Books of The Times; Of the Gettysburg Address and a Second Revolution
Lincoln at Gettysburg The Words That Remade America By Garry Wills  317 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


Israel Mowshowitz, 77, a Spokesman for Rabbis
Rabbi Israel Mowshowitz, spiritual leader of a major Queens congregation who became a spokesman for rabbis nationwide and an intimate of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, died yesterday at Long Island Jewish Hospital Medical Center.
He was 77 years old.
Rabbi Mowshowitz died after a long battle with cancer, according to Rabbi Geoffrey Botnick of the Hillcrest Jewish Center, the congregation where Rabbi Mowshowitz served for 34 years before becoming rabbi emeritus in 1983.


Los Angeles Journal; Quake Spares Buildings but Undermines Denials
When Joan Welles, an actress, tells people she is moving to Boston, she finds it necessary to add, "We're not leaving because of the earthquakes or the riots." And with that explanation she defines the difficult new reality of this balmy city by the sea.
"It's tough here, it's really tough," she said today, realizing the implications of her words.
"When you have a child, you find yourself thinking twice: Do I really want to continue here with the smog and with the earthquakes and with the crime?"


2,100 Jobs To Be Cut By Alcoa
The Aluminum Company of America said yesterday that it was eliminating 2,100 jobs to trim operations and increase efficiency at 21 of its worldwide business divisions.
The nation's largest aluminum producer will take a second-quarter after-tax charge of $40.6 million for severance payments.
In the year-earlier second period, Alcoa earned $81.2 million, or 95 cents a share, on sales of $2.57 billion.


Reviews/Film; The Tables Are Turned on a Smug, Sweet-Talking Don Juan
Marcus Graham, the main character in "Boomerang," is a suave, lady-killing executive who can send flowers to seven different girlfriends, each with a note saying, "Thinking only of you." Marcus is so picky about women that he secretly inspects their feet for imperfections, and is appalled if their toenail polish happens to be chipped.
There's a short name for a man like this, and it's not Eddie Murphy.
But Mr.
Murphy happens to be playing this role, so Marcus becomes a lot more likable than he deserves to be.
The presence of the dapper, dressed-for-success Mr.
Murphy also locates "Boomerang" in a strangely retrograde Fantasyland.
The star may wear an earring and sound savvy, but he inhabits an improbably glamorous corporate universe that comes straight out of the Rock Hudson-Doris Day 50's.
Though all the principals in "Boomerang" are black, with only a few white extras used occasionally for comic relief, the film's ideas about business and prosperity remain weirdly dated even as its sexual attitudes strive for something new.


Tongues Wag Over Shift at New Yorker
THE Talk of the Town, and all the other features of The New Yorker, were the talk of the avenue -- Madison Avenue, that is -- in the wake of the unexpected changes in editors that S. I. Newhouse Jr. made yesterday at that venerable weekly magazine and at his glitzy monthly, Vanity Fair.
Mr.
Newhouse, chairman of the magazines' parent companies, named Tina Brown, the Vanity Fair editor in chief since 1984, to replace Robert Gottlieb as editor in chief of The New Yorker, a post he had held for five years.
Graydon Carter, editor of The New York Observer, will succeed Ms.
Brown at Vanity Fair.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Taking Heat at Every Turn, Bush Shows a Boiling Point
President Bush's temper seemed to get the better of him in Detroit on Monday night.
Speaking to a group of Republican contributors, he said he was tired of hearing that the economy is not getting better when he is sure that it is, and he thinks Americans have just not gotten the word.
Waving his arms in the air and nearly shouting, he said he is sick of not getting credit for the Persian Gulf war, the fall of communism and arms-control breakthroughs.


Bush and the Judiciary
Whatever the outcome of the November election, the Federal judiciary seems likely to have a conservative bent for many years to come.
President Bush has already appointed 150 judges, and the number chosen by him or President Ronald Reagan is now 60 percent of the total.
The Bush Record: Sixth article of a series, page A13.


Olympia To Disclose Lost Value
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. is expected to disclose today in court documents in Toronto that the value of its real estate assets fell by as much as $4 billion in Canadian currency in 1991, bankers and others said yesterday.
The staggering write-down is largely a result of reappraisals of the insolvent company's real estate and other assets, but it also includes a small operating loss for last year.


ON THE BOOK-TOUR CIRCUIT WITH: Terry McMillan; Fiction Verite: Womanish Talk That's Quoted Chapter and Verse
TERRY McMILLAN says that when she enters a lecture hall or a bookstore these days, she feels like a preacher at a revival meeting.
The faithful start lining up hours before she's scheduled to read from her new novel, "Waiting to Exhale" (Viking), clutching copies of the book and reading or reciting passages as if they were the Psalms.
Most churches, of course, would not look too kindly on some of the language and predicaments in Ms.
McMillan's earthy, uncensored portrayal of friendship among four black women living in Phoenix.
But the language and situations, with all their profane honesty, are part of what her devotees love about the book.


Selection of Conservative Judges Insures a President's Legacy
If President Bush fails to win re-election this November, his successor will no doubt move swiftly to undo many of his policies.
But one aspect of Mr.
Bush's legacy will not yield to quick change, and that is the sharply conservative makeup of the nation's Federal courts.
Building on the record of Ronald Reagan before him, Mr.
Bush has put into place a Federal judiciary with its own distinct conservative philosophy that could dominate the courts for decades.


For Russians, There's No Going Back
To the Editor:
In "Yeltsin Needs Moral Support" (Op-Ed, June 15), Stephen Sestanovich, director of Russian and Eurasian studies at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, brings up an urgent problem of the post-Soviet world.
The attitude of the West toward Russia's possible actions against the newly independent non-Russian former Soviet republics in response to the alleged mistreatment of ethnic Russian minorities may well determine whether or not there will be peace in Eurasia.
While indeed the United States and Europe should promote a serious role for international forums in defending the rights of ethnic Russian (and I would add non-Russian) minorities, they should also realize that the rights of Russians vary.
For example, Ukraine treats its ethnic Russians in the same way as it treats its full-fledged citizens.


Howe Supporters Speak Up
Two teammates, his manager and general manager were among those who testified yesterday in Manhattan on behalf of Steve Howe in his arbitration hearing against major league baseball.
The Yankee relief pitcher was permanently suspended last Wednesday for violating baseball's drug policy.
Although General Manager Gene Michael, Manager Buck Showalter, team captain Don Mattingly, catcher Matt Nokes and his wife, Kristy, were among those who spoke on behalf of Howe, no decision was reached.
The hearing will resume Friday and arbitrator George Nicolau will probably not make a decision until next week.


Consumers Hesitant in the Heartland
After several years of profound economic malaise, businesses and consumers in much of the country appear to be emerging, at last, from the recession.
But while they say they are more hopeful than they were a few months ago, most people are by no means convinced that their woes are past.
The recovery has yet to take hold in the Northeast or in California.
But in interviews in and around Salt Lake City, Omaha and here in Centralia in the last week, dozens of people provided evidence that the economic recovery remained spotty and that even in areas of relative strength, faith in the recovery was thin.
Consumers and businesses hold dampened expectations and neither group is likely to shed the caution adopted over the last several years. 'Depends on Who You Are'


A's Stewart on 15-Day Disabled List
The Oakland Athletics placed DAVE STEWART on the 15-day disabled list last night because of a sore elbow and called up right-hander JIM CORSI from Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
The A's also signed right-hander KELLY DOWNS to their 40-man roster.
Downs was released by San Francisco last Wednesday. (AP)


Review/Country; A Pop Star Shining In the Glow Of Success
If Garth Brooks is the new Elvis of country music, then Billy Ray Cyrus is the new Fabian.
Without much evidence of talent or expertise, and with a preponderance of beefy muscles and calendar-boy looks, Mr.
Cyrus has come out of nowhere to become the biggest pop-music phenomenon of the moment.
His single, "Achy Breaky Heart," a harmlessly catchy bit of dance fluff with a hook that glues itself to the brain, is No. 1 on the country chart and ascending the Top 10 of the pop chart, while his debut album, "Some Gave All" (Mercury), has topped Billboard's pop-album chart for four consecutive weeks.
Mr.
Cyrus is breaking chart records Mr.
Brooks never touched; "Achy Breaky Heart" has already sold nearly a million copies.
Performing on Monday night at the Ritz in mid-Manhattan, Mr.
Cyrus seemed eager to ride his "Achy Breaky" wave for as long as he could.
In front of an audience of mildly hysterical young women, who threw stuffed animals and undergarments at the stage and screamed when Mr.
Cyrus so much as took off his ponytail holder, the singer did his best to live up to the hype.
His wiggled his rear end a few times, and between songs he bounced around like an athlete warming up for a decathlon, or perhaps just like an aerobics instructor dedicated to his work.


Charges Dropped Against Giants' McGhee
The Jersey City police yesterday dropped charges against Giants linebacker KANAVIS McGHEE stemming from an argument with a police officer and a motorist.
CHARLES GOGAN, a city police officer, agreed to drop simple assault, resisting arrest and disorderly persons charges after McGhee admitted that Gogan had cause to arrest and charge him, Municipal Court Judge JERRAMIAH HEALY said. (AP)


Reviews/Film; Trailing the Photographers Who Follow the Famous
The term paparazzo, meaning a freelance photographer who specializes in candid photographs of celebrities, was apparently coined by Federico Fellini, who gave that name to such a photographer in "La Dolce Vita." According to the Random House Dictionary, second edition, Fellini was inspired by the name of a hotel keeper in George Gissing's "By the Ionian Sea," a book of impressions of Italy published in 1901.
Whatever its origin, paparazzo and its plural, paparazzi, are now as much a part of the American language as the indefatigable practitioners of the trade are of our daily lives.
Their images appear in even the most august publications, although their most avid customers are the picture magazines and supermarket tabloids.
We all stop and stare as Madonna jogs, John F. Kennedy Jr. rides his bicycle and one of the princesses of Monaco sunbathes topless in the foolish assumption that no one's looking.


Lloyd T. Barnes, 77, a Physician And Professor at Medical School
Dr.
Lloyd T. Barnes, a longtime physician in Manhattan who was an associate clinical professor of medicine at Cornell University Medical College, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 77 years old.
Dr. Barnes died of cancer, said his wife, Winifred D. Barnes.


Pirates Say Bonds Is Set but Not Ready
The Pittsburgh Pirates say BARRY BONDS, who was eligible to return to play yesterday after a stint on the disabled list, won't be back before the weekend.
The muscle strain in Bonds's right side isn't 100 percent better, the Pirates said.
Bonds was placed on the 15-day disabled list June 23, retroactive to June 15.
He was injured swinging at a pitch in the ninth inning June 14 in New York.
The Pirates hope to have Bonds back for the weekend. (AP)


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD Morceli Takes 1,500 in Helsinki Nourredine Morceli of Algeria edged Mohammed Suleiman of Qatar in the 1,500 meters at the World Games Mobil/I.A.A.F.
Grand Prix meet yesterday in Helsinki, Finland.
Each runner clocked 3 minutes 34.89 seconds in the final event of the meet, held in rainy, cold and windy conditions, and Morceli had a slight edge in the photo finish.
Markus Hacksteiner of Switzerland finished third in 3:36.80, and Davide Tirelli of Italy was fourth in 3:37.53.
In other events, Lisa Ondieki of Australia turned in a seasonal best in the women's 10,000 meters, clocking 31:11.72.
The time was nine seconds faster than Kathrin Ullrich of Germany posted on May 28.
Seppo Raty of Finland, a former world champion, won the men's javelin throw with a throw of 285 feet 10 inches.
The throw was the sixth-longest of the year.(AP) OLYMPICS South Africans Optimistic on Games Sports officials said yesterday in Johannesburg they were confident that South Africa would compete in the Olympics despite a threat by the African National Congress to have the nation withdraw from the Barcelona Games.
"Judging by the mood, one has reason to be optimistic," said Solomon Morewa, secretary general of the South African Football Association, after a meeting of national sports bodies with the congress, which will make a recommendation today. (AP) GOLF 20-Year-Old Muehr Youngest to Win Ike Michael Muehr of the Roxiticus Golf Club in Mendham, N.J., a 20-year-old junior at Duke, became the youngest player ever to win the Met Life/Metropolitan Golf Association Ike championship yesterday at East Norwalk, Conn.
He registered rounds of 67-69 to finish with a 54-hole total of 206, which tied the tournament record set by John Ruby of the Forest Hill Club in Bloomfield, N.J., in 1972.
George Zahringer of the Stanwich Club in Greenwich, the 1987 Ike champion, was runner-up.
BOXING Jones Scores Easy Decision Roy Jones Jr. won a unanimous 10-round middleweight decision over Jorge Castro of Argentina last night in Pensacola, Fla.
Jones, the 1988 Olympic silver medalist, had knocked out all 17 of his previous opponents since turning pro.
Castro (71-4-2) has never been knocked down in his career. (AP)


Slow Trading in Advance of Jobs Data
Prices of most Treasury securities moved a bit lower in slow end-of-quarter trading yesterday, as dealers awaited the June employment data to be released tomorrow.
While the employment report is always an important set of numbers for credit market participants, the upcoming figures have an added significance because they may serve as the catalyst for the Federal Reserve Board to ease monetary policy again.


Corruption Was Reported to Prosecutors, Police Insist
Top police officials say they were in contact "at least" 30 times with the office of a special state prosecutor on the possibility that a New York City police officer was corrupt.
The officer, Michael Dowd, was later arrested by Suffolk County police for selling cocaine in a ring with several other police officers.
The arrests began a major internal review of the department's policing of itself and Mayor David N. Dinkins appointed an external investigating panel.


Amoco Names Two Vice Chairmen
The Amoco Corporation yesterday named two senior executives to be vice chairmen and promoted several others.
Lawrason D. Thomas, 58 years old, who had been executive vice president of Amoco, and Patrick J. Early, 59, who was the president of the Amoco Production Company, will be vice chairmen.
The appointments are effective today.


Village May Buy Property Where Yeshiva Is Planned
For decades the owners of the sprawling million-dollar homes here lived peacefully beside the proper and exclusive Lawrence Country Day School in a gingerbread turn-of-the-century brick mansion.
But now that the school and its nine acres of fields have been sold to make way for a yeshiva high school for Orthodox Jewish girls, many of the mostly Jewish residents of this tiny village are up in arms.


U.S. Steelmakers Seek Steep Fees on Imports
American steel producers filed 84 trade complaints today against Japan, Canada, Mexico, Germany and 17 other countries, seeking steep customs fees on imports.
The filing of the complaints, which coincided with the arrival in Washington of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan, is new poison for the nation's already-difficult trade relations with important allies abroad.
European, Canadian and Japanese officials warned that the cases would heighten tensions already raised by disputes over trade in soybeans, lumber and mini-vans.


African Women Reach Starting Line
Even before the rising sun crests the eucalyptus forests that cut through this mile-high city, Helen Kimaiyo is out loping along the red loam paths amid the trees, her husband keeping pace at her side, as she makes a final training spurt for the Olympics.
A few hours later, she will go to the city stadium, with its antique scoreboard and irregular hours, to perfect her speed work.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Buoyed Clinton Goes on the Offensive
Buoyed by new polls indicating that his Presidential campaign seems to be picking up some speed, Gov.
Bill Clinton tried today to take advantage of the renewed concern about the abortion restrictions narrowly approved Monday by the Supreme Court.
In a long day of television appearances, speeches, meetings and news conferences, here and in New York, Mr.
Clinton repeated that he favored the right to choose an abortion and said that he would select a running mate who held that view.
He also said that if elected President he would appoint only Supreme Court Justices who support the Roe v.
Wade decision legalizing abortion.


Ex-Soviet Coach Saw Sport's Future in 1956
"Let me show you how we beat John Thompson's press," said the old Russian coach, who now makes his home in San Diego.
He reached across the table in the hotel lounge for a reporter's notebook and pen.
Four years after achieving his lifelong dream, a gold medal in Olympic basketball, after being tossed triumphantly into the air like a beach ball by his players, 64-year-old Aleksandr Gomelski happily diagrammed the intricate series of screens and options he devised for Sarunas Marciulionis, Arvidas Sabonis, Titt Sokk, Sasha Volkov and the rest of the players he still endearingly calls "my boys."


KIMBERLY-CLARK PLANS JOINT VENTURE IN EUROPE
The Kimberly-Clark Corporation and the German-based VP-Schickedanz A.G. said they had signed a letter of intent to form a joint venture in Europe to make and market consumer products.
The two manufacturers of tissue products said the venture would have annual sales exceeding $1.2 billion.
Each company will own 50 percent of the venture.
The companies said the venture would take advantage of Kimberly-Clark's expertise in fibers, nonwovens and absorbency, and Schickedanz's access to German-speaking markets.
The venture will exclude Kimberly-Clark's business in Britain and Ireland and its specialty products in Europe.


Context Counts in Sister Souljah's Remarks
To the Editor:
"Sister Souljah Is No Willie Horton" (editorial, June 17) indicates that Sister Souljah was calling for violence against whites and praises Gov.
Bill Clinton for condemning her statement in a speech to the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's Rainbow Coalition.
In the same issue, "Rapper, Chided by Clinton, Calls Him a Hypocrite" (news article) indicates that Sister Souljah's statement was in response to a "question about the views of those who committed the violence":
"Did they think it was wise? Was that wise, reasoned action?"


Congress and White House Are Nearing Agreement on Urban Aid
After more than five weeks of intense bargaining, Congressional and White House negotiators said tonight that they were nearing an agreement on a $5 billion urban aid package.
The emerging agreement would provide $500 million a year for five years for the nation's cities, including money for new social programs, as well as $2.5 billion for businesses in waivers on capital gains taxes to spur investment in impoverished neighborhoods.


Neutral's Not Enough in Mississippi
What must states do to overcome the legacy of a century of segregation in higher education?
They must certainly do more than simply open public college doors to minority students.
They have an obligation, the Supreme Court now rules, to desegregate all schools, from kindergarten through college.
It's a wise, welcome and surprisingly strong decision.
The case involved Mississippi's university system, which long maintained separate colleges for whites and blacks.
It was at the University of Mississippi that Federal marshals were called in 30 years ago to escort a black student, James Meredith, in a high point of the civil rights movement.


CHRONICLE
There is no way that ELLEN CHESLER could have known 18 years ago, when she starting writing her book "Woman of Valor: Margaret Sanger and the Birth Control Movement in America," that the publication party would coincide with an important Supreme Court decision on abortion.
On Monday, just hours after the Court handed down its ruling affirming the basic right to abortion but upholding a variety of restrictions, some 350 guests crowded into the Urban Center on Madison Avenue to celebrate publication of the biography by Simon &amp; Schuster.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush TODAY: 7-8 A.M., CBS, "CBS This Morning," interview. (Channel in 2 New York.)  Gov.
Bill Clinton  No appearances scheduled.
Ross Perot No appearances scheduled.


New Manila Chief Sees a Nation at Risk
Fidel V. Ramos, the general who helped re-establish democracy in the Philippines after toppling the dictator he once loyally served, was sworn in today as President with a call to Filipinos to recognize that their country had lost its way.
"Let us begin by telling ourselves the truth," Mr.
Ramos said in his inaugural address.
"Our nation is in trouble and there are no easy answers, no easy fixes for our basic ills."


Editorial Notebook; Television's Memory Hole
Television, for all its awesome reach, has an ephemeral touch.
Even the best programs rarely leave footprints in libraries, archives, indexes or books.
It is harder to retrieve the transcript of a documentary seen by millions than to unearth an obscure magazine article read by thousands.
Who remembers, for example, an ambitious four-part CBS documentary called "The Warren Report," broadcast just 25 years ago?
It was apparently overlooked by the American Medical Association, which claimed in May that two pathologists, Dr.
James J. Humes and Dr.
J.
Thornton Boswell, had broken a 28-year silence to discuss their autopsy on President Kennedy.


Some Tales of Recovery Despite the Skepticism
WENDY KAMINER'S new book, "I'm Dysfunctional, You're Dysfunctional," takes on America's obsession with self-help.
Widely and prominently reviewed, it dissects the recovery movement, the need of more and more people to address past experiences and present addictions that hold them prisoner.
The book is satisfying in its debunking of the stream of self-help books and extremely public confessions.
Just how did we get to the point that it has become fashionable for people to wail dark and delicate secrets to the largest possible audience?


John Piper, a Renaissance Man Of British Art World, Dies at 88
John Piper, omnipresent in British art for 60 years as a painter, a printmaker, a stage designer, an artist in stained glass, a photographer and a pioneer enthusiast for English vernacular architecture, died at his home near Henley-on-Thames, England, on Monday.
He was 88 years old.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


Personal Health
SUMMER is not a happy time for feet.
Enclosed in socks or stockings and shoes, they sweat and smother.
Bare, they are prone to cuts, punctures and infections.
In sandals, they often suffer blisters and stubbed toes.
And, no matter how well or poorly shod, a vacationer's feet are called upon to trek miles a day through hot foreign streets or up and down long, rocky trails.
They often cry out,


Outpatient Surgery on the Rise; Regulation Doesn't Keep Pace
People facing surgery usually think of days of wearing backless gowns, eating bland food and yearning for the comforts of home.
For most people, however, surgery now means having an operation during the day and being back home by 6 P.M. for dinner and a favorite television show.


Amendments Stall Gun-Control Measure in Hartford Senate
A special session of the General Assembly that was expected to act swiftly on a package of gun-control laws has instead turned into a complicated political minuet.
On Monday, after almost 10 hours of debate, the House of Representatives passed a pair of bills that had been vastly transformed from the original proposals.


Tyson Drops Out, and It's His Birthday
MIKE TYSON has dropped out of school at the Indiana prison where he is serving a six-year sentence for rape, prison officials said yesterday.
The former heavyweight champion, who turned 26 yesterday, began working full-time in the Indiana Youth Center's recreation department last week, a prison spokesman, KEVIN MOORE, said. (AP)


60-Minute Gourmet
SUMMER is the time to devise quick, simple sauces that can be used warm or at room temperature.
Carpaccio-style salads, seafood salads, escabeches, grilled vegetables -- all can be served with vinaigrette-style sauces made well in advance.
The sauces go particularly well with seafood, whether it is grilled, poached, broiled or roasted.
I particularly like grilling salmon and tuna and playing with variations on vinaigrette sauces.
The flavors can be as varied as the fresh herbs in your garden or produce market.
Sorrel, basil, sage, dill, coriander and thyme come immediately to mind.


Tiki Freeman, 69, A Singer and Cantor
Tiki Freeman, who in the early 1970's became one of the first female cantors in the United States, died on Saturday at her home in Eastchester, N.Y.
She was 69 years old.
Mrs. Freeman died of cancer, said her husband, Joel.


Esasky Agrees to Report to the Minors
First baseman NICK ESASKY cleared waivers yesterday and agreed to report to the Braves' Class AAA club in Richmond, Atlanta Braves officials said.
Esasky, who was on the disabled list for more than two seasons with vertigo, was placed on waivers last week after he completed a 20-day rehabilitation assignment with Richmond.
The Braves said the 32-year-old Esasky, in the final year of a three-year contract, would report to the Richmond team tonight.
The team is playing in Syracuse. (AP)


Woman Pleads Guilty to Lesser Counts in Kidnapping
Irene J. Seale pleaded guilty in Federal court today to two counts of extortion in the kidnapping of a top Exxon official and agreed to testify against her husband.
A little more than a week after she mouthed the words, "I love you" to Arthur D. Seale as they sat in court after their June 19 arrest, Mrs.
Seale today accused her husband of 25 years of manipulating and abusing her, leading her into the scheme that resulted in the death of Sidney J.


M.T.A. and Suburbs in Aid Pact
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority and several suburban counties around New York City settled a stalemate over apportioning Federal transportation aid today after Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's staff worked out a last-minute compromise.
The transit authority accepted a Federal plan that leaves vague the source of future mass transit funds, but includes assurances from the Governor's office that some road money would go to the bus, subway and commuter rail operating agency.


Review/Film; For the Girls of Summer, Pop Flies and Charm School
In 1943 at the height of World War II, when women well over voting age could still be called girls, Philip K. Wrigley, of the Chicago Cubs, and other prominent baseball figures got together to form the nonprofit All American Girls Professional Baseball League.
It was a stopgap idea.
Its aim: to fill the vacuum if, as seemed possible, the major league clubs lost too many of their players to the armed services.
As things turned out, the major leagues never had to shut down, but the women's league survived until 1954.


Eating Well
IN the 1970's, the food industry opposed nutrition labeling of any sort.
No one will use it, they said.
No one will understand it.
Fast forward to the 1990's.
Not only has the industry resigned itself to nutrition labeling, but in 1990 it gave up fighting over whether or not it should be mandatory.
And soon nutrition labeling will be required on most foods.
But the industry wants to draw the line at that point: labeling will be mandatory, but don't change the appearance or content of the labels from what is now found on packages.


What's the Good of Lawsuit on Sewage Plant?
To the Editor:
The timing of the suit filed by a coalition of environmental groups and Harlem residents against New York City because of odors coming from the North River Sewage Treatment Plant (news article, June 22) is puzzling.
One of the plaintiffs, Eric Goldstein, in a press release, acknowledges that Mayor David N. Dinkins and Albert F. Appleton, Environmental Protection Commissioner, "inherited this plant's problems from the previous administration."
The previous administration denied there was a problem at North River.
Mayor Dinkins (who vigorously opposed putting the plant in Harlem) not only acknowledged the community's complaints about North River, but also committed more than $50 million to solving the problem.


Henley Regatta to Start
The Henley Royal Regatta, "our special pagaent of British life," as Winston Churchill once described this five-day rowing event, will begin staging races on Wednesday, with 30 rowing entries from the United States among the 14 cup events on the River Thames.
Syracuse University will have three eight-oared entries, headed by a coach who refuses to mix rowing and politics.
Bill Sanford, coach at Syracuse for the last 25 years, is also an elected legislator, currently serving as chairman of the Onondaga County Legislature.
He turned down a call to run for the New York State Senate just before departing with his crew for Henley.


In the Bronx, 718 Is Up, 212 Is Down
Starting today, the Bronx is being weaned from its 212 area doce and assigned to the 718 code used by Staten Island, Queens and Brooklyn.
The change is not a result of secret solidarity negotiations by the Confederation of Outer Boroughs but an act of technological necessity.
The spread of cellular phones, fax machines and beepers (no doubt in Manhattan) has steadily gobbled up numbers in the 212 code, causing New York Telephone to reserve it for Manhattan.


Tiny Cancer Risk in Chlorinated Water
Chlorinated drinking water has been linked to small increases in the rates of rectal and bladder cancer in a new analysis by researchers at Harvard University and the Medical College of Wisconsin.
The findings, reported today in The American Journal of Public Health, are drawn from a combination of 10 previous studies.
Using statistical methods, the researchers found that the slightly higher rates of the two cancers seemed to correlate with the amount of byproducts produced by chlorinated water.
Previous studies had offered contradictory findings, but many of them, taken by themselves, were not statistically significant.


U.S. Agency Is Criticized For Dropping AIDS Ads
A number of proposed Government-sponsored advertisements that suggested using condoms to prevent the spread of AIDS have been dropped, and a dispute has broken out over whether the action was taken for political reasons.
One organization, the AIDS Action Council, a Washington lobbying group for AIDS organizations, has published several reports criticizing the Government and has contended that Dr.
William Roper, the head of the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, personally killed some advertisements.
Representative Ted Weiss, Democrat of Manhattan, has also criticized the agency's handling of the advertisements, saying they were killed for political purposes.


Public Privies Open, and None Too Soon


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  NEW U.S.
TACTICS AGAINST IRAQ  The Administration is considering increasing pressure on Saddam Hussein by blocking shipments that violate the United Nations trade embargo after they arrive in Iraq.
A1  GUNS PUNCTUATE RELIEF EFFORT  Relief efforts began in Sarajevo, but the city remained volatile and the newly opened airport vulnerable as sporadic fighting continued.
A8  U.N.
ISSUES WARNING TO CROATIA  The Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution telling Croatia to remove troops from Serbian areas of the country and accept more peacekeeping forces.
A8  MILITARY CLARIFIES BALKAN PLAN  The United States would use combat planes to protect international relief efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but would not use American ground forces for combat.
A8  ANOTHER ECONOMIC ERA IN RUSSIA  Russia rings in the second stage of its economic reforms without having achieved the goal of the first phase -- stabilizing the economy.
A7  MONGOLIAN PARTIES FIGHT BACK  Mongolian opposition parties who were resoundingly beaten by former Communists in elections Sunday are considering boycotting Parliament or suing the Government.
A4  ISRAELI LABORITES ALTER STANCE  Israel's Labor Party today dropped its calls for a one-year freeze on settlement activity in the occupied territories while Middle East peace talks continue.
A6  NO RERUN FOR MIYAZAWA AND BUSH  With elections looming in the U.S. and Japan, the latest meeting between the leaders of the two nations is expected to be far less eventful than the last.
A3  PHILIPPINE PRESIDENT SWORN IN  Acknowledging that his country is mired in trouble, Fidel V. Ramos was inaugurated as President of the Philippines.
A3  Beijing Journal: Dynasties are still being built in China.
A4  Leaders of Ireland and Northern Ireland met in London.
A6  National A10-18  'THE PROMISE OF CONSTANCY'  News analysis: Its decision reaffirming Roe v.
Wade said as much about the Supreme Court as about abortion.
In particular, it spoke volumes about the importance that three conservative Justices see in resisting pressure to overturn Court precedent.
A1  Abortion clinics braced for more legal battling.
A12  A House panel approved an abortion rights bill.
A12  A court rejected a RICO suit against anti-abortion protesters.
A12  BUSH'S TEMPER FLARES  Political Memo: Speaking to a group of Republican contributors, the President declared that he was tired of being on the "receiving end of criticism day in and day out." If the show of anger reflected Mr.
Bush's frustration with the way his re-election campaign has been going, there was every reason for it.
A1  A lasting Reagan-Bush legacy: a conservative judiciary.
A13  Many in the nation's heartland like "none of the above." A14  The Perot campaign is set for a new, more sophisticated phase.
A15  Clinton was buoyed by polls showing him on the rise.
A15  SEX ABUSE IN THE MILITARY  Female veterans told a Senate panel that they had been sexually abused by other soldiers, that their complaints to superiors had been ignored or dismissed as untrue and that they had found veterans hospitals to which they turned for help to be similarly unresponsive.
A1  THOUSANDS FLEE TOXIC CLOUD  At least 50,000 people were forced to evacuate their homes and businesses along the Wisconsin-Minnesota border after a derailment caused a railroad car carrying benzene to spew a cloud of toxic vapor.
A10  BATTLE OVER AIDS ADS  Proposed Government-sponsored ads that suggested using condoms to prevent the spread of AIDS have been dropped, and a dispute has broken out over whether the action was taken for political reasons.
A10  NEW FINDING ON CHLORINATION  Researchers at Harvard and the Medical College of Wisconsin linked chlorinated drinking water to small increases in the rates of rectal and bladder cancer.
A18  AGREEMENT NEAR ON URBAN AID  Congressional and White House negotiators said tonight that they are nearing an agreement on a $5 billion urban aid package.
A18  Scientists gained in their study of prostate cancer's spread.
A18  The patient with a baboon liver was reported improving.
A18  Education Page A19  A North Carolina public boarding school has inspired imitators.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 HOUSING BIAS ADMITTED  New York City acknowledges that it has steered black and Hispanic applicants away from some public housing projects and has agreed to place more of them in its largely white projects.
A1  MAJOR KIDNAPPING INQUIRY  The largest kidnapping investigation in recent history began on April 29 with a car standing empty at the end of a secluded suburban driveway, its motor idling, its driver, Sidney J. Reso, gone.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-22  NEW YORKER'S NEW EDITOR  The venerable magazine stunned the publishing industry with the announcement that Tina Brown, editor in chief of Vanity Fair, will replace Robert A. Gottlieb, who has resigned.
A1.
Squeezing into the corset of history.
C13  Film: "A League of Their Own." C13  Music: Billy Ray Cyrus.
C13  The Living Section C1-10
So contemporary: In search of the low-fat hot dog.
C1  On the Book-Tour Circuit With Terry McMillan.
C1  Ready-to-hear music for ready-to-fix meals.
C1  Health Page C12  Obituaries A20-21  Sports B6-11  Baseball: Mets lose to Cubs again.
B9  Yanks blank Royals.
B9  Hockey: Lindros awarded to Flyers.
B7  Rangers look to future without Lindros.
B11  U.S. must decide on point guard.
B10  Tennis: Capriati not quite out yet.
B7  Becker finally advances.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Symbols can't save Bosnia.
Neutral's not enough.
Long Island's fiscal stability.
Karl E. Meyer: Oswald.
Letters A22  Anna Quindlen: One vote.
A23  Rian Malan: Will hope die in South  Africa, too?
A23  Allan Gerson: Compensate Libya's victims.
A23


New Theater to Open in Newark on the Site of 1967 Riots


Book Notes
What? No Index?
For all the Washington insiders who were hoping to find their names in the index and so turned gingerly to the back of "What It Takes: The Way to the White House" (Random House), Richard Ben Cramer's much publicized 1,047-page look at the 1988 Presidential campaign and the reasons people run for President, the author had a surprise: no index.
The sputtering and the muttering could be heard in bookshops from Capitol Hill to Foggy Bottom to Georgetown.
What do you mean, no index?
Surely there must be some breakdown of who did what to whom, and on what page?


Soft-Shell Crabs With Fruity Salsa and Couscous
THE height of the season for soft-shell crabs is from Memorial Day to Labor Day, and as the season advances, prices improve.
Just as New Englanders eat salmon and peas for July 4, Marylanders like their crabs, soft shell or hard, for the holidays.
Soft-shell crabs can weigh anywhere from 1 1/2 to 5 1/2 ounces.
Figure on 6 ounces for a serving.
If you are buying live crabs, pick the feisty ones.
If you are buying crabs that have already been cleaned, they should smell fresh.


Investors Carefully Calculate Cost of Betting on a Sure Thing
When New York State officials auction off a winning lottery ticket today, it will take more than a dollar and a dream to walk away with the prize.
How much more is the question that has been fascinating scores of potential bidders for the last two weeks, but the smart money is betting at least $2 million more.
The winner of this unusual event will receive $240,245 almost immediately, and another $3.6 million over the next 15 years.
And unlike most state lotteries, which tend to attract a lower- and middle-income clientele, the auction's ground rules suggest that only the rich will be able to play: the minimum bid is $1.3 million.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about cutbacks in retirees' medical insurance misidentified the court that ruled in a case involving the Pressed Steel Tank Company.
It was the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago.


Walter Blair, 92, Dies; A Scholar of Humor
Walter Blair, a professor emeritus of English at the University of Chicago and an authority on American humor and folklore, died on Monday at his home in Chicago.
He was 92 years old.
Jeff Makos, a spokesman for the university, said he did not know the cause of death.


How a Magazine Evolved Into an Institution
For much of its 67-year history, The New Yorker has seemed to float in splendid isolation, a law unto itself, unruffled by the turbulence that disturbs lesser magazines.
The last decade has changed all that.


Cheney Talks of an Air Role in Bosnia
The United States is prepared to use Air Force and Navy combat planes to protect an international relief mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said today.
In the most detailed description by an Administration official of the role American forces might play in the United Nations relief operation, Mr.
Cheney also ruled out the use of American ground forces for combat in the Balkan conflict.


Clinics Eager to Learn Impact of Abortion RulingA Correction
Many abortion clinics were calling lawyers yesterday seeking guidance on whether the Supreme Court ruling on Monday had suddenly resurrected restrictive abortion laws in their own states.
Jane Brevard, of the Fargo Women's Health Clinic, the only abortion clinic in North Dakota, said she became alarmed when the State Attorney General told reporters that he expected he would soon begin enforcing the state law requiring a one-day waiting period before an abortion.


Shutout for Sanderson As Yanks Have a Blast
Scott Sanderson throws pitches that should be hit.
They float to the plate with incredible ease and look delicious to batters.
Until they tap the ball 90 feet, miss it totally or pop it up harmlessly.
Just like the Royals did last night.
Sanderson was dominant without looking menacing, and his assortment of change-ups, sliders, forkballs, fastballs and curveballs mesmerized a Kansas City club that had accumulated 33 hits and 16 runs in its preceding two games.


A State-Financed Boarding School Made Just for the Science-Deprived
Todd Rose was something of a misfit.
A sturdily built teen-ager from a family swarming with farmers, he did not want to farm.
He wanted to study science.
In his small town of Nashville, in tobacco and soybean country in eastern North Carolina, the local high school could offer him shop classes in plowing and welding but nothing in advanced science.


Appeals Court Upholds Albany's Districting Plan
Moving the Legislature's tortuous redistricting process one big step toward a conclusion, New York's highest court today gave its approval to the plan drawn up by the majority parties in both houses of the Legislature.
The 4-to-1 decision by the State Court of Appeals, which overturned two separate lower-court rulings, declared the lines fully valid and dismissed arguments from some Democratic groups that the State Senate districts violated the State Constitution by repeatedly crossing county lines to help Republicans keep their grip on that chamber.


Long Island Needs an Eagle Eye
Nassau and Suffolk counties want Albany to let them go into debt.
Nassau plans to borrow $71 million and raise its mortgage tax; Suffolk is asking to borrow up to $91 million and raise its sales tax.
Borrowing to close budget gaps is always risky, and these are no exceptions.
The Legislature has an obligation to keep the damage to a minimum by insisting on independent monitoring.
That won't happen if Senate Majority Leader Ralph Marino, a Long Island Republican, has his way.
He opposes any independent oversight, preferring to rely on the usual state and county comptrollers and legislators.
That would accomplish nothing.
A borrow-now, pay-later strategy requires the eagle eye of a board, an accounting firm or some other independent authority.


Symbols Can't Save Bosnia
Relief and relief.
A thousand Canadians are winding their way by truck along mountain roads toward Sarajevo to bolster the handful of U.N. peacekeepers already there.
Mercifully, the convoy demonstrates that the world has started to resist the murderous aggression against Bosnia by the Serbian strongman Slobodan Milosevic.
But a thousand troops, however welcome, are only a token.
The Serbs who surround the airport, where three U.N. peacekeepers were wounded yesterday, may never stop shooting long enough even to allow starving Sarajevo to be fed.
That would mean a far more powerful outside force.


Theophil C. Kammholz Dies at 83; Lawyer an Expert in Labor Issues
Theophil C. Kammholz, a Chicago lawyer who argued before the United States Supreme Court as general counsel of the National Labor Relations Board in the 1950's, died on Saturday in Houston.
He was 83 years old and lived in Winnetka, Ill.
He was in declining health recently, but the immediate cause of his death was unclear, said one of his partners, James S. Petrie.
He was staying with his daughter when he died.


Bank Yields Off Slightly
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit moved lower for the week ended today, according to the Bank Rate Monitor.
But analysts at the publication said the shallow decline this week could indicate that the banks did not share the expectation of other financial sectors that the Federal Reserve would move to lower rates again.
"The numbers over the last six months show that the Fed has the latitude to change," said Robert K. Heady, the publisher of The Monitor, which focuses on interest rates.


Baboon-Liver Patient Improving, Doctors Say
The world's first recipient of a transplanted baboon liver was reported improving and watching television in his room at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center today as animal-rights advocates protested outside the hospital.
The man, who is 35 years old and whose name is being withheld, is "doing well," said Dr.
Andreas G. Tzakis, one of the surgeons who implanted the baboon liver on Sunday.


New Los Angeles Police Chief Promises to Heal the City's Wounds


Knicks' No. 1 Pick Is No. 1 Fan of His Father
Hubert Davis, the Knicks' top pick last week in the National Basketball Association draft, had a choice of his own to make yesterday.
Who is the basketball player he most admires?
Michael Jordan?
Scottie Pippen?
Clyde Drexler?


PATENT OFFICE TO REVIEW GENETICALLY ALTERED TOMATO
The Patent and Trademark Office will re-examine the patent process undertaken by Calgene Inc. and ICI Seeds, an American unit of Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C.,in their pursuit of protection for a genetically altered tomato, ICI said.
The news brought a drop in Calgene's stock, which fell $1.125, to $11.50, on a busy trading day.
By the end of the day, more than 1.5 million shares had traded in the over-the-counter market.
Calgene said it did not expect the patent dispute to interfere with its plan to begin selling a genetically engineered tomato by 1993.


Market Place; Equitable Takes A Capital Step
THE Equitable Life Assurance Society, the nation's fourth-largest mutual life insurer, is approaching a crucial moment in its 133-year history: For the first time, it is about to ask investors to buy stock in one of the most august names and one of the most troublesome real estate portfolios in the life insurance industry.
In the largest conversion ever of a mutual insurer -- a company owned by its policyholders -- into a company owned by stockholders, Equitable hopes to raise more than $500 million, one of the larger initial public offerings this year.


2 Seconds of Importance
Neither gloom of night nor an extra tick of the clock stayed Mayor David N. Dinkins's plan to have 2,104 New York City police recruits begin their training on the last second of the fiscal year last night.
The Mayor, trying to outmaneuver the State Legislature and save the city $20 million, put the trainees on the payroll in the final second of the 1992 fiscal year.
That one second of work was not enough to foil the Mayor's plan to defer city pension contributions for them until the 1993 fiscal year.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed Matt Young, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Daryl Irvine, pitcher, from Pawtucket of the International League.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Extended the contract of Mike Hargrove, manager, through the 1993 season with an additional option for 1994.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Activated Jim Gantner, second baseman, drom the disabled list.
Optioned William Suero, infielder, and Andy Allanson, catcher, to Denver of the American Association.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Placed Dave Stewart, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Called up Jim Corsi, pitcher, from Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
Signed Kelly Downs, pitcher.
Moved Scott Hemond, catcher, from the 15-day disabled list to the 60-day.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Recalled Gerald Alexander, pitcher, from Oklahoma City of the American Association.
Optioned Terry Mathews, pitcher, to Oklahoma City.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Announced that Nick Esasky, first baseman, has cleared waivers and agreed to report to Richmond of the International League.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Named Ron Oester manager of Chattanooga of the Southern League.
NEW YORK METS -- Placed Vince Coleman, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Tom Filer, pitcher, from Tidewater of the International League.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Sent Greg Litton, infielder, to Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Gil Heredia, pitcher, to Phoenix.
Recalled Craig Colbert, infielder-catcher, from Phoenix.
Purchased the contract of Jim Pena, pitcher, from Phoenix.
SOCCER National Professional Soccer League
KANSAS CITY ATTACK -- Named Zoran Savic coach. COLLEGE
SOUTHERN CONFERENCE -- Named Patrick Britz assistant commissioner for championships.
BAYLOR -- Named Kevin Gray men's assistant basketball coach.
BOSTON COLLEGE -- Named Al Paquette tight ends and special teams coach.
CALIFORNIA -- Promoted Eric Hughes from men's volunteer assistant basketball coach to part-time assistant men's basketball coach.
Named Tina Krah women's assistant basketball coach.
CAL POLY-SAN LUIS OBISPO -- Named John F. McCutcheon athletic director.
IOWA STATE -- Named Rhonda Osborn assistant women's basketball coach.
MERCY -- Named Becky Miller women's basketball coach.
TEXAS -- Named Beverly Kearney women's track and field coach.
UNLV -- Named Karen Dennis women's cross-country and indoor and outdoor track and field coach, and Musiette McKinney women's assistant basketball coach.
WILKES -- Named John Dunne men's assistant basketball coach.
FOOTBALL National Football League  PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Dave Harbour, tight end, and Johnny Walker, wide receiver.


Lindros Moves to Broad Street, Not Broadway
The Rangers, accustomed to losing the big one on the ice, suffered an upset defeat yesterday in the arena of binding arbitration.
Ruling that the handshake is as mighty as the pen, an arbitrator, Lawrence Bertuzzi, decided that Marcel Aubut, president of the Quebec Nordiques, had traded Eric Lindros to the Philadelphia Flyers at 10:30 A.M. on June 20, just 80 minutes before Aubut concluded an equally informal exchange with the Rangers.
The rights to negotiate with Lindros, a 19-year-old budding superstar at center, belong to the decimated, last-place Flyers.


Put Drug War Price At $500 Billion
To the Editor:
Re "20 Years of War on Drugs, and No Victory Yet" (The Week in Review, June 14): The estimate that the United States "has poured nearly $70 billion into fighting drugs in the last 20 years" is the tip of the iceberg.
As the figure on drug arrests in your accompanying graphic shows, an average of 750,000 people a year were incarcerated for drug offenses in this same period.


U.N. TRIES TO PART CROATS AND SERBS
Fearing that a United Nations peace plan for the former Yugoslav republic of Croatia may collapse, the Security Council called on the Government of Franjo Tudjman today to withdraw its forces from Serbian areas of the country and accept the deployment of additional United Nations peacekeepers.
The resolution, adopted unanimously, seeks to reassure Serbs living near United Nations-protected Serbian enclaves that they will not be mistreated as Croatia re-establishes its authority.


Revised Bid Is Accepted By Wetterau
After a tense day of reviewing a new bid, Wetterau Inc.agreed yesterday to accept a lower takeover offer from Super Valu Inc.
In Super Valu's revised offer to buy the smaller grocery wholesaler, Super Valu will pay $30.25 a share in cash, or $644 million for Wetterau.
Super Valu dropped its offer to distribute to Wetterau shareholders new shares in a spinoff of Wetterau's Shop 'n Save retail subsidiary.


Rabin Drops Call for a Freeze on Settlements
In an attempt to win right-wing support for the government coalition it is building, Israel's triumphant Labor Party today dropped its previous calls for a one-year freeze on settlement activity in the occupied territories while Middle East peace talks are under way.
New guidelines approved by Yitzhak Rabin, the party leader and Israel's next Prime Minister, say the Labor-led Government will "reinforce settlement along the confrontation lines," which has been defined by Mr.
Rabin in the past as the Jordan Valley and the Golan Heights.


So Contemporary: In Search of a Low-Fat Hot Dog
SOME people don't salivate when they walk by a hot-dog stand and smell that great symbol of American cuisine, bursting with grease and salt.
But they are a very, very small group.
Ninety-five percent of the households in this country eat hot dogs, and they indulge, on average, more than once a week, according to the National Hot Dog and Sausage Council in Westchester, Ill.
Some people can't finish a round of golf or sit through a baseball game without grabbing a hot dog.


Audiences, Too, Have a Role in Movies
To the Editor:
"Anarchy reigns at the local multiplex," begins a June 5 article decrying noise -- laughing, talking back, chatting, slurping -- at the movies.
The article's thesis, that there has been an increase of "blabbering" in movie theaters due to the advent of videocassette recorder technology, has little connection with any empirical research.
One might as well claim the opposite -- that the expectations of moviegoers for silence while watching a film has increased because they have become accustomed to watching films in silence in the privacy of their own homes.


A Parade of Creamy Summer Salads, and Fat Takes a Holiday
IF the Fourth of July hot dogs this year are the lean, low-fat kind, what about the traditional side dishes to serve with them?
Pickles are fat free, of course, and so is mustard.
But there are some potentially fat-laden accompaniments to consider, like potato salad, cole slaw and macaroni salad.
The rich, creamy flavors that have always made these traditional salads appealing do not have to be sacrificed in the name of healthy summer eating.
With the availability of nonfat mayonnaise dressing, plus nonfat yogurt, salad ingredients can be generously coated with satisfyingly satiny dressings that are surprisingly stingy when it comes to calories from fat.
Most have none at all.


Lord Bath Dies; First Nobleman To Open Home
The Marquess of Bath, who shocked the British peerage when he opened his immense Elizabethan mansion to the paying masses in 1949, died yesterday at Longleat House, the Wiltshire estate he later turned into a lucrative safari park.
He was 87 years old.
A spokesman at the 412-year-old home said Lord Bath had died peacefully after a long fight against stomach cancer.


Review/Ballet; In a Revered Work, a Young Kirov Provokes Memories of the Old
In "La Bayadere," the Kirov Ballet's corps still reigns supreme.
When, in 1961, this same Russian company first brought out the "Kingdom of the Shades" scene from an 1877 ballet virtually unknown in the West, audiences in Paris, London and the United States were stunned.
Marius Petipa, the ballet's choreographer, was familiar from later masterpieces like "The Sleeping Beauty," but here he had carried classicism to heights of previously unimagined formal beauty.
As dancer after dancer in white tutus (ghostly spirits or "shades"), stepped into arabesque to descend a ramp and then filled the stage, the Kirov corps became abstracted into an image of poetic eloquence.
With its purity of style and unison, the corps symbolized the true body of the Kirov, the company at its best.


COMPANY NEWS
BURROUGHS WELLCOME CO., Research Triangle Park, N.C., a unit of the Wellcome Foundation Ltd., said it would donate $1 million for AIDS research aimed at providing experimental treatment to a broad array of people.
KMART CORP., Troy, Mich., said its Officemax Inc. unit had completed its acquisition of OW Office Warehouse Inc., Virginia Beach, Va., under which Office Warehouse shareholders would receive $11 a share in cash.


Campus Journal; Giving City Airwaves a Country Air
On Sundays, Columbia University's cloistered campus is so quiet that visitors swear they can sometimes hear a reedy backwoods tenor lamenting lost love and, high above it, the plaintive whine of a pedal steel guitar.
For a moment, it seems that the errant ghost of Hank Williams has come to haunt Morningside Heights.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voices -- San Francisco; Concern About Bush's Choices for the Court
Political experts, local officials and ordinary voters in several cities were asked to appraise President Bush's appointments to the Supreme Court.
Rachel Jackson  28, AIDS counselor and research worker in San Francisco
"With Scalia and Thomas, I think it's pretty clear a really right-wing court is being assembled at the same time that a lot of really important rulings are going to be made, particularly around Roe v. Wade. I think right now -- in 1992 when women are starting to come to the political forefront -- the fact that abortion rights are being threatened the way that they are, and that the Supreme Court has someone like Clarence Thomas to possibly be a swing vote, is very chilling.


Public &amp; Private; One Vote
History was being made Monday.
You could tell because Harry Blackmun and Randall Terry agreed about something.
Justice Blackmun, the author of Roe v.
Wade, and Mr.
Terry, the founder of Operation Rescue, both said the same thing when the Supreme Court decision affirming a constitutional right to abortion but upholding state restrictions was handed down.
One vote, they each said, one with anguish, the other with rage. One vote.


Mustaches Are Issue For Police
The State of Massachusetts insists that a policeman's lot is not a hairy one.
So when all four state police agencies merge on Wednesday to cut costs, the officers pounding the beat are expected to be plying their razors as well.
But six mustachioed members of the state's Metropolitan, Capitol and Registry police preferred to sue rather than shave and asked a Federal District Court to issue an injunction that would block the baring of their upper lips.


CHRONICLE
Meanwhile, at the National Arts Club on Gramercy Park, at another book party, the talk focused on the generally unsociable topic of taxes.
But that was understandable, for the occasion was the publication, by Walker &amp; Company, of "Harry's Last Tax Cut," by JIM WEIKART.
It is his second book about Jay Jasen, a sleuthing accountant.
Mr.
Weikart is an accountant himself, so although most of the guests were writers, journalists and agents, they were not invited for literary reasons, but because they are his clients.


12 Pharmacies Closed in Prescription-Drug Raid
Sixty-nine people were arrested, 12 pharmacies were closed and 46 others were searched as agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation fanned out across the New York metropolitan region yesterday as part of a nationwide crackdown on the illegal sale and redistribution of prescription drugs, Federal and state law-enforcement officials said.
Although the sweep involved raids and arrests in more than 50 cities and towns across the nation, the New York region was the primary target of the two-year investigation by the Departments of Justice and of Health and Human Services.
Two men from Long Island and one from Queens were described as the "major distributors" in the scheme.
The operation was centered on Long Island.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.80
6.09
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.55
3.59
5.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.64
3.66
5.72
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.70
6.68
8.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.77
7.76
8.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.70
8.68
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.49
6.50
7.19
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


PLAN TO TIGHTEN EMBARGO ON IRAQ SUGGESTED BY U.S.
Seeking to slow an increase in illicit trade with Iraq, the Bush Administration failed to win greater cooperation from King Hussein of Jordan last week to enforce the United Nations trade embargo.
Washington is now considering a broader plan to stop illegal shipments after they arrive in Iraq, Administration officials said today.


Subaru Tunes Up Its 'What to Drive' Ads
Subaru of America and its advertising agency, Wieden &amp; Kennedy, are making a mid-course correction in their unconventional, much-debated advertising campaign.
New television commercials and print advertisements were introduced yesterday at a news conference at a similarly unconventional venue, the Lox Around the Clock restaurant at Avenue of the Americas and 21st Street in Manhattan.


Lindros Called Good for Business
The Rangers missed out on him, but the other five teams in the Patrick Division are delighted that once the Philadelphia Flyers sign Eric Lindros he will be playing in their division, the one that has produced the Stanley Cup champion the last two years in the Pittsburgh Penguins.
The Flyers, of course, see him as their chief rebuilding block.
But even the Devils are happy Lindros was awarded to Philadelphia, even though the Devils fell short in their strong bid to acquire the 19-year-old player.


For Japanese, 'Shared Values' in U.S.
In the six months since President Bush's ill-fated trade mission to Japan, Washington and Tokyo have made little progress on the major economic issues that turned the visit into one of the bitterest encounters between the two countries in years.
Yet when Kiichi Miyazawa arrives on Wednesday afternoon for his first official White House visit as Prime Minister, no one expects the discussion to dwell on Japan's swelling trade surpluses, its automotive imports or the depth of either country's commitment to fundamental economic reform.


A Bet on Declining Prices
Selling stocks short is a legal way of betting on declining prices of a stock.
There are rules dating from the Depression that govern when a stock can be shorted, but there is generally little disclosure of which investors have shorted stocks.
To sell a stock short, a trader must arrange to borrow shares from someone who owns them.
For a small fee, institutional investors are often willing to lend shares and brokerage firms lend stock that is held by their customers.
The shares are then sold to another buyer.


Harvard Law Notifies Bell Of Dismissal For Absense
Derrick Bell, the Harvard Law School professor who took an unpaid leave of absence two years ago to protest the school's failure to hire, in his words, "a woman of color," received notice today that his teaching days there are over because of the university's two-year limit on leaves of absence.
In a letter from Robert C. Clark, the law school dean, Mr.
Bell was told that his refusal to return to the school would be considered a resignation, effective July 1.


Brown to Add Inquiry Power In Police Graft
Seeking to pre-empt external monitoring of corruption within his department, Police Commissioner Lee.
P.
Brown says he will give Internal Affairs Division investigators greater leeway in surveillance in an effort to shore up the New York City department's mechanism for uncovering corruption.
Under his plan, officers -- even those who are not suspected of corruption -- will be subject to spot checks like the ones now used to test for drug use.
Investigators will also conduct after-hours surveillance, following officers to restaurants and bars and even to their homes.
And the Police Department will recruit more officers to serve surreptitiously in the precincts as special agents for the Internal Affairs Division.


A City of Immigrants Is Pictured in Report
More than a quarter of the population of New York City is now foreign born as the number of immigrants settling here has climbed to its highest level since 1940, according to a city report released yesterday.
In the report, a study of immigrants who arrived in the 1980's, a clear picture emerges of just how dramatically the city's ethnic landscape is changing.


After an Overnight Wait, Becker Hurries to Victory
After playing like a laggard in the fourth set on Monday and spending a sleepless night worrying about having to sacrifice a scheduled day off to finish off Wayne Ferreira in a fifth set, Boris Becker wasted no further time on the court today.
Given clearance to perform after a three-hour rain delay, he stomped around Wimbledon's Center Court like he owned it for 29 minutes, all the time he needed to administer sudden death to the hopes of the 20-year-old South African.


G.O.P. Votes To Override Budget Veto
Eight hours before the start of a new fiscal year, the Republican-controlled Legislature voted today, with no votes to spare, to override Gov.
Jim Florio's veto of its $14.6 billion budget.
The vote puts in place a budget that contains the biggest tax cut in state history and will eliminate or sharply curtail dozens of programs, requiring the layoffs of more than a thousand state workers.
The Republicans cut $1.1 billion from the $15.7 billion budget that Mr.
Florio proposed in January, after approving a rollback in the sales tax from 7 percent, to 6 percent, that will cost the state $608 million.


Rockets Owner Says Sale Is a No-Deal
The Houston Rockets' owner, CHARLIE THOMAS, said yesterday that he had rejected an offer to sell his team to an investors group for a reported $82 million.
Thomas issued the statement two days after The Houston Chronicle reported that a group that includes the heavyweight champion, EVANDER HOLYFIELD, and the rap artist HAMMER had made a bid to buy the Rockets.
The Chronicle said a purchase agreement could be signed in a matter of weeks. (AP)


QUOTATION OF THE DAY
"I was very proud to serve my country but not to be a sex slave to someone who had a problem with power." -- SPECIALIST JACQUELINE ORTIZ, at a hearing on sexual abuse in the military.  [ A1:5. ]


Wine Talk
I AM standing in front of a table in a modest farmhouse in this little village 25 miles from Bordeaux.
Technically, the place is a chateau, at least in the wine world, but practically, it's a farmhouse.
In front of me are 28 bottles of wine; 6 in the first horizontal row, 11 in each of the other two.
I've just arrived after an hour's drive in pelting rain from Pauillac, where the chateaus are showplaces and the wines are all stars.


The Excitement of Playing a Nazi; The Fear of Playing Her Too Well
In the hypnotic dream world of "Zentropa," Lars von Trier's stylized thriller set in Germany in 1945, mystery, intrigue and unfathomable motives swirl in a treacherous whirlpool.
Its calm, deadly center is Katharina Hartmann, played by Barbara Sukowa (pronounced soo-KOH-vuh), whose slinky, suspect glamour fatally traps an innocent young American who wants nothing more than, as he puts it, to show postwar Germany "a little kindness."
Miss Sukowa's performance is one more in a string of memorable roles that began with work with Rainer Werner Fassbinder in the early 80's, and continued with her fruitful collaboration with the director Margarethe von Trotta, who has called on Ms.
Sukowa for the strong, fiercely intelligent women in films like "Marianne and Juliane" and "Rosa Luxemburg," for which Ms.
Sukowa won the Golden Palm in Cannes in 1986 as best actress.
Earlier this year the 42-year-old actress played Sam Shepard's archeologist wife in the Volker Schlondorff film "Voyager."


Bridge
When a partnership overbids a little, the declarer must hope for a combination of skill and luck to save him.
On the diagramed deal from the Cavendish Teams at the beginning of May it might seem that North-South should be content to play a minor-suit part-score.
But when Sam Lev and Jim Rosenbloom sat North-South they climbed optimistically to five diamonds, and South performed a minor miracle by making 11 tricks after an opening heart lead. [ DIAGRAM ]


Chairman Retires at France's Aerospatiale
The chairman of Aerospatiale of France, one of the two main participants in the European aerospace consortium Airbus Industrie, stepped down today, the company announced.
Henri Martre led state-owned Aerospatiale to a prominent position in the world aerospace industry and fiercely defended Airbus against American criticism.
He will be 65 years old next year, the retirement age for executives in state companies.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Olympia &amp; York, the troubled Canadian developer, is expected to disclose today that the value of its real estate assets fell by as much as $4 billion in Canadian currency in 1991.  [ Page D1. ]
The publishing world was stunned by the news that Tina Brown, editor of Vanity Fair magazine, would replace Robert A. Gottlieb as editor of The New Yorker.  [ A1. ]


Needed by Space Plane: Space-Age Composites
Sometime around the turn of the century, if technological hurdles can be overcome, a specially designed airplane will be able to take off from a conventional runway, roar into space at 25 times the speed of sound, then come scorching back through the atmosphere to land at another airport.
To meet the challenge of the Government's National Aero-Space Plane project, researchers are scrambling to develop light, strong materials with the ability to withstand temperatures of 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit -- well above the capabilities of the metal alloys used in building aircraft.
One approach is to combine materials with differing properties into composites.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN EXPRESS TRAVEL RELATED SERVICES, New York, a unit of American Express Co., named Randy Christofferson to the new post of senior vice president of quality and re-engineering.
BEL FUSE INC., Jersey City, which makes electronic parts, appointed Daniel Bernstein president.


Military Women Report Pattern Of Sexual Abuse by Servicemen
Female veterans told a Senate panel today that they were sexually abused by fellow soldiers, adding that complaints to superiors were generally ignored or dismissed as untrue and that they found veterans hospitals as unresponsive as the military.
Specialist Jacqueline Ortiz, a 29-year-old Army reservist who served in Saudi Arabia during the war with Iraq, told the Senate Veterans Affairs Committee that she was "forcibly sodomized" by her sergeant in broad daylight on Jan. 19, 1991.
When she told her male superiors about the incident, she added, they said they did not believe her.


Tina Brown to Take Over at The New Yorker
In an announcement that stunned the publishing industry, The New Yorker yesterday named Tina Brown, the 38-year-old British editor in chief of Vanity Fair, to be its editor in chief.
She will replace Robert A. Gottlieb, whose resignation was also announced yesterday.
Graydon Carter, a co-founder and editor of Spy magazine who last year became editor of The New York Observer, is to replace Ms.
Brown at Vanity Fair.


Council Approves Bills to Limit Certain Property Tax Increases
Acting just minutes after a 12:01 A.M. deadline today, the New York City Council approved bills that prevent a substantial increase in property taxes for owners of condominiums, cooperatives and rental apartment buildings.
The action came less than an hour after the State Senate paved the way for the Council's action.
Property taxes for a typical condominium or cooperative apartment will increase by about $49 over the next year, or less than 4 percent, as a result of the bills, according to calculations by the City Council staff.
The bill for a typical owner of a one- , two- or three-family house will decrease by about $14.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Perot Turns to Professionals As Campaign Turns Rough
Amid tentative signs that the heady momentum of the last two months is beginning to flag, the undeclared candidacy of Ross Perot is moving into a new, more sophisticated phase, a top campaign official said today.
The official, James Squires, press secretary for the Perot Petition Committee, said in an interview that in the coming month the Texas billionaire would make greater use of professional political advisers to help his campaign, possibly put some campaign commercials on television and become more specific about his views.
Such a shift would be a marked but expected departure from the campaign's almost exclusive reliance on enthusiastic but untutored volunteers, whose primary focus has been to gather enough signatures to try to qualify Mr.
Perot for the ballot in the 50 states.


Food Notes
The Spicing of America
The American appetite for spicy food has yet to be sated.
Total consumption of spice last year was 821 million pounds, an increase of 3 percent over the year before, according to figures from the American Spice Trade Association.
Black pepper, up 18 percent, now accounts for about 10 percent of total spice consumption.
Consumption of red peppers like cayenne and chili increased by about 10 percent.
While its rise last year was not as striking as black pepper's, total red-pepper consumption amounted to 155 million pounds, nearly 20 percent of the total.
Foods From All Over
On Saturday from 11 A.M. to 10:30 P.M., Water Street in lower Manhattan, from Fulton to State streets, will be the scene of a food festival.
Restaurants and small vendors from all over New York will sell foods of many of the city's ethnic populations.
In addition to Manhattan restaurants like Rosa Mexicano and Tropica, Greek restaurants in Astoria, Queens, Korean restaurants in Flushing, Queens, and the River Cafe in Brooklyn plan to take part.


House Panel Approves Bill To Bar Most Abortion Curbs
The House Judiciary Committee today approved legislation that would bar most state restrictions on abortion, including some provisions in the Pennsylvania law that were upheld Monday by the Supreme Court.
The bill approved by the House panel and sent to the House floor would neither permit states to require counseling on abortion and its consequences, nor would it allow them to impose a waiting period like Pennsylvania's 24-hour delay before an abortion can be performed.
The Court upheld both provisions.


The Pop Life
Deee-Lite's Politics
When Deee-Lite released its first album, "World Clique" (Elektra), in 1990, it pretty much shook things up.
The three band members managed to take club music, previously in the realm of the initiated underground, into pop music, mixing the glossy dance beats with tunes that even had melodies.
And they were funny, with a kitsch sensibility that gloried in excess.
The group's new record, "Infinity Within" (Elektra), gets roughly the same mix going, except that it adds what most second records recently seem to add: politics, and it goes easy on the melodies.
But its mix of dance music and pop is still there, as is the attention to kitsch and fashion; the striking cover draws on U.F.O.'s, 1960's spy movies and Hollywood movie conventions.
Although the group helped to design it, Lady Kier Kirby, its lead singer, who used to call herself Lady Miss Kier, doesn't want to talk about the cover.
She's interested in talking about the music.


Beijing Journal; Will 'Princes' Inherit China? Fathers Know Best
In the days of emperors, power used to be handed down by blood line.
Now, some Chinese feel that not much has changed.
Throughout the Government and among business executives, some of the most important and powerful people are the children of leaders.
This has always infuriated many ordinary Chinese, who watch with frustration as the "taizi" -- princes -- soar effortlessly in their careers.


Credit-Data Settlement For Equifax
Equifax Inc., one of the nation's three largest credit-reporting agencies, agreed yesterday to significant changes in the way it gathers and maintains personal financial information on millions of consumers.
The agreement by the Atlanta-based company came amid widespread consumer complaints of inaccuracies on credit reports and difficulties in getting them corrected.
The pact resolved investigations of the industry by attorneys general in 18 states, including New York.


Sports of The Times; A Handshake Does Mean Business
LIKE Marryin' Sam, the Quebec Nordiques kept saying yes.
It seemed that every time someone made them an offer for their hand -- read Eric Lindros -- they accepted.
And when no one was offering, they went seeking: "A hand, a hand, half your hockey team for my hand."
There was in all this not just a sense of desperation, but also of greed -- the more the merrier.
It was the hand, though -- rather the handshake -- that in fact determined the fate of the Nordiques, and Lindros.


Reviews/Jazz Festival; Concentrating on Hard-Bop
When the bassist David Holland began leading his own quintet in 1984, it included trumpet, trombone, saxophone and drums.
Now, he has exchanged the trumpeter for a pianist in his new quintet, which performed on Saturday night at the Equitable Auditorium.
The shift in lineup has altered the quintet's style, moving closer to conventional hard-bop than Mr.
Holland has been since the 1960's.
It's an expert hard-bop group, cruising with aplomb through the odd meters, modal and extended harmonies, meditative ballads and quick-changing uptempo melodies that are hard-bop staples.
Robin Eubanks, on trombone, starts solos with warm, forthright melodies and builds up to headlong rushes.
Joe Lovano, on tenor and soprano saxophones, plays lines that snake in and around the harmonies, climbing to controlled squeals.
Mr.
Holland combines utterly secure intonation and the knowledge of when to bear down on a riff, when to add tuneful counterpoint.
And Marvin (Smitty) Smith on drums adds explosive dynamics to the music, thudding out a calm rhythm with mallets or pushing soloists with volleys of crescendoing drumrolls.


BIAS IS ADMITTED BY NEW YORK CITY IN PUBLIC HOUSING
New York City acknowledges that it has steered black and Hispanic applicants away from some public housing projects and has agreed to take major steps to integrate its largely white projects, under the settlement of a discrimination lawsuit to be announced in the next few days.
The city is to provide apartments for 2,000 black and Hispanic families who can show that they were victims of such discrimination in the last decade, officials said yesterday.


Hughes to Cut 9,000 Workers And Write Off $789.4 Million
The Hughes Aircraft Company said today that it would lay off 9,000 employees, or about 15 percent of its work force, largely because of the rapid decline in Pentagon spending.
The layoffs will come primarily in Southern California, where Hughes is the largest industrial employer, and will be spread over the next 18 months, company officials said.


Economic Indicators Rise But Recovery Still Sputters
The Commerce Department index designed to forecast the economy climbed six-tenths of 1 percent in May, its fifth straight advance and the largest since February.
But the moderate rise in the Index of Leading Economic Indicators was seen by most analysts as exaggerating the economy's prospects and doing nothing to dispel the growing sense that an already weak recovery is losing momentum.
Recent reports have shown declines for home sales and orders for durable manufactured goods amid higher first-time claims for jobless benefits.


Disappointed, Yes, but Not Distressed
He missed getting the player of the 90's by 80 minutes.
Neil Smith, a general manager who usually gets his man, realized yesterday he might never get another shot at a brawny teen-ager like Eric Lindros.
"This kind of player doesn't come along too often," Smith said.
"I'd do it all again. We did what we could. We dotted our i's, crossed our t's. I just don't know if there will be a next time."


Capriati-Sabatini a Struggle Amid Some Easy Victories
Until a resolute Jennifer Capriati stepped onto Center Court, curtsied to the royalty, and refused to leave until darkness descended on her come-from-behind tangle with Gabriela Sabatini with the Argentine about to serve for the match, everything about the women's quarterfinals at Wimbledon was strictly academic.
It rained today, the matches were delayed by three hours, the competitors spent some edgy downtime with their paperbacks, card games and crossword puzzles in the locker room, and finally the top-ranked players got down to business and eliminated the underdogs.


Ex-Communists Win Mongolia Election; Democrats Puzzled
Opposition political parties said today that they might boycott Parliament and take the Government to court rather than accept the apparently overwhelming victory by the former Communist Party in the election on Sunday.
They also said the former Communists, embarrassed by the huge margin of victory, were trying to find a way to give additional seats to the opposition.
The opposition parties said they were certain of winning only three of the 76 seats in Parliament, with two races too close to call.


Electric Utility in Ohio to Buy Pollution Rights From Alcoa
In a new twist on trading pollution rights under the Clean Air Act, an industrial company, Alcoa, said yesterday that it would sell sulfur dioxide credits to a utility, the Ohio Edison Company.
The agreement, the third pollution-rights deal disclosed so far, is the first involving a party other than an electric utility.


Context Counts in Sister Souljah's Remarks; Hard-Core Haters
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis's chastisement of Gov.
Bill Clinton for his comments on Sister Souljah ("Black and White," column, June 18) and Mr.
Lewis's wistful dream of another Robert Kennedy represent the liberal mind at its most infuriating.
When Robert Kennedy was alive, so were the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X. Dr.
King represented the Christian and Gandhian idea that blacks, even as they protested and agitated, must hate the sin, not the sinner.
Malcolm, whether or not his views shifted toward the end, represented the idea that it was the duty of blacks to hate whites forever and that the only freedom that mattered was the freedom to express that hatred.


Martin Rockmore, 74, Marine Corps General
Brig.
Gen.
Martin F. Rockmore, retired, who established the United States Marine Corps Scholarship Program for college-bound children of Marine Corps personnel, died on Saturday at his home in Chesterfield, Mo.
He was 74 years old.
General Rockmore died of emphysema, his wife, Ruth, said.


First Supplies Reach Sarajevo From Airport as Shelling Continues
A convoy of white trucks belonging to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees drove from the Sarajevo airport into the city today with the first 15 tons of food, water, milk and medicine delivered by air as part of a humanitarian airlift to this besieged city.
The relief supplies were taken to a warehouse in the Skenderija district in the south-central area of the city, from where delivery to Sarajevo's 400,000 hungry and frightened residents was expected to begin within 48 hours, United Nations officials said.
The delay was necessary to allow local relief agencies to sort the supplies and arrange for their orderly distribution.


Fiat Reports 39% Decline In Earnings
Fiat S.p.A., the Italian automobile and industrial giant, said today that 1991 profits fell 39 percent, to the lowest level in four years.
The 90-year-old company forecast a continued squeeze as it pursues a $40 billion program to modernize production and update aging car designs.


Twisted Tale of a Kidnapping And of Dreams Gone Wrong
It was, in its way, a distinctly American tragedy, one built, perhaps, on greed and carried out with a casualness and ineptitude that shocked even the most seasoned of law-enforcement officials.
It was, said Gary L. Penrith, the special agent in charge of the Newark Office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, an "unbelievably despicable" crime.
The largest kidnapping investigation in recent history began on April 29 with a car standing empty at the end of a secluded suburban driveway, its motor idling, its driver gone.


Tokyo Stocks Rise
Japanese stock prices were up at the close of the trading session today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues rose 373.34 points, or 2.34 percent, finishing at 16,325.07.
On Tuesday, the index finished higher, gaining 210.46 points, or 1.34 percent, to close at 15,951.73.


Protein Is Linked to Prostate Cancer
Researchers have discovered the likely reason prostate cancer so often spreads into the backbone, an event that is usually a prelude to death from the disease.
They have found that bone tissue is rich in a protein that sharply stimulates the growth of prostate tumor cells.
The new work suggests that advanced prostate cancer may be amenable to treatment by blocking the activity of the stimulatory protein, a molecule called transferrin.
It also casts light on the grim puzzle of metastasis, the mechanism through which a rebel cell wrests free of a primary tumor and sets up lethal outposts elsewhere in the body.


Op-Ed Columnists
The days on which Op-Ed columnists appear are customarily rotated every six months.
Here is the schedule through Dec. 31:


Ready-to-Hear Music For Ready-to-Fix Meals
SOMETIMES, desperation leads to inspiration.
And the best response to a challenge is to throw food at it.
Since the earliest days of the LP, a number of record companies keen to diversify have chipped away at the strangest market niche of them all: music to eat by.
Three years ago at Sony Classical records, a group of executives sat around a table and glumly contemplated the shrinking market for classical music.
In the Ice-T age, what would it take to create some sizzle around Schubert?


Vietnamese Convicted in Slaying of a White
Three Vietnamese immigrants men were convicted on Monday in the fatal stabbing of a white man last August in a case whose prosecution has drawn broad criticism from Asian residents on fairness grounds.
A Common Pleas Court jury returned guilty verdicts against the three men, Minh La, 21 years old, Manh B. Hoang, 20, and Dien V. Nguyen, 20, of third-degree murder in the slaying of David Reilly, 18.
He was stabbed in the back and chest with two knives in a South Philadelphia playground on Aug. 3, 1991.
Mr.
La was also convicted of cutting off the ear of a man who was with Mr.
Reilly.


U.S. Must Consider Another Playmaker
An injury to John Stockton has reopened an old wound for the United States Olympic basketball team and left it with one point guard for the remainder of the Tournament of the Americas.
Stockton suffered an undisplaced fracture of his right leg in a freak collision with Michael Jordan during the United States' 105-61 victory over Canada on Monday night.


Elie Kedourie, Author And Teacher, 66, Dies
Elie Kedourie, a professor at the London School of Economics and an authority on the Middle East and nationalism, died on Monday at Washington Adventist Hospital, in Washington.
He was 66 years old and lived in London.
Professor Kedourie died of heart failure, said Charles Blitzer, director of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington.
He had been a visiting fellow at the center since last fall.


NEWEST 'REFORMS' WILL VEX RUSSIANS
The first of July has been billed as the dawn of an ambitious second stage of Russia's economic reform, including, most importantly, a single floating exchange rate for the battered ruble.
The changes are important for the Government and for business, but for most individual Russians, they will mean still higher prices for the goods they buy.


Mets Specialty: Meekness At Plate
The eighth inning for the Mets tonight ought to be framed.
Date it 1992 and hang it over the season.
The events of that inning decided the latest defeat for the Mets, and the specifics were right out of the catalogue of shortcomings that have sabotaged the club from opening day.
The final score was 3-1 for the Cubs, but the place to evaluate the demise is the top of the eighth.


POSTAL SERVICE SUSPENDS EMERY FROM NEW WORK
Consolidated Freightways Inc. said its Emery Worldwide air freight unit had been temporarily suspended from being awarded future contracts by the United States Postal Service because of disputed reimbursement claims.
Consolidated asserted that the suspension had been timed to favor a competing carrier by jeopardizing Emery's ability to bid for a pending Postal Service procurement.
Emery said it would appeal the decision.


Millions for Sale
Solomon Keith lived for one happy, dissipated year after winning $5 million in the New York State lottery in 1987.
The 54-year-old janitor quit his job and visited Hawaii, the Poconos and Las Vegas.
He bought a Cadillac, and traded his Harlem apartment and longtime live-in girlfriend for a luxury West Side apartment and a 26-year-old cocktail waitress.
But it was a good deed, not the good life, that killed him.
While visiting his dying brother in their childhood home of Dalzell, S.C., in October 1988, Mr.
Keith turned his car into the driveway of his cousin's house and was struck by an oncoming car.


None of the Above
A weeklong Midwest journey found disappointment with President Bush but also skepticism about Ross Perot and Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Page A14.


Reviews/Jazz Festival; Smoldering, and Still Singing About It
"All these rappers think they're doing something," scoffed Nina Simone at Carnegie Hall on Saturday night, during a concert that was part of the JVC Jazz Festival.
"All they're doing is imitating me 30 years ago." With that the singer went into one of her signature tunes, "Mississippi Goddam." The original Sister Soljah, Ms.
Simone has been flaunting her anger over generations of civil unrest.
And while she can't quite take credit for the hip-hop movement, she was right in supposing that her strongest protest songs, like "Mississippi Goddam" and "Four Women," have a renewed relevance in today's social climate.
Ms.
Simone's powerful set went back and forth between anger and love, frustration and grace.
She came on stage wrapped in a long white gown, her hair knotted into a small crown atop her head; as she sat at her piano high heels pumped the pedals.
Whether she was singing love songs or protest songs, Ms.
Simone performed as though her soul was living out each injustice and heartache.
Her mannish voice would turn from impenetrability to vulnerability within the space of a line or two, and she also showed impeccable comic timing.
Introducing "I Put a Spell on You," she made a plug for her recent autobiography of the same title and listed the bookstores in Manhattan that are stocking it.


Review/Television; Strange Bedfellows in the Persian Gulf
Where exactly was the American warship Vincennes at the moment on July 3, 1988, when it shot down an Iranian airliner, killing 290 civilians?
And what was it doing there?
Tonight's extended "Nightline" on ABC at 11:30 (Channel 7 in New York) offers disturbing answers to those questions.
Ted Koppel calls the Administration version, seen being advanced at the United Nations by George Bush when he was Vice President, "a tissue of lies, fabrications, half-truths and omissions." An investigation by "Nightline" and Newsweek magazine concludes that instead of being in international waters at the time of the incident, as Washington maintained, the Vincennes was in fact in Iranian territorial waters.
Adm.
William J. Crowe, retired, who was Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, concedes as much on camera.


Northern Ireland Protestants Hold First Talks With Dublin Since '75
Leaders of the two parties supported by most of Northern Ireland's Protestant majority met here today with officials of the Irish Republic.
It was the first such meeting in more than 18 years.
The purpose of the talks, which included British officials and other Northern Ireland leaders, was to try to breathe life into stagnating talks on setting up a regional government backed by both Protestants and the minority Roman Catholics in the province.


Eckersley Makes a Record Save in History
DENNIS ECKERSLEY of the Oakland Athletics got some peace of mind.
He also got another piece of major league baseball history.
By converting his 26th straight save opportunity Monday night, in an 11-inning, 5-4 victory over the Seattle Mariners, the 37-year-old right-hander set a big league record.
Eckersley had previously matched the record of TOM HENKE, set in 1991, by converting 25 consecutive save opportunities in one season.
Eckersley extended his own record to 30 straight saves in two years. (AP)


INSIDE
Air Role Possible in Sarajevo
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said the U.S. would be willing to send planes but not ground troops to protect the U.N. relief mission.
Page A8.
G.O.P.
Budget in Trenton
With no votes to spare, Republican legislators overrode Gov.
Jim Florio's veto and put in place their own $14.6 billion budget.
Page B5.
Thousands Flee Toxic Cloud
At least 50,000 people on the Wisconsin-Minnesota border were evacuated after a train derailment caused a cloud of benzene vapor.
Page A10.
Layoffs at Hughes Aircraft
Hughes will lay off 9,000 employees, mainly in Southern California, largely because of the rapid decline in Pentagon spending.
Page D1.
Tackling Police Corruption
New York's Police Commissioner says he will give internal investigators greater leeway in surveillance to try to root out corruption.
Page B1.
Flyers Beat Rangers in Swap
An arbitrator ruled that Philadelphia traded with Quebec for Eric Lindros 80 minutes before the Rangers obtained him.
Page B7.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Midwest: Fertile Region For Politics of Disgust
At truck stops and picnics, in downtown high rises and farm-town cafes, the American heartland is talking politics.
"I've voted Republican all my life, but I'm disgusted," 40-year-old Jim Allmon said in ball park bleachers as he watched his son play Little League in Springfield, Ill.
"I'm leaning toward Perot and hope he doesn't come up with something off the wall."


THE SUPREME COURT: A Telling Court Opinion; The Ruling's Words Are About Abortion, But They Reveal Much About the Authors
The Supreme Court's decision on Monday reaffirming Roe v.
Wade was as much about the Court as about abortion.
It was not only that three of the five Justices appointed by Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush turned out to have the controlling votes that preserved the constitutional right to abortion.
Beyond that, the three -- Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy and David H. Souter -- approached their task and wrote their joint opinion as if they held the future of the Court in their hands.


Boys High's Building And Schooling Crumble
To the Editor:
Your June 13 article on Boys High School in Brooklyn focuses on its deteriorating physical structure.
As an alumnus, class of 1960, I am appalled at the description, but more appalled that the building is a metaphor for the education provided.
The level of education Boys High once offered equaled the elegance of its Romanesque revival building.
You describe a school once reputed to be among the top secondary schools in the country as "a melange of programs intended to cater to some of the system's most troubled students," including some reading below fourth-grade level.


Child Hurt in Shooting
A two-year old boy playing near his Brooklyn home was shot in the arm last night by a gunman driving by in a car, the police said.
The boy, who was not identified because of his age, was listed in stable condition last night at Woodhull Hospital, the police said.
There were no suspects in the shooting, which occurred at 8:43 P.M. outside 16 Ten Eyck Street in Williamsburg, the police said.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 26
June 19
June 28
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.2
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.2
2.9
2.9
Gasoline stocks
220.8
221.8
219.2
Distillate stocks
102.6
100.1
113.6
Crude imports, daily
5.3
5.7
6.7
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.4
1.4
Crude stocks
330.8
341.1
349.1
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
92.9
91.4
89.6
Source: American Petroleum Institute


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CITY TO INTEGRATE HOUSING PROJECTS
New York City acknowledges that it may have discriminated against black and Hispanic applicants for public housing and has agreed to take major steps to integrate its largely white housing projects, under the settlement of a lawsuit.
The city will provide apartments for 2,000 black and Hispanic families who can show that they were victims of discrimination.
A1.
POLICE SAY PROSECUTOR KNEW OF OFFICER
Top police officials say they were in contact "at least" 30 times with the office of a special state prosecutor on the possibility that a New York City police officer was corrupt.
The officer, Michael Dowd, was later arrested by the Suffolk County police for selling cocaine in a ring with several other policemen.
The assertions, which were made by top city police officials, reflected an attempt to rebut criticism of how they had handled the case.
B3.
PHARMACIES CLOSED IN RAIDS
Sixty-nine people were arrested, 12 pharmacies were closed and 46 others were searched as agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation fanned out across the New York metropolitan region as part of a nationwide crackdown on the illegal sale and redistribution of prescription drugs.
Officials with the agency said the arrests and seizures were the beginning of a major campaign against "massive health-care fraud" that they said amounted to more than $50 billion a year.
B3.
Police recruits go on city payroll in fiscal year's last second.
B3.
REGION  EXAMINATION OF A TRAGEDY
The abduction of Sidney J. Reso was, in its way, a distinctly American tragedy, one built, perhaps, on greed and finished with a casualness and ineptitude that shocked even the most seasoned of law-enforcement officials.
It was, said Gary L. Penrith, the special agent in charge of the Newark Office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, an "unbelievably despicable" crime.
A1.
Woman charged in Reso kidnapping pleads guilty to extortion.
B4.
REPUBLICANS OVERRIDE FLORIO'S VETO
Eight hours before the start of a new fiscal year, the Republican-controlled New Jersey Legislature voted, with no votes to spare, to override Governor Florio's veto of its $14.6 billion budget.
The vote puts in place a budget that contains the biggest tax cut in state history and will eliminate or sharply curtail dozens of programs.
B5.
YESHIVA STIRS CONTROVERSY ON L.I.
For decades the mostly Jewish owners of the sprawling million-dollar homes in Hewlett Bay Park, L.I., lived peacefully beside the proper and exclusive Lawrence Country Day School in a gingerbread turn-of-the-century brick mansion.
But now that the school and its nine acres of fields have been sold to make way for a Yeshiva high school for Orthodox Jewish girls, many of the residents of this tiny village are up in arms.
B5.
The M.T.A. and several suburban counties settle a stalemate on dividing mass transit aid.
B5.
About New York by Douglas Martin B2


Compromise Reached on Bill to Widen Student Aid
Congressional conferees and the Bush Administration agreed today on wide-ranging higher education legislation after the Administration accepted a Congressional plan for a new direct student loan program.
The Senate passed the bill tonight on a voice vote with no opposition.
The House is expected to pass it later this week.


Metropolitan Diary
JULY FOURTH I have this memory, perhaps a dream of when some hip savvy sisters took their kid brother to a funky Fourth of July parade.
Nourished by cotton candy and love, dazzled by sparklers and sunsets he stares up at Uncle Sam on stilts and is blinded by full firecrackered skies.
And his sisters hold his sticky hands and kiss his five-year-old happy heart until he is safely, softly tucked into another sweet, safe night, in this dream, perhaps this memory. -- ROGER GRANET
. . .


Titanium Anchors to Help Joint Injuries
With summer sports in full swing, weekend athletes who rip up shoulders and other joints will at least have the comfort of access to a new generation of surgical aids that can speed their recovery.
Until recently, orthopedic surgeons used screws and washers to pin torn ligaments and tendons to bone for the months it took the tissues to reattach themselves.
But such devices were often too big or difficult to position properly at the exact spot of injury, leading to slow or incomplete recoveries.


Biegen's Ex-Firm Admits Illegal Donation
The former law firm of Arnold I. Biegen, the finance chairman of David N. Dinkins's 1989 mayoral campaign, has admitted to having donated $22,000 in illegal contributions to the campaign, according to a settlement announced yesterday by the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau.
The firm, Parker Chapin Flattau &amp; Klimpl, agreed to reimburse New York City $150,000, Mr.
Morgenthau said.
The firm disguised its contributions as individual donations from nine partners, Mr.
Morgenthau said.


Promotion Theme For New York City
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday introduced New York City's first-ever promotional campaign, carrying the theme "NYC It's All Yours."
The campaign is timed to coincide with the Democratic National Convention, from July 13 to 16, and the quincentennial of Columbus's voyage to America, which is being celebrated over the Fourth of July weekend.


The Candidate Who Would Be an Analyst
It was almost a throwaway line.
But at a time when the banking industry is showing signs of regaining its financial balance, Ross Perot chose to resurrect old charges that the nation's largest bank -- Citibank -- is insolvent.
Rejected by Regulators


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; CLINTON GETS TOP SHARE OF FEDERAL CAMPAIGN AID
Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign, nearly $4 million in debt, got the lion's share as the Government approved an additional $3.21 million in Federal assistance to the Presidential campaigns.
The Federal Election Commission approved $1.16 million in matching funds for Mr.
Clinton, the likely Democratic nominee, based on his receipt of private donations in May.
President Bush, whose campaign has an $8 million surplus, was approved for an additional $841,449 in matching funds, raising his total provided by taxpayers since the primary season began to $8.96 million.
He has raised about $24 million in private donations.


Mets Can't Sound Retreat on Policy
For the Mets' front-office officials, the men who made the calculations of baseball talent and who underwrote the $44 million payroll, the strategic aim was unequivocal: win now.
The policy colored all of the organization's off-season machinations.
It justified what the officials conceded was their overpaying for the 36-year-old Eddie Murray; it explained their willingness to pay top dollar for the 37-year-old Willie Randolph and to install him as the everyday second baseman; it lay at the core of their desire to land Bobby Bonilla.


Market Place; Banking: Bright Spot Stands Out In Quarter
You can bank on it.
In fact, if that was your investment strategy in 1992, you have probably done quite well.
Otherwise, it hasn't been much of a year so far.
In the second quarter of 1992, an unlamented period that saw more stocks go down than up in price, while Wall Street kept looking for signs of economic recovery, the bank stocks starred.


Home Video
Pay Per View vs. Renting
Nothing riles video dealers more than the prospect of lots of movies on pay-per-view television.
Giant cable systems like Quantum, Time Warner's 150-channel service in Queens, have the capacity to deliver dozens of movies around the clock.
Technologies like digital compression, which squeezes 3 to 10 programs into a single channel, could eventually increase that number to thousands.
Where does that leave the video store?


WPP and Banks Set Debt-Equity Swap
WPP Group P.L.C. said yesterday that as had been expected since last month, it agreed with its creditor banks on a debt-for-equity swap meant to reduce the advertising company's burdensome debt.


Private Mental-Health Care Workers in Connecticut Demand Pay Parity


Essay; Latest From Olympus
Let me set down my muckrake for a moment to don Olympian robes and deliver a thumbsucker: Whither the Presidential campaign of 1992?
Clear the palate: What is the campaign
not
mainly about?
Contrary to what you have been told, it is not primarily about vague themes like "character" or "leadership" or "change," nor ideological differences, nor health plans or abortion rights or deficit reduction, nor fears of endless recession.


Zenith Data Is Quitting ACE Desktop Project
Zenith Data Systems will announce today that it intends to withdraw from the Advanced Computing Environment, a faltering industry consortium formed last year to create a new generation of desktop computers, a Zenith official said yesterday.
The Advanced Computing Environment, or ACE, was formed in April 1991 by 21 companies with the goal of creating a new hardware and software standard for personal computers.
The ACE approach is to be based on the hardware standards of the


A Souvenir in Sterling, No Fake Snow
A STERLING silver bracelet depicting buildings.
Salt and pepper shakers that resemble skyscrapers.
A spoon topped by the Statue of Liberty.
All are included in "Souvenirs of New York," an exhibit of 75 pieces of jewelry and other objects by 24 American artists.
The show -- at the Aaron Faber Gallery, 666 Fifth Avenue (53d Street) through Sept. 4 -- elevates traditional souvenirs of Manhattan at least a notch or two.


A Correction


Foreign Affairs; A Hamilton Era?
Barring surprises like being elected Vice President, Lee Hamilton will become chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee next year.
His career and character suggest he could spark far-reaching changes in how U.S. foreign policy is made and in the policy sausage that oozes from this new grinder.
Look for an end to the traditionally cozy connection between the White House and the chairman of the House panel.
Look for stunning proposals to reorganize Washington's foreign policy machinery, including perhaps eliminating the enfeebled Agency for International Development.
Look for a drive to recast priorities, much more economic emphasis and much less military-mindedness.


When Rain Crashes a Party, What Are a Host and Guest to Do?
IT'S raining, pouring in fact, and to add to the depressing landscape, it's also windy, cold and clammy.
It feels like heaven to be home.
Now for a nice warm robe, a hot book, a pizza with everything and a golden-oldie movie in reserve.
There's just one problem.
This is the day you're expected for lunch in the country, or the evening you're expected for dinner or, more seriously and unhappily, the weekend you're expected for the weekend.


Farrel Corp. reports earnings for Year to April 30


Franco's Sore Elbow Overshadows Mets' Rally
Perhaps the will came from some reservoir of self-respect, the hits and the ability to execute from some lost memory bank.
Or perhaps it was apprehension about the health of their closer, John Franco, that drove the Mets through 12 demanding innings today and a 6-4 triumph over the Cubs.
The Mets, who had lost a 2-0 lead, erased a 3-2 deficit and wasted a 4-3 advantage, kicked and squirmed and stumbled and endured, at last delivering with a pair of runs in the 12th for only their second victory at the end of a six-game road trip.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Murder Inc.  Limelight Manhattan
"What is life without despair?" Chris Connelly sang in the opening song of Murder Inc.'s set on Tuesday night at the Limelight.
Despair and apocalypse are mother's milk to the six members of Murder Inc., who have been pounding and growling harsh pronouncements for a decade in various bands, although they have just made their first album, for Invisible Records.


Police Corruption Panel Member Quits Amid Questions on Inquiry
Citing a potential conflict of interest over the case of Officer Michael Dowd, a member of a new panel investigating police corruption resigned yesterday, only a week after Mayor David N. Dinkins appointed her.
Betsy Barros, an assistant district Attorney in Brooklyn, said she resigned because she had been involved in two meetings and several telephone conversations concerning an investigation of Officer Dowd, one of six Brooklyn officers arrested on charges of dealing cocaine.
Law enforcement officials have labeled Officer Dowd the leader of the arrested officers.
The case drew attention to corruption in the New York City Police Department and raised questions about its internal monitoring.


Stockton's Injury Raises Questions for Pro Teams
Jerry Sloan checked out of his hotel today and headed home to Salt Lake City, leaving behind one injured point guard and a power forward who was trying to avoid saying goodbye.
"I'm scared to talk to him," said Karl Malone. "I'm afraid he might say, 'Go home.' "


Hughes Fails to Fulfill Hopes Of G.M. for Counterbalance
It was for times like these, when auto sales are slow, that the General Motors Corporation bought the Hughes Aircraft Company six years ago.
Pentagon orders for military goods, it was reasoned, could be counted on regardless of lean economic times.
What was not foreseen, however, was the full impact of the end of the cold war.


The Winery, Not the Winemaker, Owns the Secrets, a Court Rules
Is that two parts merlot to one part cabernet or the other way around?
And at what point do you add the sulfites?
Don't ask. It could be a trade secret -- especially if the winery is owned by a lawyer.


Southwestern Public Service Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to month 00


U.S. Alcohol Testing of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Times Names Editors For 2 Weekly Sections
Appointments of editors for two weekly sections of The New York Times have been announced by Max Frankel, the paper's executive editor.
Mary C. Curtis was named editor of The Home Section.
She formerly edited The Living Arts, which appears on weekdays in The Times's national edition and encompasses arts and life style coverage.
In her new post, she reports to Angela Dodson, the paper's overall style editor.


Trade Gap Too High? Export a Few Lawyers
In a perverse confirmation of American competitiveness in at least one sector of the economy, the nation's capital in one day created an export that could reduce the trade deficit by $100 million or more during the next 12 months.
It consists of legal and lobbying services to be contracted by the 21 foreign countries and 47 foreign steel companies who must defend themselves against the trade complaints filed here on Tuesday by struggling United States steel producers.
To avoid punitive customs duties of up to 165 percent on shipments to the United States, each company and each country has hired or plans to hire at least one Washington law firm.


Senate Democrats Forge An Economic Strategy
Eleven Senate Democrats today brought out a $22 billion package of bills that they said would revive the nation's competitiveness in international markets.
Competitiveness and trade policy have faded as issues in the Presidential campaign, as have unsuccessful candidates in both parties who focused on them.
And the senators, led by George Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, conceded that many of the 30 proposals in their package were not new.
But they contended that the presentation of their ideas as a package would dramatize the Bush Administration's reluctance to pursue an industrial policy.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  BUSH STRIKES BACK
In sharp comments, the President defended his policy toward Iraq before the invasion of Kuwait.
He said the White House had no evidence in 1989 that Saddam Hussein was misusing federally guaranteed loans to buy nuclear-arms technology.
A1  RUSSIA'S RUST BELT
Like dinosaur steelworks in the United States that were forced to close a decade ago, the Magnitogorsk steelworks in Russia, the world's largest, is threatened with bankruptcy and extinction.
But it is one of many giant state enterprises that have emerged as powerful political forces because they keep workers housed and fed.
A1
The ruble floats, but is the budget deficit sinking the economy?
A8  QUESTIONS ON IRANIAN AIRLINER
The official United States account of the downing of an Iranian airliner by a Navy ship in 1988 was challenged by a news report saying that American forces provoked the incident, in which 290 people were killed.
A7  A PROMISE FROM JAPAN
Prime Minister Miyazawa told President Bush that his country would use "every possible means" to increase domestic growth and expand markets for American exports.
A3  PRESSURE ON DE KLERK
The largest labor federation in South Africa called for a nationwide general strike to bring the economy to a standstill until President de Klerk yields power.
A3  U.S.
PLEDGE ON ABDUCTIONS
In a commitment that fell far short of Mexican demands, President Bush promised that his Administration would not support any kidnappings of criminal suspects from Mexico in the future.
A5  HAITIAN EXODUS WINDS DOWN
With the Coast Guard refusing to take refugees to a safe haven at the American naval base in Cuba, the exodus has virtually stopped, Administration officials said.
A9  SOME RELIEF FOR SARAJEVO
Emergency food aid brought in by air earlier in the week was distributed to people in Sarajevo, but major problems continued to hinder plans for a full-scale airlift.
A10  PARIS-WASHINGTON TENSIONS
While tensions between France and the United States have long existed, it appears that the end of the cold war has brought a new level of mistrust.
A10  GERMANY SAYS NO TO WARPLANE
The Government has decided to drop out of a four-nation project to build a new European jet fighter.
It is unclear whether Britain, Italy and Spain will proceed.
A10  National A12-17  BREAKFAST WITH BUSH
News analysis: President Bush's first foray into television politics at the breakfast hour underscored both the potency of a Presidential image and the narrowness of the domestic policy agenda on which Mr.
Bush is running.
A1
Bush's appearance: between news conference and lawn party.  A14
Clinton dodged questions about his hunt for a running mate.  A14
On the Trail: A spurt in Clinton's fund raising.  A14  CALIFORNIA ISSUES I.O.U.'S
Its economy wracked by recession, its political leadership paralyzed by stalemate, the State of California ran out of cash and began to pay its bills with I.O.U.'s for the first time since the Depression.
A1  BIG VICTORY FOR WINERIES
In a milestone decision for the wine industry, a California judge has ruled that a winemaking process constitutes a trade secret belonging to a winery and may not be disclosed by a maker to subsequent employers or consulting clients.
A1  INQUIRY CLEARS BUSH
A bipartian House panel found that George Bush did not travel to Paris in 1980 to take part in any discussions aimed at asking Iran to delay the release of more than 50 American hostages.
A16  REBUKE FOR THE ADMINISTRATION
The House voted to cut off all the financing for the Council on Competitiveness, the regulatory review board headed by Vice President Dan Quayle.
A16  TEST OF ABORTION-PILL BAN
Customs officials seized one dose of the abortion drug RU-486 from a pregnant woman as she was bringing it into the United States in defiance of the Administration's import ban.
A12  ANOTHER COURTHOUSE SHOOTING
A gunman opened fire inside a courthouse in Fort Worth, killing a prosecutor and another lawyer and wounding three people, including two judges.
A12  CLEANUP IN DULUTH
The investigation and cleanup of the derailment that turned Duluth, Minn., into a virtual ghost town for several hours on Tuesday was hampered by heavy rains, winds and the potential for an explosion.
A12  The recipient of a baboon liver was reported doing well.
A17  Metropolitan Digest, B1 HEALTH INSURANCE BILL
A sweeping measure that would make it easier for some older and sicker people to get and keep health insurance was assured of passage in the New York State Legislature today.
A1  NEW YORK'S MUSLIM INMATES
Muslim inmates in many of the 68 prisons of New York State are practicing their religion, in revolutionary epilogue to the darkest days of prison Islam, the 1971 uprising at Attica prison.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-10  Homemade oases soften harshness of mean streets.
C1  Star-spangled symbolism.
C1  At rehearsal with Kris Kross.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  Brian De Palma's hopes for his new film.
C13  National Endowment for the Arts Approves 1,167 Grants.
C13  A birthday celebration for John Cage.
C13  Tina Brown looks ahead.
C13  Sports B8-15  Baseball: Yankees rally over Royals.
B9  Commissioner summons Showalter and Michael.
B9  Mets top Cubs in 12 innings.
B11  Basketball: Knicks out to get Bullets' Grant.
B14  Colleges: Brooklyn College drops sports.
B13  Columns: Chass on the Steve Howe situation.
B11  Bondy on hockey.
B14  Horse Racing: Leg injury forces Pine Bluff to retire.
B15  Tennis: Sampras and Ivanisevic gain.
B9  Sabatini ousts Capriati and completes semifinal field.
B13  Obituaries D19  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials A18  Women with undue burdens.
Bush's X percent solution.
Not-so-mean streets.
Topics: Lesson for meddlers.
Letters A18  William Safire: Latest from Olympus.
A19  Leslie H. Gelb: A Hamilton era?
A19  Rebecca Roiphe, Daniel Cooper: Batman and the Jewish question.
A19


Maradona's Drug Suspension Ends
The suspension of DIEGO MARADONA for cocaine use ended at midnight Tuesday, and soccer officials and players in Buenos Aires said he is welcome to play in Argentina.
"If he decides to return to soccer, I'll open the box and give him the captain's emblem" for the national team, said JULIO GRONDONA, president of the Argentine Football Association.


Timmons Makes Third Olympic Team
STEVE TIMMONS, who can become the first player in Olympic volleyball history to win three straight gold medals, heads the United States team that was named Tuesday for the Barcelona Games.
Timmons is the only player to return from the 1984 squad and one of six to return from the '88 team.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Ann Hampton Callaway  Edison Hotel Manhattan
One of the specialties of Ann Hampton Callaway, a singer and pianist who has performed in New York clubs for more than a decade, has been the spontaneous creation of songs built around words suggested by the audience.
And on Tuesday evening at the Blue Room of the Supper Club, a new cabaret in the Edison Hotel, Ms.
Callaway outdid herself in inventiveness.


2 Tank Cars Stir Fears At Scene of Derailment
The investigation and cleanup of the derailment that turned this city of hills and breathtaking views into a virtual ghost town for several hours on Tuesday was hampered today by heavy rains, winds and the potential for an explosion.
A day earlier, the authorities had been most concerned about the rupture of a tanker carrying a solution containing benzene, a carcinogenic, and had evacuated much of Duluth and adjoining Superior Wis.
But Federal officials said their main concern today was with a derailed car, near the Nemadji River, that did not crack but contained up to 40,000 gallons of liquified propane gas.


Quotation of the Day
"This is only a place that keeps you locked up spatially. I don't have bars and razor wire blocking my mental life. I'm in a state of peace." -- HAMZAH ABDUL AZIZ, inmate leader of the mosque at the Fishkill Correctional Facility.  [ A1:3. ]


Yankee Executives in Hot Seat After Howe Testimony
The confusing and often bizarre world of the Yankees took a new twist yesterday when Manager Buck Showalter and General Manager Gene Michael learned they could be disciplined, and possibly suspended, by Commissioner Fay Vincent because of their testimony at Steve Howe's arbitration hearing.
Showalter, Michael and Jack Lawn, a Yankee vice president, were summoned by the commissioner because he was angered that all three took stances Tuesday at a hearing that he said was in opposition to Major League Baseball's drug policy and treatment program.


Coppola Files for Bankruptcy
Francis Ford Coppola, who made such films as the "Godfather" trilogy and "Apocalypse Now," has filed for bankruptcy protection for the second time in three years.
The filing, made Tuesday in Federal Bankruptcy Court in San Francisco, stemmed from the 1982 box-office flop of the film "One From the Heart," a spokeswoman for Mr.
Coppola said.


Helen M. Serfling; Art Director, 54
Helen M. Serfling, an art director for national magazines, advertising agencies and department stores, died on Tuesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 54 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of breast cancer, said Milton Simpson, her companion.


Morrison Inc.(X) reports earnings for Qtr to June 6


Asa D. Sokolow, 73, An Antitrust Lawyer
Asa D. Sokolow, an antitrust lawyer and civil rights advocate, died on Friday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Sokolow was with the Rosenman &amp; Colin law firm in Manhattan for 30 years, rising to senior partner.
His clients included Sony, CBS, Columbia House and May Department Stores.


Oracle Systems reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


It May Be Junk, but What Junk It Is!
REMEMBER the glamorous old elevator cabs with domed ceilings, gilded mirror frames and paneled walls at the Fifth Avenue outpost of Lord &amp; Taylor?
Ever wonder what happened to them?
Evan Blum knows.
His company, Irreplaceable Artifacts, dismantled the eight elevators when new ones were installed two years ago, and took them to his showroom in lower Manhattan.
He recently sold the last piece.
One of the domes is now in the ceiling of a bathroom in a home.
Another is in an entrance foyer.


Germany Abandons European Jet Fighter Project
In a decision that marks a turning point in German security policy, the Government of Chancellor Helmut Kohl has decided to drop out of a four-nation project to build a new European jet fighter.
"The world situation and Germany's security position have fundamentally changed," members of Parliament from the ruling coalition asserted in a statement approved Tuesday.
"Political responsibility requires that our defense efforts and the expenditures required to support them be adjusted to new conditions."


Philip Morris Defies Critics Of Marlboro Medium Brand
PHILIP MORRIS U.S.A. is high on Medium, despite critics who hold it in lower regard.
A year ago, the nation's leading tobacco marketer took a giant risk in introducing a variation of Marlboro, the world's best-selling cigarette, with tar levels between those of regular and light brands.
Some industry analysts derided Marlboro Medium as an unneeded, oddball hybrid that would confuse consumers and prove a problem in stemming a recent decline in Marlboro's popularity.


Public Advocate Quits in Trenton Over Cutbacks
Public Advocate Wilfredo Caraballo announced his resignation today, saying that Republican budget cuts had weakened the effectiveness of his office, which is the voice of citizens with complaints about government.
With the announcement coming less than 24 hours after the Legislature's override of Gov.
Jim Florio's veto of the budget, Mr.
Caraballo's resignation became an immediate and highly visible symbol of the impact of the spending plan and of the Republicans' effort to restructure government across the board.


A Mere $2 Million Bid, But a $3.8 Million Return
It cost Solomon Keith $1 to buy a winning New York State lottery ticket worth $5 million in 1987.
Yesterday, at a crowded auction in Surrogate's Court in lower Manhattan, it cost the Presidential Life Insurance Company $2.075 million to buy the rights to the $3.843 million in winnings that remained after Mr.
Keith's death.
The 9.9 percent rate of return on this unusual investment must have looked positively blue-chip to Presidential Life of Nyack, N.Y., which in late 1990 had more than half its $2.3 billion in assets invested in high-yield, high-risk junk bonds.
Presidential Life, which has had financial troubles, is now the lead plaintiff in a class-action suit against Michael Milken, the former junk-bond king of Drexel Burnham Lambert.


Federal Jurors Considering Death Penalty for Mobster
After hearing emotion-charged arguments on both sides, a jury began yesterday to consider whether to impose the death penalty on a drug-dealing mobster convicted of six murders.
The defendant, Thomas Pitera, deserves to die for the "heinous, cruel and depraved" murders, the chief prosecutor, David W. Shapiro, told the jury in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Questions on Iranian Airliner
The United States account of its downing of the plane in 1988 has been challenged by a news report that says the Navy provoked the incident, in which 290 people died.
Page A7.


Dynamics Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


Ruble Floats While Russian Economy Still Sinks
As Russia's ruble began its precarious journey toward being a normal, convertible currency, acting Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar warned the Russian Parliament today that the Government budget deficit was running out of control.
"We have begun to allow ourselves to spend more than we can afford," Mr.
Gaidar said, cautioning legislators that there could be no stability for the newly floated ruble if the deficit continued to grow, further fueling inflation.


American Science &amp; Engineering Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Haitian Exodus Has Slowed to a Trickle, U.S. Says
Faced with the Coast Guard's refusal to take refugees fleeing Haiti to a safe haven at an American naval base in Cuba, the exodus from Haiti has virtually stopped, Administration officials said today.
Since President Bush's order on May 24 that all Haitians intercepted at sea be returned immediately to Haiti without checking to determine whether they were escaping political persecution, the Coast Guard has picked up 3,031 refugees, but only about 120 since June 5, according to a Coast Guard spokesman, Petty Officer Steve Sapp.


Bush Has Steered Right Course on China
To the Editor:
Your first article in "The Bush Record" series (front page, June 25) singles out the President's handling of China policy as an area where his approach has failed and states that conciliation after the 1989 events in Tiananmen Square produced no tangible results.
This is untrue.
China released some political prisoners and allowed some dissidents to leave the country.
More important, it is again embarked on reform and openness, perhaps more forcefully than before.
It is to Mr.
Bush's credit that his Administration has tried to work with China, rather than isolate it.
Imagine what a nonconciliatory or, worse, a hostile policy would do.
China would have stepped up its repression of political dissent, and the hard-liners would have an excuse to slow down, if not nullify, the reforms.


COMPANY NEWS
INTEGRA FINANCIAL CORP., Pittsburgh, completed the acquisition of Landmark Savings Association, Pittsburgh, in a stock conversion transaction.
MARKS &amp; SPENCER P.L.C., the British retailer, will open its fifth store in Hong Kong in early October.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
WICKER furniture can suffer an early demise from lack of care.
Routine maintenance of wicker is easy and takes little time, and many minor repairs are within the range of amateurs.
The term wicker refers to any furniture, baskets or containers made by weaving fibers around a frame that forms the core of the piece.
Fibers commonly used include rattan, raffia and buri, all of which are varieties of palm.
Also used are willow and several species of reed. (Twisted paper called fiber rush is usually used only for chair seats. It should not be allowed to get wet, and should not be cared for in the same manner as the wicker described in this column.) Frame materials are usually woody stalks, stems or vine sections.


Central Pennsylvania Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Revised Urban Aid Plan Is $5 Billion Compromise
Eager to display an ability to govern amid rising disenchantment with partisan bickering, the White House and Congressional Democrats agreed tonight on a $5 billion aid package for the nation's cities.
It includes tax incentives for businesses willing to invest in inner-city neighborhoods and $2.5 billion for a variety of social programs.
While the program falls far short of a sweeping effort to uproot urban poverty, it represents a victory for Republicans and Democrats alike who were able to weave their differing policy approaches into one package.
While final enactment is still in doubt, President Bush appears on the way to achieving the core of his urban program: the establishment of urban enterprise zones meant to flood neighborhoods like Harlem and Watts with new capital investment.


Hotels Have to Take Security of Their Guests More Seriously
To the Editor:
Re "Traveling More on Business, Women Seek More of Hotels" (news article, June 17):
As a writer of books on issues confronting teen-agers, I am often on the road meeting with young people and experts around the country.
Last November, while visting Los Angeles, I planned to stay at an upscale hotel.
Within minutes of checking in, the phone in my room rang.
A voice said: "This is the front desk. There's been a report of a leak on your floor. Before you settle in, we're sending a maintenance man to check it."


CRAY RESEARCH'S CHIEF IS SHARPLY CRITICAL OF TOKYO
John A. Rollwagen, chief executive of Cray Research Inc., lashed out at the Japanese Government, telling a Congressional subcommittee yesterday that Japan was violating trade agreements and giving unfair advantages to its supercomputer makers.
Mr.
Rollwagen testified at a hearing of the House Committee on Government Operations Subcommittee on Legislation and National Security after learning on Monday that Tokyo had awarded the Japanese computer maker NEC a contract to install a supercomputer at Japan's National Institute for Fusion Science.


Reviews/Dance; A Stage Mother as Shrew: Supreme Shrew
The A and G Dance Company presented two new pieces that were enjoyable but also something of a tease on Sunday afternoon at the Bessie Schonberg Theater in Manhattan.
"Bunny Hop," choreographed by Germaine Salsberg to popular and classical music, was a suite of eight skits built around monologues for a piranha of a stage mother who is so awful she out-stereotypes the stereotype.
The cheerfully schlocky dance routines might be tap-recital numbers, and Ms.
Salsberg's woeful tapping bunny might be Chelsea, the stage mother's daughter, decades later.
There is vivid performing from the entire cast, which included Mary Brienza, who played the stage mother, Rene, and wrote her monologues; Crystal Chapman; Nicole Kostura; Glenn Leslie; John Scott; Artis Smith, and Eileen Woods.
Ms.
Chapman and Mr.
Leslie stood out in one goofy duet, and Mr.
Leslie was particularly funny as a comically genial tapster in drag.
But it was tantalizingly unclear whether Ms.
Salsberg chose to choreograph tap cliches or was simply working within her dancers' skills.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Tuesday about R. H. Macy &amp; Company's latest losses included one expense erroneously.
The company did not have a $22.2 million interest expense for financing it has received since it sought bankruptcy protection.


Blazing Trails, Urban Style
ON Tuesday, a doll-house-size model of a tenement went on permanent exhibit at the Lower East Side Tenement Museum at 97 Orchard Street (Delancey Street).
Called "Urban Log Cabin" because immigrants on the Lower East Side were considered urban pioneers, the five-foot-tall model is a replica of the museum building.
One side shows the three-room apartments as they were in 1870; the other reflects the 1915 state.
Inside are dolls making a Passover meal.


Equitrac Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Holiday on Saturday
Saturday is the Fourth of July, but many offices will be closed tomorrow.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  FIREWORKS: 9:15 P.M. today at the Brooklyn Bridge; 9:20 P.M.
Saturday on the Hudson River between Battery Park and West Houston Street.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal and New York City closed tomorrow; state open tomorrow.
POST OFFICE: Regular service tomorrow; Express Mail and special delivery only on Saturday; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Most open tomorrow; most closed on Saturday.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect on Saturday.
SANITATION: Regular service tomorrow; no pickups or street cleaning on Saturday.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Subways and buses on Saturday schedule tomorrow and Saturday with extra subway service to and from lower Manhattan on Saturday evening; Metro-North on regular schedules, with extra trains from Grand Central Terminal on Saturday evening; Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedules tomorrow and Saturday.
NEW JERSEY GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Regular service tomorrow; Express Mail and special delivery only on Saturday.
BANKS: Most closed Friday; many closed Saturday.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit on weekend schedules tomorrow and  Saturday.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Regular service tomorrow; Express Mail and special delivery only on Saturday.
BANKS: Most closed tomorrow; local option on Saturday.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on regular schedules, with extra trains from Grand Central Terminal on Saturday evening.


Hornacek Has Arthroscopic Surgery
Philadelphia 76ers guard JEFF HORNACEK underwent arthroscopic surgery on his left knee Tuesday and faces about six weeks of rehabilitation, the team said.
Hornacek came to the 76ers with ANDREW LANG and TIM PERRY on June 17 in the CHARLES BARKLEY trade.


2 Environmental Bills Fail in Albany
The two most significant environmental bills facing the State Legislature this year were declared all but dead today, in large measure because two Republican Senators insisted on having the authority to block state land purchases in the Adirondacks and the New York City watershed in the Catskills.
As state lawmakers headed toward their annual end-of-session marathon, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Assemblyman Maurice D. Hinchey, a Saugerties Democrat who is chairman of the Environmental Conservation Committee, both conceded that their environmental agenda had been thwarted in the Senate.


Olympic Failure: Others Share Pain
Reebok International Ltd. was not the only marketer to be stung by Dan O'Brien's unexpected failure to make the United States Olympic team.
Skybox International, a trading-card company, included Mr.
O'Brien as one of the "Olympic hopefuls" in its series of U.S.
Olympicards.
Frank O'Connell, president and chief executive of Skybox, said his company had no plans to pull Mr.
O'Brien's card, adding, "He represents what contending for a medal is all about."


U.S.-French Relations Turn Icy After Cold War
As a meeting in Washington on May 11 between Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and the French Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas, went from bad to worse, an exasperated Mr.
Baker asked bluntly, "Are you for us or against us?"
The remark, contained in an official French transcript of the meeting, underscores the mutual suspicion, even outright anger, which has come to characterize relations between France and the United States in recent months.
While tensions between the two countries have long existed, it appears that the end of the cold war has brought a new level of mistrust.


Quantronix Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Hyman Ruchlis, Writer on Science, Is Dead at 79
Hyman Ruchlis, an educator who wrote about science and mathematics for young readers, died on Tuesday at Palm Beach Hospice in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 79 years old and lived in Century Village, a retirement community in West Palm Beach.
He died of kidney failure and a cardiac disorder, said Dr.
Leo Gross, a close friend in New York.


Tyson's Conversion to Islam Denied
MIKE TYSON and a prison Muslim group issued a statement yesterday emphasizing that the former heavyweight champion has not converted to Islam but acknowledging he is studying the religion.
The Daily News reported last month that Tyson had become a Muslim at the Indiana Youth Center in Plainfield, Ind., where he is serving a six-year sentence for his February rape conviction in Indianapolis.


Safety-Kleen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


BILL TO OVERHAUL HEALTH INSURANCE PASSES IN ALBANY
A sweeping measure that would make it easier for millions of older and sicker people to get and keep health insurance was grudgingly approved by the New York State Legislature today, assuring that it will become law.
The bill would have the immediate effect of canceling a proposed rate increase for more than 1.2 million individual and small-group customers of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the state's largest health-insurance company.
But it would go far beyond that, state officials say, making New York the first state to ban discrimination in setting health insurance rates.


Bush Gives Mexico Limited Pledge on Abductions
In a pledge that fell far short of the Mexican Government's demands, President Bush promised today that his Administration would not kidnap criminal suspects from Mexico in the future.
The United States refused to make a more lasting commitment to refrain from cross-border kidnappings or to extradite any American officials who carry them out.


Kidnapped Executive Died After 4 Days in a Locked Wooden Box
Sidney J. Reso died inside a padlocked wooden box left inside a larger metal self-storage room on May 3 -- four days after he was kidnapped from his front driveway, law-enforcement officials said today.
Arthur D. and Irene J. Seale, the New Jersey couple charged in the abduction, left no apparent way for Mr.
Reso to move or summon help before he died, officials said.


Hunter Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ulster Protestants to Negotiate With Dublin
In a major step toward finding a political means of ending the sectarian violence in Northern Ireland, leaders of the British province's Protestant majority agreed today to begin sustained negotiations with the Irish Republic on the North-South relationship.
It will be the first time in more than 18 years that Protestant leaders from Northern Ireland have taken part in political talks with Dublin.
But even those talks in late 1973 involved only leaders of Protestant groups whose support for continued association with Britain was considered moderate.
The new talks will include even hard-line unionists who bitterly opposed any talks with Dublin the last time around.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PRIVATE LABS TO BEGIN SCREENING FOR H.I.V.
To shorten the "excruciating wait" people undergo before receiving the results of their AIDS tests, private laboratories will begin performing the initial screening for the H.I.V. antibody, New York State's acting Health Commissioner announced.
Until now, all H.I.V. testing was performed by the laboratories of the State Health Department, the New York City Health Department or by fewer than a dozen specially designated laboratories.
B3.
JURY WEIGHS DEATH PENALTY FOR MOBSTER
After hearing emotion-charged arguments on both sides, a jury in Federal District Court in Brooklyn began to consider whether to impose the death penalty on Thomas Pitera, a drug-dealing mobster convicted of six murders.
B3.
CORRUPTION PANEL MEMBER QUITS
Citing a potential conflict of interest, a member of a new panel investigating police corruption has resigned just one week after her appointment.
Betsy Barros, an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn, said she quit because she had been involved in meetings and telephone conversations concerning an earlier investigation of Officer Michael Dowd, who law-enforcement officials say ran a cocaine-dealing ring.
B3.
A VALUABLE LOTTERY TICKET IS AUCTIONED
It cost Solomon Keith $1 to buy a winning New York State lottery ticket worth $5 million in 1987.
But at a crowded auction in New York County's Surrogate Court, it cost the Presidential Life Insurance Company $2.075 million to buy the rights to the $3.843 million in winnings that remained after Mr.
Keith's death.
B4.
Bank begins foreclosure on 10 historic buildings owned by Peter Kalikow.
B4.
REGION  INSURANCE BILL NEARS PASSAGE
A sweeping measure that would make it easier for older and sicker people to get health insurance was approved by the New York State Legislature after it received the grudging endorsement of Senate Republicans.
The bill would have the immediate effect of canceling a proposed rate increase for more than 1.2 million customers of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, and would make New York the first state to ban discrimination in setting health insurance rates.
A1.
Two environmental bills thwarted in the New York State Legislature.
B4.
ISLAM FLOURISHES BEHIND BARS
Correction officials across New York State have become more accepting of inmates among the swelling black prison population who follow Islam, an epilogue to the darkest days of prison Islam, the 1971 uprising at Attica prison.
A1.
USING LAWSUITS TO SILENCE PUBLIC OPINION
Over the last two decades, the use of lawsuits to silence public opposition has grown across New York State, which follows only California in the number of such suits filed.
B6.
Defense rests, without calling a single witness, in trial of Swiss au pair.
B6.
Seventy-eight stable hands arrested at Belmont Park Race Track.
B6.
New details emerge about the kidnapping death of Sidney J. Reso.
B6.
Highbridge Journal B3  Chronicle B4


A Tina Brown Goal For The New Yorker: 'It's All About Mix'
Some years ago, William Shawn, then the editor of The New Yorker, asked Steven T. Florio, president of the magazine, who the best editor in America was.
"Tina Brown, the editor of Vanity Fair," Mr.
Florio replied.
Why? asked Mr. Shawn.


Topics of The Times; A Lesson for Albany's Meddlers
With a last-second maneuver, the Dinkins administration outsmarted New York State legislators who sought more control over the city's police hiring program.
A gimmick?
Yes.
But one with a useful message attached: Let the city run the city.
City Hall had asked for permission to push the new police class into the next fiscal year to save $21 million in pension costs.
Lawmakers tied their approval to funding curbs for the police expansion program.
So the city pulled a fast one, directing recruits to report on Tuesday at 11:59:59, the last second of the expiring fiscal year.


Sampras and Ivanisevic Slug Way to Semifinals
They are an unlikely pair of giant-killers, laconic Pete Sampras and iconoclastic Goran Ivanisevic, but the two 20-year-olds left a mighty divot on the lawns of Wimbledon this afternoon.
And their belligerence earned them their very own semifinal battle zone in which they will undoubtedly do unto each other what they did today to the defending Wimbledon champion, Michael Stich, and a two-time champion, Stefan Edberg.
"He just killed me," said Stich of the thoroughly unexpected 6-3, 6-2, 6-4 straight-set defeat dealt to him by Sampras, a player who had listed Wimbledon as his low point for two years running and came back this year determined to reach its final or bust.


Forum Group reports earnings for Year to March 31


Designed by a Gardener, for Gardeners
A YEAR and a half ago, at the age of 37, John Danzer, an economic adviser at Data Resources in Manhattan, abandoned finance for the bucolic world of his garden -- and a garden-furniture business.
"I had always been an avid gardener," said Mr.
Danzer, who owns 7,000 photographic slides of garden furniture.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Horace Tapscott  Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South (at 11th Street) Greenwich Village Through Sunday
Horace Tapscott fills his piano solos with a sense of urgency, a headlong forward momentum.
Angular be-bop lines turn into hurtling runs, light and prickly; they give way to crashing, rippling chords that might expand to ringing tremolos or condense into another stretch of sprinting linearity.


ADS Associates reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Super Valu Stores reports earnings for Qtr to June 20


Giving Lamps An Inner Glow
"I NEVER liked lamps, the traditional ceramic-base and paper-shade variety," said Lanie Kagan, a former graphic designer in Manhattan.
"Unless the lamp and shade are made of the same material, they don't seem to be integrated."
Last year, Ms.
Kagan started designing lamps inspired by the lamps of Isamu Noguchi, in which, she said, "the shade is the lamp."


Theater in Review
The Last Laugh  Jewish Repertory Theater 344 East 14th Street Manhattan
Two one-act comedies by Michael Hardstark; directed by Lou Jacob; sets by Rob Odorisio; costumes by Teresa Snider-Stein; lighting by Brian Nason; production stage manager, Nina Heller.
Presented by Jewish Repertory Theater, Nina Heller, managing director; Ran Avni, artistic director.


Hillenbrand Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Critic's Notebook; Candidates on TV: Style vs. Substance
It is no secret that the evening news has been bumped from its pre-eminence as campaign coverer by upstart interview shows, talk shows and call-in shows that often leave the networks' A-teams to report on what the candidate said on some journalistically inferior program.
Peter Jennings implicitly acknowledged as much on Monday night, when he opened an hourlong ABC News documentary about Ross Perot with pictures of the still undeclared Presidential candidate performing for the likes of Phil Donahue.
On the principle that if you can't beat them, join them, the documentary was followed by a late-night call-in, during which Mr.
Perot more or less answered questions from a studio audience and from people around the country.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; TURNOUT IN DEMOCRATIC PRIMARIES HITS NEW LOW
As a percentage of the voting-age population, voter turnout in the Democratic primaries this year was the lowest ever, according to a report released today by the Committee for the Study of the American Electorate, a nonprofit and nonpartisan research organization.
The study said that in the states with primaries this spring, 19.6 percent of the population 18 years of age and older voted, the lowest turnout since most states began relying on primaries in 1972 and compared with 22.5 percent in 1988.


Olympia Gets Reprieve on City Tax Bill
Roughly $37 million in New York City taxes that Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. would have owed yesterday will not have to be paid until July 17 because the city was late in getting out new tax assessments.
Though Olympia &amp; York officials insist the company has the cash to pay the taxes, the extension will give the troubled Canadian developer extra time while it negotiates with lenders to avoid a bankruptcy filing in the United States.
The company has already filed for the equivalent of bankruptcy protection in Canada and in Britain.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about the age of the universe misstated a new calculation of the Hubble constant, the velocity at which galaxies are moving apart.
It is 45 kilometers per second per megaparsec. (A megaparsec equals 3.26 million light-years.)


A Musical (a) Anarchist or (b) Liberator Is Turning 80
"If I were speaking to someone who was 90, I couldn't brag about being 80," is the characteristically philosophical way John Cage summarized his thoughts on his impending 80th birthday.
Speaking by telephone from Paris the other day, he added quietly, "I think of each year as a gift."
Actually, the prolific avant-gardist will not officially become an octogenarian until Sept. 5.
But the music world is in the habit of throwing extended parties for its more colorful and influential composers, and the celebrations of Mr.
Cage's next birthday have been under way around the world since January.
On his current visit to Europe, he heard performances of his music in Italy and Czechoslovakia, and he plans to attend a festival of his music in Frankfurt in August.


Executive Telecard Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to March 31


Technology Solutions reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Dodges Queries On Choice for the Ticket
Gov.
Bill Clinton dodged a flurry of questions about his search for a running mate today, acknowledging only that he had narrowed the field.
Mr.
Clinton spent much of the day renewing his attacks on the Bush Administration, telling a Hispanic political group here that a Clinton Administration would improve the lives of working people.


Hotels Have to Take Security of Their Guests More Seriously; Desk on Each Floor
To the Editor:
Re "Traveling More on Business, Women Seek More of Hotels" (news article, June 17):
The security in all American hotels could be greatly increased by having a security desk on each floor that has possession of the keys to the rooms when the occupants are out.
The main floor check-in would provide an identification card, and the floor desk would provide the key.


TRAUB GROUP BUYS MEN'S WEAR MAKER BLOCK INDUSTRIES
An investor group that includes Marvin S. Traub, former chairman of Bloomingdale's, announced yesterday that it had acquired Block Industries, a manufacturer of men's sportswear and dress shirts in large and tall sizes, from National Service Industries for an undisclosed amount.
Mr.
Traub's son, Andrew, formerly a manager of men's wear at Macy's, will become president and chief operating officer of the $50 million company on July 15.
Richard DiRosa, the current president of the sportswear operations, is also an investor and will remain in his position.
Marvin Traub, who retired last year to run his own consulting company, will be an adviser.


Books of The Times; Trying to Live Up to the Mob Code
Florida Straits  By Laurence Shames  271 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $20.
Where do you go when there's no room to grow?
Joey Goldman, the 27-year-old antihero of Laurence Shames's delightful, cleverly plotted first novel, "Florida Straits," has resigned himself to failure on his home turf in Astoria, Queens.
For one thing, Joey is the half-Jewish illegitimate son of a powerful mobster named Vincente Delgatto, and Delgatto has "a legitimate black-eyed heir" in Joey's burlier brother, Gino.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
No appearances scheduled.  Gov. Bill Clinton
No appearances scheduled.  Ross Perot
No appearances scheduled.  Vice President Quayle
THURSDAY: 11:30-midnight, ABC, "Nightline," interview.
(Channel 7 in New York.)
SUNDAY: Noon, C-SPAN, tape of a speech that is scheduled to be delivered today in Little Rock, Ark.


Local TV News
To the Editor:
"The News at Six: TV's Grim Vision" (news article, June 14) addresses only one distortion of local television news, that it paints New York City as a place where terror lurks around every corner.
Worse is its grotesque concept of news.
Anyone watching the 10 o'clock news, no matter the channel, would be hard put to know there had been an Earth Summit attended by more than 100 heads of government, that a Presidential election was coming or that New York and New Jersey were involved in redistricting.
What is purveyed are tragedies affecting no one except the people involved, but contain violence, sex or vivid scenes of destruction.


Accounts
*
Fitzgerald &amp; Co., Atlanta, was awarded four accounts with combined billings estimated at $10 million from Domino's Pizza Southeast Region; the Athlete's Foot Group Inc.; Club America Vacations and Weight Watchers of Greater Atlanta, all based in Atlanta.
The accounts were previously handled by Ross Roy Inc., Atlanta, which is curtailing its operations there. *
Mexican Tourism, Mexico City, to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, to retain its account, which Saatchi has handled since 1983.
In an annual review, Saatchi beat J. Walter Thompson in Los Angeles and San Francisco.
Billings were estimated at $8.5 million for the second half of 1992.


Harvey Grant Receives An Offer From Knicks
The Knicks, with room under the salary cap, tendered an offer sheet tonight to forward Harvey Grant, the Washington Bullets' restricted free agent.
The Bullets have 15 days from receipt of the contract to match the Knick offer.
No terms or conditions of the contract were disclosed.
But Jimmy Sexton, who also represents Grant's identical twin, Horace Grant of the Chicago Bulls, as well as Scottie Pippen, was negotiating for a contract that would pay his 26-year-old client in the vicinity of $2 million a year for five years, according to a source.


Central Capital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Earth Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


South Africa Unions Call General Strike
South Africa's largest labor federation called today for a nationwide general strike next month to bring the country's troubled economy to a standstill until President F. W. de Klerk surrenders power.
Jay Naidoo, general secretary of the Congress of South African Trade Unions, vowed that it would be the most severe disruption the country had ever seen, surpassing last year's three-day anti-tax strike, which jolted South African industries and cost scores of lives as militant unionists tried to enforce the walkout on reluctant mine workers.


Polly Baker Lived Happily Ever After
To the Editor:
It was good to see the defense speech of Benjamin Franklin's timeless heroine Miss Polly Baker make an appearance in "Murphy Brown, Colonial Dame" (Op-Ed, June 15).
Although Murphy Brown was a novice compared with Polly Baker -- whose prosecution before British magistrates in Colonial America of 1747 was for giving birth to her fifth child out of wedlock -- both are fictional characters, and yet both were taken very seriously.
Two centuries of credulous readers believed Franklin's splendid hoax, and Murphy Brown is being taken very seriously indeed by Vice President Dan Quayle, as a sign of our moral decline.


Saudi Banker Is Charged With Fraud in B.C.C.I. Case
The indictment of a senior Saudi Arabian banker on charges of defrauding $300 million from customers of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International between 1985 and 1991 was announced yesterday by the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau.
The banker, Sheik Khalid bin Mahfouz, is chief operating officer of the National Commercial Bank, the largest bank in Saudi Arabia, which has a branch in New York.
Mr. bin Mahfouz is also believed to be a principal banker for the Saudi ruling family.


U.S. Account of Downing of Iran Jet Criticized
The official United States account of the downing of an Iranian commercial airliner four years ago came under challenge tonight as a news report asserted that American forces provoked the episode.
The attack on the Iranian passenger jet by the United States Navy cruiser Vincennes on July 3, 1988, killed 290 people.
A military investigation concluded a month after the incident that the crew of the Vincennes, part of a naval force sent to protect American oil supplies in the so-called "tanker war" phase of the Iran-Iraq war, mistakenly concluded that the aircraft they had spotted taking off from Bandar Abbas, Iran, was hostile.
This occurred even though the aircraft was on a regularly scheduled flight, was flying within the commercial air corridor en route to Dubai and was ascending, not descending as if to attack, as Vincennes officers said they thought.


Bernard J. Reilly, 68, L.I. Law Firm Partner
Bernard J. Reilly, former president of both the Suffolk County and New York State Bar Associations, died on Tuesday at his home in Brightwaters, L.I.
He was 68 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, a son, Matthew, said.


Prison Has the Body, but Allah Has the Spirit
The criminals faced Mecca, staring beyond the window bars and glittering rolls of razor wire lying between their basement prison mosque and the world outside.
As they prayed, a bluejay burst freely above the sharply bladed gyres and out toward a cow herd grazing by an interstate highway that laced across the horizon, a teasing reminder to the prison Muslims of how sweetly meandering freedom can be.


Sports of The Times; If in Doubt, Send In The Marines
EVER since the United States basketball team's first game in the Olympic qualifying tournament, fan reaction has come more in the form of a question, "What do you think about the games?" than a firm statement.
This is largely because no one really knows what to make of the team's overwhelming performance.
Not even the experts were prepared for the canyon-sized gap that separates the National Basketball Association from the rest of the hemisphere.
On Sunday, the United States routed Cuba, 136-57.
A day later, the Dream Team defeated Canada, 105-61.
On Tuesday, Panama fell, 112-52, and last night it was Argentina's turn, 128-87.
The average margin of victory: 56 points.


Kleinert's Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to May 30


Joseph G. Blum; Lawyer, 86
Joseph G. Blum, a New York lawyer for more than six decades and longtime benefactor of people with disabilities, died on Sunday at his home in Larchmont, N.Y.
He was 86 years old.
His family said he died of congestive heart failure.


Congressional Roundup; Budget-Balancing Plan Dies
Senate Republicans failed today to force a vote on a proposed constitutional amendment to balance the budget, ending any chances that the measure favored by President Bush would come to a vote before the election.
A similar amendment was defeated in the House on June 11 when the 280-to-153 vote in favor of it fell nine votes short of the two-thirds majority required for a constitutional amendment.


Traffic Alert
Because of Operation Sail and other Fourth of July activities, much of lower Manhattan will be closed to traffic intermittently beginning today.
Here are major closings.
TODAY  The Brooklyn Bridge will be closed to traffic beginning at 10 A.M.
The F.D.R.
Drive will be closed betwen Houston Street and South Ferry after 6 P.M.
Lower Manhattan east of Broadway from Battery Place to Worth Street will be closed to traffic beginning at 6 P.M.
TOMORROW  The area south of the South Street Seaport west to Water Street will be closed to traffic from 1 A.M. to 8 A.M. and after 6 P.M.
SATURDAY  No traffic south of Chambers Street after 6 P.M.


Capriati Is 'Bummed' by Sabatini
Jennifer Capriati took a quick walk off a short plank this afternoon, thumped from Wimbledon's quarterfinal round in less time than it had taken for her to lace up her designer sneakers.
Gabriela Sabatini needed just four serves to seal herself a place among the familiar field that will contest the women's semifinals on Thursday.


Abortion Pills Are Confiscated By U.S. Agents
Customs officials seized one dose of the abortion drug RU486 from a pregnant woman yesterday as she was bringing it into the United States in defiance of the Bush Administration's import ban.
The woman, who gave her name only as Leona, said she brought the drug into the country to force a court challenge "so that women can benefit from this drug." She flew into Kennedy International Airport from London and was met by customs officials, who searched her and her baggage, then confiscated the envelope in which she was carrying 12 pills, just enough for her to end her pregnancy.


Xyvision Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Teacher Is Charged In Abuse of Student
A physical education teacher at a Manhattan high school was arrested yesterday and charged with sexually abusing a student repeatedly between November 1989 and December 1990, the police and school officials said yesterday.
Using gifts of clothing and money, the teacher, Donald J. Paretta, "enticed" a male student at the High School for the Humanities into performing "sexual favors," said Sgt.
John Garrity of the Brooklyn Special Victims Squad.
Mr.
Paretta, 38 years old, of 582 17th Street in Park Slope, Brooklyn, surrendered yesterday and was charged with sodomy and endangering the welfare of a child.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
4.53
5.77
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.53
3.55
5.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.61
3.64
5.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.66
6.70
8.12
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.74
7.77
8.41
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.67
8.70
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.45
6.49
7.18
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Democrats Use Experts To Seek Data on Bush
The Democratic National Committee has hired private financial investigators, hoping to find information linking President Bush to scandals at the Department of Housing and Urban Development and the savings and loan industry, the party's political director said tonight.
The official, Paul Tully, said the party was spending about $30,000 for "technical assistance" from outside investigators in looking into the involvement of Mr.
Bush and his Administration in the scandals.


Corrections
A television review last Thursday about "In the Life," a program about gay and lesbian life in the United States shown on some public television stations, identified a participant incorrectly.
She is Urvashi Vaid.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Placed Jose Canseco, outfielder, on 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Troy Neel, outfielder, from Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
Added Kelly Downs, pitcher, to their major league roster.
Optioned Johnny Guzman, pitcher, to Tacoma.
Signed Benji Grigsby, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Agreed to terms with Brian Doughty, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
National League
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Activated Ozzie Smith, shortstop, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Bien Figueroa, infielder, to Louisville of the American Association.
International League
SYRACUSE CHIEFS -- Signed Scott Medvin, pitcher.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
MILWAUKEE BUCKS -- Traded Dale Ellis, guard, to the San Antonio Spurs.
PORTLAND TRAIL BLAZERS -- Traded Alaa Abdelnaby, forward, to the Milwaukee Bucks.
Acquired the rights to Tracy Murray, forward, from the San Antonio Spurs.
SACRAMENTO KINGS -- Signed Duane Causwell, center, to a five-year contract extension.
Announced they will not make a qualifying offer to Dennis Hopson, guard-forward.
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Announced the would not extend a qualifying offer to Rod Strickland, guard, making him a unrestricted free agent.
SEATTLE SUPERSONICS -- Named Bob Medina strength and conditioning coach.
World Basketball League
HAMILTON SKYHAWKS -- Signed Dennis Williams, guard.


Corrections
An article on Monday about opening-day visitors to the newly expanded Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in Manhattan referred incorrectly to Karen Wehman, a visitor from Chicago.
She is a writer who specializes in city and regional planning.


Growing
WHEN a nongardener sees a gardener in the garden, it just looks like a lot of hot, dirty work.
The sun is beating down, the beach is beckoning, and here's this person trundling wheelbarrows of compost to the potato patch, weeding the tomato plants, spraying baking soda solution on the roses.
For what?
Some glorious denouement at the end of a day's hard labor?
The sun setting on a wall of climbing roses with nary a yellowed black-spotted leaf?
Perfect foxgloves that never fall, splat, on their faces?
Deer and rabbits and gophers who have had their genes spliced so that now they prefer pigweed to buttery bibb lettuce?


Panel Rejects Theory Bush Met With Iranians in Paris in '80
A House investigative panel concluded today that George Bush did not travel to Paris in 1980 to take part in any discussions aimed at asking Iran to delay the release of American hostages.
The notion that Mr.
Bush, then the Republican Vice-Presidential nominee, might have made such a trip in an effort to damage President Jimmy Carter's prospects in the November election that year has been part of a persistent but unproved broader theory that has long swirled around Washington.


Destron/IDI reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Assassinated Algerian Leader Is Buried


Todd Shipyards reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Gay and Lesbian Teen-Age Suicide Toll Is High
To the Editor:
"Suicide Myths Cloud Efforts to Save Children" (Science Times, June 16) omits the "secret" behind many of these deaths: A 1989 study for the Department of Health and Human Services, as well as subsequent studies, concluded that at least 30 percent of youth suicides are committed by lesbian and gay young people.
Given the common estimation that lesbians and gays comprise 10 percent of the population, lesbian and gay adolescents may face a suicide risk three times higher than their heterosexual counterparts.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Maine State Housing Authority is offering $31.7 million in tax-exempt mortgage purchase bonds with a maximum yield of 6.65 percent for an issue due in 2024 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs.
Other long bonds are priced to yield 6.55 percent in 2012 and 6.45 percent for one due in 2007.
Serial bonds yield from 3.4 percent in 1993 to 6 percent in 2002.
The issue is rated A-1 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P. *
Pepsico Inc., Purchase, N.Y., is offering $200 million in 5.625 percent notes due July 1, 1995, at a price of 99.875 to yield 5.671 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
The noncallable notes are rated A-1 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P.


Gay and Lesbian Teen-Age Suicide Toll Is High; Antidepressant Drugs
To the Editor:
Your June 16 and 17 articles on suicide among youths omitted discussion of antidepressant medication.
Antidepressant medication is dramatically effective in young people, as well as in adults.
Any parent with a depressed, suicidal or potentially suicidal child should consider pharmacological treatment.


Crest Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


JAPANESE PLEDGES PUSH FOR GROWTH
In their first meeting since President Bush's ill-fated trip to Tokyo in January, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa promised Mr.
Bush today that he would use "every possible means" to expand his country's domestic growth to stimulate more markets for American exports.
Mr.
Miyazawa stopped over in Washington for consultations with Mr.
Bush in advance of the meeting next week in Munich of the leaders of seven major industrial democracies.
It was also an effort to put an end to the bout of name-calling and mutual accusations of unfair trade practices.


I.B.M.-Hitachi Deal Is Near
The International Business Machines Corporation and Hitachi Ltd. are close to an agreement to jointly develop the next generation of I.B.M. printers for mainframe computers, an I.B.M. spokesman here said today.
I.B.M. has already been buying the core of its high-speed printers from Hitachi and then adding its own software and controlling electronics, the spokesman said.
But for the next generation, the two companies are planing to go one step further and cooperate on design.
Such printers can spew out more than 200 pages a minute compared, with 8 pages a minute for the typical laser printer that attaches to personal computers.


Pine Bluff Retired After Injury in Routine Drill
Pine Bluff, the colt who won the Preakness Stakes and later the $1 million bonus for best performance in the Triple Crown series of races, was forced into retirement at the age of 3 yesterday after tearing a ligament in his left foreleg during a routine gallop a week ago at Belmont Park.
The horse, an illustrious and rich son of Danzig and grandson of Northern Dancer, was injured while exercising during a brief vacation from serious training.
He ran fifth in the Kentucky Derby, first in the Preakness and third in the Belmont Stakes, won the $1 million bonus for best overall record in the classics and raised his earnings to $2.25 million.
But in a light workout on June 22, just 16 days after the Belmont, he apparently took the misstep that ended his career.


House Unit Tightens Curbs on 'Baby Bells'
The House Judiciary Committee voted 24 to 9 today to bar the regional Bell telephone companies from owning information services, making equipment or entering the long-distance business.
The vote was a political victory for newspaper publishers and other industry groups that opposed the entry of the Bell companies into their lines of business.


Bridge
When they play in world championships, European players have one advantage over their rivals from other continental zones: they have many opportunities for serious international competition, facing unfamiliar bidding methods.
The European Championship, held in odd-numbered years, has long been one of the toughest team events played anywhere.
The British have Camrose Trophy matches between England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
In northwestern Europe there are the Scandinavian Championships involving five countries.
And the Common Market Championships, played in even-numbered years, have grown in the past two decades to include 12 teams.
The diagramed deal was played in the 1986 event.


RESULTS PLUS
ROWING Three U.S.
Crews Gain On one of the soggiest opening days in the history of the Henley Royal Regatta in England, all three American entries in the newly named Temple Challenge Cup advanced yesterday on the Thames.
The event, established three years ago as the Henley Prize, is for collegiate and club and eight-oared crews of lesser standard than those in the established eight-oared events.
Orange Coast Junior College of Newport Beach, Calif., rallied from the halfway mark on the mile-and-five-sixteenths course to overtake Reading University of England and win by one and a half boat lengths.
The New York Athletic Club four-oared entries in the Wyfold and Brittania Challenge Cups boat were victorious, but Dartmouth and the Union Boat Club of Boston, the other United States entries in the Brittania Cup, lost their races.
BASKETBALL Croatia Wins in a Rout Touted as the best basketball team this side of Portland, Croatia finally lived up to its billing yesterday by routing Slovenia, 93-70, in the European Olympic qualifying tournament in Zaragoza, Spain.
New Jersey Nets guard Drazen Petrovic scored 36 points and Toni Kukoc added 16 for Croatia. (AP)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Religious Bias at Perot's Old Company Is Denied
A top adviser to Ross Perot has written to a major Jewish organization asserting that Mr.
Perot's company did not discriminate on the basis of religion when it dismissed an employee who said his faith required him to wear a beard.
"E.D.S. did not, and does not, tolerate discrimination, and no one with the facts could yield a concern about anti-Semitism," the adviser, Morton H.  Meyerson, wrote in a letter dated June 26 to Abraham H. Foxman, national director of the Anti Defamation League of B'nai B'rith.
E.D.S. stands for Electronic Data Systems, the company Mr.
Perot founded in 1962 and sold in 1986 to the General Motors Corporation.


Nantucket Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Recipient of Baboon's Liver Experiences a Mild Reaction
The world's first recipient of a baboon liver has developed what could be a mild rejection reaction, but his doctors expressed confidence that they could control it, and they said he was continuing to do well.
That assessment was supported today by two independent experts in transplantation from New York City who visited the 35-year-old man at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.
They said he was doing better than they would have expected three days after such surgery.


New London Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


It Looks Sharp, Feels Sharp, But Is This Razor a Knockout?
IT cost $30 million to hone and market.
It is supposed to give women finer shaves with fewer nicks and welts and prettier afterglows.
It looks like a legless beetle with a hunched neck and a head that swivels and nods.
It sparkles, with a perky white and aqua hue.
And it is reaching stores this week in a blaze of ads that say, "Finally, a razor worth holding on to."
It is Gillette's Sensor for Women, and after numerous tests on this reporter's legs, it proved no better than its competitors.
After all, what more can a razor do than shave?
Still, it is already sending ripples through the razor marketplace.


Lillian Vernon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


A.T. &amp;T. and Unions Reach Accord
After 94 days of hard bargaining, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and its two main labor unions plan to announce on Thursday a tentative agreement on a labor contract.
The talks were the most extensive such labor negotiations this year and involved 127,000, or nearly a third, of the union workers in the sprawling telecommunications industry.


Gunman Kills 2 Men and Injures 3 In Rampage at Texas Courthouse
A gunman opened fire inside the Tarrant County Courthouse here this morning, killing two lawyers and wounding three other people.
Several hours later, a man turned himself in to the authorities at a Dallas television station and said he was responsible.
The man, identified as George Lott, 45 years old, explained the shooting by saying he was still angry about losing his child custody case here four years ago.


Council Held Likely to Bar Waste Project
The Dinkins administration's plan to build a $550 million incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard -- one of the most bitterly contested public works projects in New York's history -- will almost certainly be rejected by the City Council before it adjourns next week.
The Council action would send the city's carefully crafted solid-waste management plan into chaos and probably force Mayor David N. Dinkins to negotiate a new agreement by the end of the month, when it must be presented to state officials.


Canseco Goes on Disabled List
Outfielder JOSE CANSECO was placed on the 15-day disabled list by the Oakland A's yesterday because of a sore right shoulder.
Outfielder TROY NEEL was recalled from Class AAA Tacoma.
Canseco's move came with Oakland tied with Minnesota for first place in the Americn League West.


CHRONICLE
In the wake of two new court decisions upholding a gag rule on IVANA TRUMP, her former husband, DONALD J. TRUMP, said yesterday that "in theory" he should receive the profits of her novel, "For Love Alone."
Mrs.
Trump's book, recently published by Simon &amp; Schuster, is a thinly veiled tale about a skier from Czechoslovakia who marries an American tycoon.
She has also discussed her marriage to Mr.
Trump in a television interview with Barbara Walters.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
CAMILLA PERSSON BENBOW recalls feeling shocked a few years ago when she received a call from the principal of her 8-year-old son's school saying that the boy was failing arithmetic.
Wystan had started kindergarten two years early because he was academically gifted, especially in mathematics.
"I was embarrassed as heck since I'm in this field," said Dr.
Benbow, a professor of psychology at Iowa State University in Ames and the director of a 50-year study of 5,000 mathematically precocious young people.
When she talked to the teacher, she discovered that Wystan was doing extremely well on his examinations but wasn't bothering to do the homework assignments because he found them boring.
Dr.
Benbow persuaded her son to do his homework to keep the school happy.
She also hired a college student to teach him algebra so that he'd feel challenged instead of bored.


Race Track Is Raided By the I.N.S.
Immigration agents descended on a flood-lit dormitory at Belmont Park Race Track in the middle of the night, roused hundreds of stable hands from their beds and arrested 78 men on charges of working at the track without proper documentation.
The raid at 3 A.M. today, one of the largest in the metropolitan region in years, was conducted with the "cooperation and permission" of the New York Racing Association, which operates the track, said Charles Troy, a spokesman for the Immigration and Naturalization Service.


Purchasers See Signs of Slow Growth
Economic growth among manufacturers slowed somewhat in June, according to a survey of the nation's purchasing managers.
Economists contend that the survey indicates that the rebound from recession will be gradual and drawn out.
The National Association of Purchasing Management said that its index of economic activity had fallen to 52.8 percent in June, from 56.3 percent in May.
The decline was largely a result of slower growth in production and new orders.
A reading below 50 percent indicates that the economy is contracting, the group says, while a reading above 50 is a sign of expansion.


Kenya's Old Guard Makes Way for New
Kenya's four defending middle- and long-distance Olympic gold medalists were soundly defeated as newcomers dominated all but one event at the country's track and field trials for the Barcelona Games today.
None of the runners who won gold medals at Seoul and firmly established this East African nation's reputation for distance running -- Paul Ereng in the 800 meters; Peter Rono, 1,500 meters; John Ngugi, 5,000 meters, and Julius Kariuki, 3,000-meter steeplechase -- will represent Kenya in Barcelona.


First Airlifted Food Supplies Reach a Needy Sarajevo
The first food supplies to reach Sarajevo's 400,000 hungry residents by the tenuous air bridge opened earlier in the week were distributed today, but major problems continued to hinder plans to broaden the effort into a full-scale airlift.
The problems include the continuing fighting in areas near the airport and the fact that Sarajevo continues to be bombarded by Serbian guns on the hills surrounding the city, despite pledges of a cease-fire from Serbian leaders.


CALIFORNIA FORCED TO TURN TO I.O.U.'S
Its economy racked by recession and its political leadership paralyzed by stalemate, the State of California ran out of cash today and began to pay its bills with I.O.U.'s for the first time since the Great Depression.
State Controller Gray Davis sent out the first 12,000 of the I.O.U.'s after the Democratic-controlled Assembly failed to reach agreement with the Republican Governor, Pete Wilson, on how to erase a $10.7 billion shortfall in the new state budget before the fiscal year began at 12:01 this morning.


Foreclosure Begins on 10 Historic Buildings Owned by Kalikow
In what is likely to end a bitter eight-year dispute between hundreds of tenants on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and Peter Kalikow, the developer, Chemical Bank said yesterday that it had begun foreclosure proceedings on 10 historic tenement buildings owned by Mr.
Kalikow.
The buildings are part of the City and Suburban York Avenue Estate, a 14-building complex between 78th and 79th Streets that Mr.
Kalikow purchased in 1984 and have been the center of dispute over historic preservation, tenants' rights and development interests ever since.


Topics of The Times; Fare Treatment in Japan
Two African-American women who traveled recently to Kyoto had an experience that, oddly, reminded them of life back home: being passed up by taxicabs.
Three times, the women were deliberately avoided by drivers carrying no passengers.
Racism, they thought, recalling the recent insulting remarks about blacks made by high Japanese officials.
Maybe not, said their escort, an American law professor who is white.
Some Japanese cabdrivers, he said, don't pick up foreigners because they fear they won't be able to communicate properly.
Indeed, Japanese drivers take pride in doing a good job; they often wear white gloves and their cabs have clean white cloth seat covers.


Endowment Approves 1,167 U.S. Arts Grants
Anne-Imelda Radice, the acting chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts, whose veto of two grants in May inspired widespread protests in the arts world, yesterday approved without exception all 1,167 grants recommended by her advisory council.
The grants, worth $63 million, included a $15,000 award to Highways, a controversial Santa Monica, Calif., group, for a stage work called "The Warriors' Council." A collaborator on the project, which depicts artists as warriors fighting for social justice, is Tim Miller, one of four performance artists who is now suing the arts endowment for reinstatement of an earlier grant.
Mr.
Miller frequently appears in the nude and frankly discusses his sex life as a gay man.


Geac Computer reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
U.S. steel producers, by filing trade complaints against foreign steelmakers, have created a $100 million export: legal and lobbying services that must be purchased by the foreign producers to defend themselves.  [ Page D1. ]
Manufacturing growth slowed in June, according to the purchasing managers survey, indicating a lengthy rebound.  [ D1. ]
Senate Democrats outlined a $22 billion package of bills meant to revive the nation's international competitiveness.  [ D2. ]
Builders increased construction spending in May for the fifth straight month, but analysts played down the gain.  [ D15. ]
The Senate approved legislation aimed at preventing taxpayer bailouts of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.  [ D15. ]  Companies
A winemaking process constitutes a trade secret belonging to a winery and may not be devulged by a wine maker to subsequent employers, a court ruled.  [ A1. ]
General Motors bought Hughes Aircraft six years ago as a source of military business.
But the end of the cold war has turned the acquisition into a money-loser.  [ D1. ]
Ford completed the purchase of a half interest in Mazda's $760 million auto assembly plant in Flat Rock, Mich.  [ D3. ]
Olympia &amp; York will have three more weeks to pay roughly $37 million in New York City taxes.  [ D3. ]
Owens-Corning Fiberglas settled its cases in the nation's biggest trial of asbestos lawsuits.  [ D3. ]
Shell opened a convenience store offering private mailboxes, gift wrapping, printing, money orders and, yes, gas.  [ D3. ]
A.T.&amp; T. and its two main labor unions reached a tentative agreement on a contract, which they will announce today.  [ D4. ]
A House committee voted to bar the regional Bell companies from entering the information and other businesses.  [ D4. ]
Zenith Data Systems intends to withdraw from the Advanced Computing Environment, a faltering industry consortium.  [ D7. ]  International
The Magnitogorsk steelworks in Russia, the world's largest, faces extinction but survives because it fills social needs.  [ A1. ]
Japan's Prime Minister promised to expand his country's economy to stimulate the market for American goods.  [ A3. ]
Lloyd's of London should create separate bodies for regulation and operation, a report by a task force says.  [ D3. ]
A senior Saudi Arabian banker was indicted in Manhattan on charges of defrauding $300 million from B.C.C.I. customers.  [ D4. ]  Markets
Stocks surged on speculation of another cut in interest rates.
The Dow climbed 35.58 points, to 3,354.10.  [ D6. ]
Prices of Treasury securities rose on more signs of economic weakness and amid anticipation of unemployment data.  [ D15. ]
The dollar finished mostly higher as traders bought to cover short positions.
Gold prices rose.  [ D16. ]
Soybean prices recovered despite a Government report that an unexpectedly large number of acres had been planted.  [ D16. ]  Today's Columns
If you invested in bank stocks in 1992, you probably did quite well.
Otherwise, it hasn't been much of a year for equity issues so far.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D1. ]
Can Israel's newly elected Labor Party surprise the experts by transforming the country into a modern free-market economy?
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Philip Morris is pleased with Medium, a light-style Marlboro, despite criticism that another version of the world's best-selling cigarette would be confusing.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D4. ]


The Women With Undue Burdens
This week's 5-to-4 Supreme Court abortion decision turned out humane and honorable yet it still puts American women into two classes.
There are those who, given residence in the right states or the money to get to one, can still easily exercise their right to abortions.
And there are those -- the young, the rural and the poor -- who cannot.
In terms of law and politics, the Court majority worked conscientiously to preserve the right to an abortion free of "undue burdens" imposed by the state.
Even so, law and politics often do not have much to do with real life.
What's an undue burden?
On whom does it fall?


Prices of Treasuries Rise Again
Additional signs of economic weakness helped push prices of Treasury securities up again yesterday and heightened anticipation among credit market participants about the release of June employment data today.
Prices fell early in the session after the Market News Service reported that representatives of the American Bankers Association's economic advisory committee met with a group from the Federal Reserve Board last week and found Fed governors reluctant to ease monetary policy.
The group included the Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan.


Homemade Oases Soften the Harshness Of Mean Streets
LAST year a man was shot five times in front of Nancy Santiago's garden at 160 Madison Street on the Lower East Side.
"I watched him draw his last breath," said Mrs.
Santiago, who had run out of her apartment building to make sure it wasn't her husband, Israel.
"It was 10 minutes to 12, and usually I'd be teaching half a dozen children how to garden, but I had canceled the class."


Reviews/Dance; Cast Changes in the Kirov's 'Bayadere'
A powerhouse cast of principals -- Altynai Asylmuratova, Igor Zelensky and Olga Chenchikova -- delivered the goods in the Kirov Ballet's second performance of "La Bayadere" on Tuesday night.
As classical dancers, these performers break more than one rule.
Miss Chenchikova, for instance, is the Jimmy Connors of ballet: She throws herself full force into her dancing without regard to niceties of form.
But like Mr.
Connors with his two-handed swings, she achieves results.
Repeating her performance as Gamzatti, she was flanked now by Miss Asylmuratova, whose Nikiya has gained in luminosity and technical assurance since she dazzled in the role as a guest with American Ballet Theater in 1988.
As for Mr.
Zelensky, the heart-throb appeal he has shown on tour in 1990 and 1991 now finally came through in New York.
He portrayed Solor, the warrior who betrays Nikiya, the Indian temple dancer.


Congressional Roundup; House Votes to Eliminate Money for Regulatory Council Headed by Quayle
In a pointed rebuke to the Bush Administration's environmental and labor policies, the House voted today to cut all financing for the Council on Competitiveness, the regulatory review board headed by Vice President Dan Quayle.
The action came as a response to the Administration's growing aggressiveness in narrowing environmental regulations that it says prevent businesses from expanding.
The council, which seeks to reduce or eliminate rules that it believes decrease trade competitiveness, only last week dismayed many lawmakers on Capitol Hill by recommending that companies be allowed to increase emissions of air pollutants.


Hector I. Vasquez Is Dead at 63; First Puerto Rican on School Panel
Hector I. Vazquez, who in 1968 became the first Puerto Rican member of the New York City Board of Education, died on Monday at his home in Briarwood, Queens.
He was 63 years old.
He died of prostate cancer, said a son, Jaime.


Stop &amp; Shop Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 23


No Eagles, No Cypress
To The Home Section:
I truly appreciate the positive tone of the article "At Home With Don Henley: In His Mulholland Drive Wilderness,"  [ June 18 ] .
However, I feel compelled to point out factual errors and misquotes.


Baryshnikov Cancels Europe and Africa Tour
Mikhail Baryshnikov has canceled a July tour of Europe and South Africa for himself and his company, the White Oak Project.
The tour was canceled because of numerous changes and poor organization, said Edgar Vincent, Mr.
Baryshnikov's manager.


Congressional Roundup; 1,126 Officers Are Promoted
The Senate Armed Services Committee approved the promotions of 1,126 Navy and Marine Corps officers tonight, breaking a logjam caused by a scandal over an aviators' convention last year.
The committee had imposed a freeze on more than 4,500 promotions, transfers and retirements until the Pentagon certified that none of the officers were involved in the incident at last year's convention of the Tailhook Association, a private group of active-duty and retired naval aviators.
Twenty-six women, including 14 female officers, were assaulted by drunken fliers.


Zonic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


North Coast Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Yanks, Down by 6, Keep the Faithful in Stadium
You want depression?
Try being a Yankee in the second inning yesterday.
Your rookie manager has just walked into the dugout after a meeting with the commissioner that may lead to a suspension and he witnesses a three-run homer by Wally Joyner that puts your team into a quick 6-0 hole.
You want elation?
Try being a Yankee in the seventh inning.
Your team has poked and plodded its way back into the game with two runs here, one there, two more here and then two from a pinch-hit homer by Matt Nokes off Tom Gordon that thrusts your team in front for the first time.


It's Not the Humidity, It's the Heat


Canoeist Took 20 Years For Second Time Around
The distinctions about Jamie McEwan begin with his age, 39 years 2 months on July 25, the day the Summer Olympics will begin in Barcelona, Spain.
That maturity will make the canoeist one of the oldest of the 10,000 Olympians and he can still paddle rings around all but one or two.
McEwan has been an Olympian before, in 1972 at Munich, where he won a bronze medal to the astonishment of everyone associated with the sport, including himself.
He was then a Yale sophomore from Bethesda, Md., an unknown who had not been paddling very long.


Russia's Rust Belt -- A Special report.; On the Path to an Open Economy, A Decrepit Steel Plant in the Urals
The 64,000 steelworkers at the Magnitogorsk Metallurgical Complex, the world's largest steelworks, are beginning to get nervous.
The company is 90 days behind in paying wages and is offering instead 50-pound sacks of sugar and pieces of steel that the workers can try to resell.
As production falls, 5,000 of the workers do not have a full day's work and some have been sent home on forced vacations.


Millionaire Adding Unpredictability to a Campaign
Here in this state of shuttered factories, collapsed banks and wilted real-estate investments, the campaign for the United States Senate seat held by Christopher J. Dodd has taken an unexpected turn with the entry of a Republican candidate some consider a Connecticut strain of Ross Perot.
His name is Charles Senter Johnson Jr., but he prefers to be known as Brook, a childhood nickname.
A millionaire several times over, he runs a towel and bedding company called C. S. Brooks, lives in an exclusive enclave of this well-to-do Fairfield County suburb, where his neighbors are people like Ivan Lendl, and swings a polo mallet for recreation.  'A Dose of Success'
And to counter the fact that a month ago the mention of his name drew blank stares from nearly everyone considered important in state politics, he has already spent $160,000 on television ads that depict him as an earnest, smiling executive in shirt-sleeves and describe him as "a dose of success Washington needs."


An 80-Minute Ranger Misplay
Eighty minutes.
The length of a Marx Brothers movie.
Playing time for a women's quarterfinal at Wimbledon.
And now: The number of minutes it takes for the Rangers to lose Eric Lindros to the Philadelphia Flyers, and to sabotage their next decade.


CBS Revises Affiliate Plan
CBS reacted to objections of angry local affiliates yesterday by disclosing a revision of its controversial plan to charge them for programming.
The initial plan, announced May 30, had its 214 affiliate stations, which had become accustomed to getting free programming, up in arms.
The networks compensate affiliated stations for running their programming and in return pocket lucrative national advertising dollars.
The affiliates gain because they get both local advertising time and free programming.


Traffic Alert
Because of Operation Sail and other Fourth of July activities, much of lower Manhattan will be closed to traffic intermittently this weekend.
Here are major closings.
TODAY
The area south of the South Street Seaport west to Water Street will be closed to traffic from 1 A.M. to 8 A.M. and after 6 P.M.
TOMORROW
Traffic will be limited south of Chambers Street after 8 A.M.; no traffic south of Chambers Street from 6 P.M. to midnight.
Water Street between State and Fulton Streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the World's Fare.
The Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel will be closed from 6 P.M. to midnight. SUNDAY
Madison Avenue between 34th and 59th streets will be closed from 1:30 P.M. to 6 P.M. for the Immigrant Parade.
Water Street between State and Fulton streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Independence Day festival.


As Ethnic Fighting Continues, Many Leave Moldova


Au Pair's Defense Rests Without Calling a Witness
Minutes after the prosecution completed its case today in the arson murder trial of a Swiss au pair, the defense lawyer startled the courtroom by resting her case without calling a single witness.
Then, in unusual comments out of the presence of the jury, Judge Donald N. Silverman hinted that the prosecution's monthlong case against the au pair, 20-year-old Olivia Riner, was so weak that he might overturn a jury verdict if she was found guilty.
The judge said he would not be explicit "in fairness to the prosecution."


Dublin Journal; Her Invitation to the Irish: Come Dance With Me
When President Mary Robinson addresses Parliament next Wednesday she will be making history, again.
But it will not be the feminist kind of history she made 19 months ago by being the first woman elected President of Ireland.
Only one other President in Ireland's 70 years of independence has addressed both houses of Parliament, and that was for a historical commemoration, not in the Parliament building and not on a major matter of state.
But Mrs.
Robinson wanted to speak out on a major issue -- Ireland's place in Europe -- and so requested permission to address Parliament.


Gay and Lesbian Teen-Age Suicide Toll Is High; The Method of Choice
To the Editor:
Besides the homicidal dangers posed by guns, there is another important life-saving implication of gun control legislation -- the prevention of suicide.
The leading method of death by suicide (both men and women) is by gun -- 60 percent of those who die by suicide use a handgun or long gun to kill themselves.
About 47 percent of all firearms-related deaths in the United States each year are attributable to suicide.
One of the most common reasons people cite for defending the private ownership of firearms is self-protection.
Some feel the need to store guns in their home to protect themselves, their family and their possessions.


Command Security Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


DI Industries Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Money Market Funds' Yields Show Slight Weekly Rise
Yields on tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were up slightly in the latest reporting week, but showed a decline over a 30-day period.
The seven-day compounded average tax-exempt yield rose 10 basis points in the week, to 2.54 percent, while the simple yield was up 9 basis points, to 2.50 percent.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


From the Rose Garden, the Bush TV Show
It was something between a lawn party and a White House news conference, only there was no food and the parts usually reserved for reporters were played by some rather nervous-looking tourists.
Watching the program, one could not help wondering whether this was one of the "weird talk shows" the President had railed against Monday night.
Perched on a white wrought-iron chair and surrounded by luridly red flowers, President Bush appeared yesterday in a special broadcast of "CBS This Morning" from the Rose Garden.
For almost an hour and a half, he fielded questions from the program's hosts, Paula Zahn and Harry Smith, and from a live audience culled from the White House tour line.


Brock Exploration Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Monday about the finances of large law firms misattributed the information that Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom did not respond to a survey by American Lawyer magazine.
It came from Skadden, Arps itself, not from American Lawyer, which does not disclose whether firms respond.


Yanks Profess Concern For Howe Far Too Late
During the World Series in 1985, club owners unilaterally jettisoned baseball's drug and alcohol program.
The owners, who wanted mandatory testing of players, didn't want to be in a position to initiate the procedure that could lead to a player's suspension.
In other words, they didn't want to rat on their own players and lose their services, epecially if they were good players .
The behavior of the Yankees in the Steve Howe case is a perfect example of the clubs' way of thinking.


Barbara D. Wainwright; Bank Executive, 44
Barbara Dalton Wainwright, a vice president of Manufacturers Hanover Trust, died on Tuesday at her home in Ossining, N.Y.
She was 44 years old.
She died of complications from cancer, said her husband, Harris E. Wainwright Jr.


Economic Scene; Need Zionism Equal Socialism?
ISRAEL'S Labor Party surprised the experts by trouncing the ruling Likud coalition in last week's elections.
Could the torch bearers of the Zionist welfare state surprise them once again by transforming Israel into a modern free-market economy?
The prospect seems bizarre: foxes generally can't be expected to spruce up the chicken coop.
But these foxes have learned pragmatism -- and they are certainly aware that Israel's security and capacity to absorb Jewish immigrants turn as much on its economic productivity as its military prowess.
"This is the best chance in years to reform the economy," concludes Howard Rosen of the Institute for International Economics.


Tab Products reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


MISSOURI BANK COMPANY IS MOVING INTO KANSAS
Bank merger mania has finally come to Kansas, one of the last states to permit the acquisition of local banks by out-of-state buyers.
The Mercantile Bancorp of St.
Louis said yesterday that it would acquire two Kansas-based banks, the MidAmerican Corporation and Johnson County Bancshares Inc., in a stock transaction valued at $129 million.


Off With Blinds, On With Fabric
TO Sayzie Carr, a designer who works with fabrics, windows require drama and fabric, not humdrum Venetian or vertical blinds.
To give architectural shape to an ordinary rectangular window, Ms.
Carr designed a canvas arch, which she painted gold to resemble an arch in King Tut's tomb.
A drapery arch, she said, could just as easily be Gothic.
And while an arch extends the scale of the window, it can hide an ugly wall.


Executive Changes
BORDEN INC., New York, named Peter J. Cline group vice president of North American snacks.
OMNICOM GROUP, New York, named Keith Bremer treasurer.


On Podiums, Star-Spangled Symbolism
IT crests over the floor of Madison Square Garden like a great Malibu wave.
When Richard Dattner, an architect in New York, conceptualized the podium for the 1992 Democratic National Convention, which begins on July 13, he was not thinking about the high-tech video wall (23 feet wide and 17 feet tall), the hidden hydraulic lift, Bill or Hillary or the decision to forsake the salmon, eggshell and azure color scheme of 1988 for the traditional red, white and blue.
He was thinking about making a civic architectural gesture complete with molding -- a grand stair inspired by the Spanish Steps in Rome.
Goodbye, unfriendly angularity.
Hello, baroque.


With New Film, De Palma Tries To Rise From Ashes of 'Bonfire'
Brian De Palma sat in the first row of a darkened, packed movie theater the other night, twisted around with his back to the screen, staring at the audience watching the preview.
Five minutes after the start of his newest film, "Raising Cain," a bizarre thriller that shocks audiences into laughter, the director whispered excitedly: "This is great. They're watching. They're quiet. They're not babbling. Now watch this. They don't know what to to think."


Congressional Roundup; Legal Services Gains Support
A Senate committee moved today to put the Legal Services Corporation on a firmer legal footing by voting it renewed authority, which Congress has not provided since 1977.
Because of conflicts with the Reagan and Bush Administrations, Congress has kept the program of free legal services for the poor going with year-to-year spending bills.
The appropriations committees have also imposed restrictions on activities by lawyers who work on behalf of the poor.
Some would be lifted by this bill and by a companion measure that the House passed 253 to 154 in May.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Frothy Wet Mass
Q.
I've noticed a frothy wet-looking mass on my plants' stems that looks like saliva.
What is this? -- Jerry M. Olivo, Arlington, Mass.
A.
What you're seeing is the camouflage of a fascinating insect known as the spittlebug or froghopper.
Adult spittlebugs are tiny winged creatures maybe one-quarter of an inch long and pale yellow to dark brown.
They lay their eggs inside the stems or leaves of a number of perennials including chrysanthemums and strawberries, and woody species like rosemary and pine.
The hatching nymphs, which are green and soft bodied, are responsible for the frothy mass you've found.
The nymphs feed on the plant and excrete bubbles of undigested sap mixed with air.
They then move this foam so that it envelops them completely, protecting them from sun and predators.


Congressional Roundup; Panel Backs Abortion Measure
After emotional debate and parliamentary skirmishing, a Senate committee voted 12 to 5 today for legislation to prohibit most state restrictions on abortion.
Prompt action by the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee appeared threatened when one senator, who was not named, invoked Senate rules and objected to the committee's meeting while the Senate was in session.


Supermail International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For One Breath, Now, a Foe Is Beaten
ONLY now.
That was the essence of the warrior ethic that Henry Smith, a fourth-degree black belt in aikido, quietly shared with his students as they knelt on a patch of orange gym mats in their makeshift dojo, or martial-arts school.
"Only this moment is important," he said, respectfully bowing to the photograph of Ueshiba, the Japanese martial artist who developed aikido.
"This hour could be your last hour. Live fully in the moment, but ready for death when it comes."


INSIDE
Agreement on Urban Aid
The White House and Congressional Democrats reach an accord on a package of increased aid for inner cities.
Page A16.
Haitian Exodus Stops
Faced with the Coast Guard's refusal to take refugees who are fleeing Haiti to the American naval base in Cuba, the flow has virtually stopped, Administration officials said.
Page A9.
An Inquiry Clears Bush
A House panel found that George Bush did not go to Paris in October 1980 to ask Iranians to delay releasing American hostages.
Page A16.
Bush's Promise to Mexico
The Bush Administration told Mexico it would not conduct further cross-border kidnappings but resisted demands to return suspects.
Page A5.


Plymouth Rubber reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


United Stationers reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Separation of Functions Again Urged for Lloyd's
One of two task forces investigating possible corruption at the Lloyd's of London insurance market has recommended that two bodies be created to separate the responsibilities of regulation and operation now vested in a single group.
Lloyd's is publicly releasing the reports on Thursday, but copies were obtained by British newspapers, which published the main findings and recommendations today.


CHRONICLE
After a 10-year examination, the Vatican announced yesterday the annulment of the marriage of PRINCESS CAROLINE of Monaco to PHILIPPE JUNOT, a French financial counselor.
The couple were married on June 29, 1978, and divorced on Oct. 9, 1980.
In 1983, Princess Caroline was married in a civil ceremony to Stefano Casiraghi, an Italian businessman who was killed in October 1990 when his speedboat flipped during the World Offshore Racing championship on the French Riviera.


Juno Lighting Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Falcons Make Sanders $1 Million Offer
The Falcons have offered DEION SANDERS an extra $1 million if he will leave the Braves early and report to mini-camp on July 13, according to today's editions of the Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
That offer would be reduced to about $800,000 if Sanders reported for the beginning of formal training camp on July 25.


Harvey Group reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Moveable Murals Get Off the Ground


Mr. Bush's X Percent Solution
President Bush bristles at the criticism that voters can't find his domestic agenda.
He reminds audiences that he's sent scores of bills to Capitol Hill -- on crime, education, welfare reform, tax cuts.
But people don't pay attention, he says, because this is "a weird political year."
On CBS's "This Morning" yesterday, he called attention to his program, one that "controls the growth of mandatory spending. . . . And we have a program. It's there. It's definitive." In an interview last week with The Times, he challenged the idea that only Bill Clinton has offered a coherent economic plan.
His Administration has "32 pages of alternatives and options up there right now before the Senate."


Brooklyn College Drops Sports
Nearly two months after New York State required Brooklyn College to cut its operating budget for the 1992-93 academic year, school officials said yesterday that the college's sports programs, some in effect continuously since the 1920's, would be eliminated altogether.
The move will affect 16 teams and approximately 175 student athletes.
Facing an overall reduction of $5.4 million, after losing nearly the same amount from the state for the academic year just completed, the school, which is part of the City University, was forced to reduce or eliminate programs and positions in a variety of areas, said Richard Coniglione, the college's public relations director.


Theater in Review
Lotto Experience the Dream
"Lotto: Experience the Dream," originally produced by the Billie Holiday Theater in Brooklyn, has reopened at the Union Square Theater, 100 East 17th Street, in Manhattan.
Following are excerpts from D. J. R.Bruckner's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Dec. 26, 1991.


Silencing the Opposition Gets Harder
As is her way, Betty Jane Blake did not meander in attacking a developer that planned to cut down a dozen trees on her street.
Playing on the company's name, Terra Homes Inc., she put up signs saying: "This neighborhood will not be Terraized." She tied red ribbons around the trunks of the doomed beeches and oaks, and staged a candlelight vigil.
In short order, Terra Homes hit her with a $6.6 million lawsuit, what legal experts call a classic example of a "strategic lawsuit against public participation," or SLAPP.
The suit was dropped four years later, but the ordeal had so consumed Ms.
Blake that she neglected to pay all the taxes on her late mother's house, and she may have to sell the property.
Prevalent in New York
But today, in a 53-5 vote, the state Senate passed a bill that would make it more difficult for developers, public officials and other targets of opposition to sue outspoken citizens.
The measure had already passed unanimously in the Assembly.
And now, Ms.
Blake is as close to jubilant as she gets.


Private Labs To Conduct H.I.V. Tests
To shorten the wait people undergo before receiving the results of their AIDS tests, private laboratories will begin performing the initial screening for the H.I.V. antibody, New York State's acting Health Commissioner said yesterday.
Until now, all H.I.V. testing was performed by the laboratories of the State Health Department, the New York City Health Department and by fewer than a dozen state-designated laboratories.
The State Health Department has granted approval to 13 private laboratories to perform the tests, and about 100 others have expressed interest in performing them.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis Focus Is Elusive for Bush President Is Aimiable in Breakfast-TV Debut But Some Visitors Leave Hungry for Ideas
President Bush made his reluctant first foray into breakfast television politics today, an event that gave a taste of the potency of Presidential imagery but at the same time underscored the narrowness of the domestic policy agenda on which he is running.
For nearly 90 minutes on the program "CBS This Morning," Mr.
Bush sat among the flower beds and crab apple trees of the majestic Rose Garden, the colonnaded veranda outside the Oval Office framing the shot, and took questions from 125 slightly bewildered tourists who had been plucked by CBS producers from the White House tour line on Tuesday.


Not-So-Mean Streets
The imposing cast iron column looks tough enough to handle anything New York might inflict and it offers welcome convenience.
You put your quarter in the slot, go inside and the big curved door slides shut behind you.
The place is no bigger than the restroom on an airplane, yet it feels roomier and has a lot more style.
That's because of the ingenious design.
Only a small toilet bowl protrudes from the wall.
There's no need for a sink; you wash your hands by sticking them into a rectangle under a big round mirror.
In a few seconds they are bathed in warm, soapy water, then cool clear water, then warm air.


President Angrily Contests Charges Over Loans to Iraq
President Bush made a bristling defense of his prewar policy toward Iraq today, saying the White House had no evidence in 1989 that President Saddam Hussein was misusing federally guaranteed bank loans to buy nuclear-arms technology illegally.
That suspicion, still unproved, had been raised in State Department documents and has since become the focus of investigations by Federal prosecutors and a House committee.


Corrections
A chart yesterday showing the age breakdown of women who had abortions from 1973 to 1988 reversed the labels for two segments, one representing women under 20 years old and the other, women over 24.
A corrected chart appears today on page A16.


At Home Abroad; De Klerk And Gorbachev
When President F. W. de Klerk made his dramatic move to release Nelson Mandela and lift political bans, on Feb. 2, 1990, he seemed to have come to a crucial understanding: that the 15 percent of South Africans who are white can no longer govern this country.
He would try to cushion the transfer of power, it was thought, by negotiating constitutional guarantees.
Those would include protections of individual liberty in a bill of rights, and safeguards of property to assure whites a continuing strong economic position.


Bidder for News Plays Down Disappointing Stock Sale
The disappointing investor response this week to an initial stock offering by The Daily Telegraph of London, which is owned by Conrad M. Black, will not affect his ability to buy The Daily News, the president of his holding company , said yesterday.
"It has absolutely no effect," said F. David Radler, president of Hollinger Inc., Mr.
Black's holding company, which is based in Vancouver, British Columbia.
Mr.
Radler added that Hollinger remained eager to buy the bankrupt New York paper.


Film Society to Honor Jack Lemmon in April
Jack Lemmon will be the recipient of the Film Society of Lincoln Center Tribute next April 19 at Avery Fisher Hall.
Tickets for the event, which will include excerpts from Mr.
Lemmon's films and appearances by colleagues and friends of the actor's, are $25, $50 and $150.
Information: 875-5610.


Willa Armstrong, 63, Video Company Head
Willa L. Z. Armstrong, the president of Armstrong Information Services, a Manhattan video-production company, died on Tuesday at the New York University Medical Center.
She was 63 years old and had homes in Manhattan and at Ocean Ridge on Fire Island, L.I.
She died of cancer, said a friend, Helen L. Horwitz.


A Murky Recovery; How Many Lean Years Must Follow The Long String of Very Fat Years?
Fifteen months after the recession supposedly ended, the economic recovery remains wobbly, slow and, to many Americans, barely perceptible.
Why can't this economy get moving?
The answer is that the economy still has a hangover from the eight-year Reagan boom.
The longest peacetime expansion in postwar history has left the Government with too much debt, consumers with too little savings and many businesses, especially in the sprawling service economy, too bloated.


CHRONICLE
The actress LINDA LAVIN was awarded a divorce yesterday from KIP NIVEN, her husband of almost 10 years, and agreed to pay him $675,000 in a settlement that she termed a victory.
Mr.
Niven, an actor, had asked for monthly payments of $13,500, support for his two children by a previous marriage and half of all marital assets.
That would have amounted to more than $6 million, said Ms.
Lavin's lawyer, HARRIET N. COHEN.
After a trial that ended in the settlement, Justice PHYLLIS GANGEL-JACOB handed down a decision in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


On Stage, and Off
Michaels Leaving 'Catskills'
Not everyone at "Catskills on Broadway" is laughing.
Marilyn Michaels has left the comedy revue, which has been running for eight months at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, and will be replaced by Louise DuArt starting next week.
There are two reasons for her departure.
The first is a dispute over taking a 50 percent pay cut, along with the rest of the cast, for this week only, since business is weak. (July 4 is traditionally bad for the theater, as New Yorkers flee and tourists favor the fireworks.) Ms.
Michaels's refusal to take a cut in what one company member described as "a Vegas-style salary" was the culmination of a long period of unhappiness for the impressionist, her co-workers say.
Things had even deteriorated to the point of her accusing one of the show's producers of sexual harassment.
A company member, who spoke on condition of anonymity, says the producer entered Ms.
Michaels's dressing room after knocking when he thought he had her permission to enter.
She later said she hadn't given it.


Handel Choral Works
The Church of the Servant Choir, from Oklahoma City, will join the Masterworks Chorale, from Akron, Ohio, to perform two of Handel's "Chandos" Anthems on Sunday at 8 P.M. in Carnegie Hall.
The combined choirs will present Anthem No. 4, "O Sing Unto the Lord a New Song," and No. 9, "O Praise the Lord With One Consent." The second half of the program will be Mozart's Requiem, performed by a 300-voice choir conducted by John Rutter.
The New England Symphonic Ensemble will accompany the choirs.
Tickets are $19 to $35.
Information: (212) 239-4699.


Search for Other Suspects Is Pressed in Kidnapping
The F.B.I. is continuing to press a search for other suspects in the fatal kidnapping of Sidney J. Reso, in part because of a taped ransom message that the authorities received four days after the Exxon executive's abduction, law-enforcement officials say.
Irene J. Seale, who has pleaded guilty to Federal extortion and conspiracy charges in the case, has told officials that the 57-year-old Mr.
Reso made the recording before she and her husband found him dead in a padlocked, coffinlike box on May 3.
But officials do not believe Mrs.
Seale's account at this point, said one source close to the investigation.


For Children
United Nations Tours  United Nations  Visitors' Entrance First Avenue at 45th Street Manhattan (212) 963-7713 Recommended ages: 5 and up
Once you step inside the United Nations headquarters, you enter a stream of foreign voices, languages and faces that makes you feel as if you have landed at Heathrow Airport near London; the feeling, of course, is a thrill for adults and children, who immediately seem to sense the kinetic atmosphere of the place.
The daily tours, for groups of 15 or more, can be tailored for children on request.
The tours are packed with 45 minutes of head-swarming details, which few could absorb entirely, but sitting in the cavernous General Assembly chamber can make even the very young feel like worldly sages.


Bodh Gaya Journal; Where Buddha's Path Crosses the Hindu Cosmos
It was evening, history records, on that day in 531 B.C., when the 35-year-old Siddhartha Gautama settled himself under the spreading branches of a peepul tree here.
For weeks, the young prince sat, meditating on the nature of death and life, and finding, in his contemplations, the path to immortality, or nirvana.
In the course of his meditations, Gautama attained enlightenment and became the Buddha.
Over the centuries, the original tree died or -- legend conflicts on this -- was felled.
Today, a peepul tree, what became known as the bo tree, a vast tangle of branches stretching away from a thick, gnarled trunk, now stands on the very spot, it is said, of the tree that once shaded the Buddha.
Abutting the tree soars a tiered pyramid of gray stone, its surface incised with dozens of bas-relief images of the Buddha.


For Olympics Crew, a Flame Has Turned to Ashes
The ice skating arena where Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean danced to a gold medal in the 1984 Winter Olympics has burned down.
The bobsled and luge run is a sniper's perch for the Serbian paramilitary.
The men's Alpine venue is a staging area for Serbian forces.
The speed-skating oval is beyond repair.
The broadcast center has been shelled.
Eight years have passed since Sarajevo played host to the Olympics and ABC brought the Games into our homes.
Now, ethnic hatreds among Serbs, Croats and Bosnian Muslims have made the city, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a brutal killing ground.


Some Keys to the Gridlock on a Busy Weekend
Here are some survival tips for the holiday weekend. Roads
Water Street will close today from 1 A.M. to 8 A.M. and at 6 P.M.
Although all arterial highways will remain open tomorrow, there will be significant traffic backups throughout the city during the Parade of Sail and the evening fireworks display.
From 8 A.M. to 6 P.M. tomorrow, traffic will be limited south of Chambers Street: no vehicles will be allowed south of Frankfort Street or east of Broadway, and northbound and southbound traffic will be allowed via Broadway and Church Street only.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section yesterday about communities in New York that turn empty lots into gardens omitted the name of the organization that runs Bronx Green-Up, a project that has helped start 90 gardens.
It is run by the New York Botanical Garden.


Telecom's $265 Million Deal on Matra
Seeking to gain a strong position in Europe's fast-growing and increasingly open telecommunications market, Northern Telecom Ltd. of Canada said today that it would pay $265 million for a 39 percent stake in Matra Communication, the telecommunications arm of the Matra military and electronics group of France.
Under the two-stage investment, Northern Telecom will initially pay about $135 million for a 20 percent stake in Matra Communication.
At the same time, the Canadian telecommunications giant will make a $130 million loan to the French company, convertible into a 19 percent equity stake after 1995.


Marion Trozzolo, Teflon Pan Manufacturer, 66
Marion Trozzolo, whose manufacture of Teflon-coated frying pans helped change the way America cooks, died here on Wednesday.
He was 66 years old and lived in Kansas City.
Mr. Trozzolo suffered from leukemia for several years, his family said.


Corrections
A report in the Book Notes column on Wednesday about triples on this Sunday's New York Times best-seller list misidentified the series that includes "Ice Cap" (Pocket Books), by L. A. Graf.
It is the "Star Trek" series.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Navy Officers Found Perot Immature, Paper Says
Senior Navy officers described Ross Perot as "emotionally maladjusted" and said in 1955 that he was too immature to be a career naval officer, The Los Angeles Times reported today.
The newspaper said the assessments of Mr.
Perot were made after he requested an early discharge from the Navy.


At the Bar; When a lawyer asking clients to dial INJURY 1 takes on the one with INJURY 9, who is injured?
About eight years ago, Harris J. Sklar of Philadelphia spotted a fellow personal injury lawyer named Paul Perlstein approaching him at a wine and cheese party.
"Well, here comes Mr. 'INJURY 1!' " Mr.
Sklar said cheerily.
Mr.
Perlstein had mixed emotions about the greeting.
On the one hand, it was yet another indication that his new phone number -- the one he was advertising in broadcasts, on benches and buses, at bus stops, on magnets and ball point pens and in newspapers -- was catching on.
INJURY 1 might be clunkier to dial than "465-8791," but it was so much catchier.
And it was far more memorable than "Dranoff-Perlstein Associates," the name embossed on his stationery.


CUNY Law School Gets Vote of Support For Accreditation
A pivotal committee of the American Bar Association has recommended that the Law School of the City University of New York -- an innovative institution with a mission to bring minority students into the profession -- be granted full accreditation.
Although highly praised from the outset for its goals and curriculum, the Law School had struggled in its first few years, with large numbers of its students failing the bar exam.
But in recent years, the school has made considerable strides, with the rate of students passing the bar exam doubling.
The action of the Bar Association committee appeared to recognize those gains.


Investigators Tell of Tirade By Policeman
When Officer Michael Dowd, who is charged with leading a ring of cocaine-dealing police officers, was served with departmental charges at his Long Island home early last month, he yelled at the New York City police investigators who confronted him and his wife ordered them off the property, internal affairs officers said yesterday.
The description of a police officer under pressure emerged in testimony during a departmental trial in which the suspended 31-year-old officer was tried on charges that he failed to cooperate with a police investigation after his arrest on May 6.
Mr.
Dowd and his lawyer did not attend the hearing, which took place in a stark wood-paneled room on the fourth floor of police headquarters.
Trials Commissioner Rae D. Koshetz reserved decision in the case.


Brooklyn Bridge Fireworks Begin Independence Day Celebrations


Holiday Tomorrow
Tomorrow is the Fourth of July, but many offices will be closed today.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
FIREWORKS 9:20 P.M. tomorrow on the Hudson River between Battery Park and West Houston Street.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal and New York City closed today; state open today.
POST OFFICE Regular service today; Express Mail and special delivery only tomorrow; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Most open today; most closed tomorrow.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect tomorrow.
SANITATION Regular service today; no pickups or street cleaning tomorrow.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Subways and buses on Saturday schedule today and tomorrow with extra subway service to and from lower Manhattan tomorrow evening; Metro-North on regular weekday schedules today and weekend schedules tomorrow, with extra trains from Grand Central Terminal tomorrow evening; Long Island Rail Road on regular weekday schedules today, with extra trains from Pennsylvania Station in the afternoon, and on weekend schedule tomorrow, with extra trains to Penn Station.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Regular service today; Express Mail and special delivery only tomorrow.
BANKS Most closed today; many closed tomorrow.
TRANSPORTATION N.J. Transit on weekend schedules today and tomorrow. CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Regular service today; Express Mail and special delivery only tomorrow.
BANKS Most closed today; local option tomorrow.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on regular weekday schedules today and weekend schedules tomorrow, with extra trains from Grand Central Terminal tomorrow evening.


New York Area Job Data Are Especially Grim
In an employment picture nationwide that is unremittingly bleak, the scene in the New York region appears gloomier than most.
New York State experienced one of the sharpest jumps in joblessness in the nation last month, undermining hopes for the region's recovery soon.
The Government said yesterday that the unemployment rate in New York State jumped to 9.2 percent in June from 7.9 percent in May, with most of the increase coming in New York City.


The Dog and the Earthquake
Other Americans may wonder why Californians, facing The Big One, don't think hard about moving on.
Some do, particularly after the endless shocks and aftershocks of the last week.
But people in Los Angeles say they are more likely to dwell on more immediate, practical questions.
They do not, mostly, ask themselves, When do we leave, but How close is this newest movement of the earth?
Is it growing in force?
How much more can the chimney take?
And why does the dog think I can make it stop?
The rumble of a truck laboring up a nearby hill or even a car door slamming can sound like the beginning of something big.
But the reaction is hardly ever Whose idea was it to move here in the first place?


The Art Market
Toronto Museum on Hiatus
In these hard economic times, many museums threaten to close; the Art Gallery of Ontario in Toronto is really doing it -- at least for six months, part of which had been intended for expansion.
Tomorrow it will shut until Jan. 24.
The museum is also laying off almost half its staff.
"I guess we're just one more on the casualty list," said Glenn Lowry, the museum's director.
The Art Gallery of Ontario, considered one of Canada's most important cultural institutions, owns the world's largest collection of Henry Moore sculptures, as well as sizable holdings in European and North American paintings, drawings and sculptures.


On Mott Street in Summertime, Fireworks Rule
Weaving around crates of bitter melons and lotus roots piled along Canal Street, Jose Santiago hurls himself into the torrent of traffic, diving in front of oncoming cars, grinning as they come to an sudden halt in front of him.
"Fireworks?" he asks.


The Muddled Model Cities Model
In January 1966, President Lyndon Johnson went to Congress with a truly dramatic idea for urban aid.
Model Cities it came to be called, and the idea was to show how urban America could be transformed.
As envisioned, the program would have concentrated billions in huge demonstration grants to a handful of cities.
Such grants would have tested whether comprehensive aid could create a realistic chance of eradicating blight.


Interest-Rate Payoff on California I.O.U.'s
The inability of California to pay all its bills in cash is a black mark against its reputation in financial markets, but there is a silver lining for people and businesses who are issued i.o.u.'s instead of cash.
If the recipients of the i.o.u.'s hold the check-like pieces of paper, the state has promised to pay a 5 percent interest rate, which is much higher than the annual rate they could earn on a short-term bank deposit.
If the i.o.u.'s are deposited or cashed at a bank, the bank will receive the 5 percent rate.


Yankees Below .500, But Having a Blast
The Yankees did not have their manager, Buck Showalter, for the first inning of the game on Wednesday, but they never panicked.
They did not have their injured closer, Steve Farr, for the ninth inning, but they still survived.
They scoffed after being tossed into a 6-0 ditch and climbed out with a 7-6 victory over the Kansas City Royals.
Why is this team so resilient?


Stern British and Angry Chinese to Resume Hong Kong Talks
A senior British official arrived here tonight to begin talks on sharp new tensions over the preparations for the handover of Hong Kong to China in 1997.
Underlying the tensions are indications that Prime Minister John Major intends to be tougher with China and perhaps add a dash more democracy to the political system in Hong Kong.
Beijing is outraged, and is withholding approval of the huge new airport that Britain is building as a parting gift to the territory.


U.S. AND IRAQIS TELL OF A COUP ATTEMPT AGAINST BAGHDAD
Iraqi military forces may have tried to stage a coup against President Saddam Hussein on Monday, and intelligence reports have indicated that an armed revolt was crushed by presidential security forces, Bush Administration officials and Iraqi opposition leaders said today.
Initial reports about a coup attempt were sketchy at best.
One Administration official would say only that the coup plotters were intercepted early.


Seeing the Tall Ships by Sea
Here is a sampling of boat excursions to view the ships this weekend.
CIRCLE LINE CRUISES, leaving from Pier 83, Hudson River, near 43d Street, Manhattan.
Today through Sunday, two-hour cruises leaving every half-hour from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Tickets: today and Sunday, $16; $8 for children under 12.
There is also a two-hour evening cruise at 7 P.M.; same admission.
Tomorrow: $25; $12.50 for children; there is also a three-and-a-half-hour fireworks cruise tomorrow at 7 P.M.; advance tickets required, $30; $15 for children.
Information: (212) 563-3200.
SAIL AWAY NEW YORK.
Rides aboard the Petrel, a 70-foot racing yawl that leaves from Battery Park, at the waterfront, near the Statue of Liberty Ferry.
Two-hour sails today at noon, 5:30 and 7:30 P.M.; tickets, $20 to $30, depending upon the sail time.
Tomorrow, there is a Parade of Tall Ships Sail, from 6 A.M. to 2 P.M., $200 a person.
There is also a two-hour sail from 4 to 6 P.M., $75 a person and a three-and-a-half-hour fireworks sail from 7:30 to 11 P.M., $300 a person.
On Sunday, three-hour excursions depart at 2:30 and 6 P.M., $40 a person.
Reservations are recommended.
Information: (212) 825-1976.


Ozawa Won't Conduct As Tanglewood Opens
Seiji Ozawa, the music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, has withdrawn from tonight's opening concert of the Tanglewood Music Festival because of tendinitis in both shoulders.
He is to be replaced by Roger Norrington, who was already scheduled to conduct a concert at Tanglewood on Sunday.
The main part of the program, which includes Mozart's Violin Concerto No. 5, with Anne-Sophie Mutter, and Dvorak's "New World" Symphony, is to remain unchanged, although a section of Olivier Messiaen's "Turangalila-Symphonie" has been dropped.


Japan Won't Hunt Whales, Miyazawa Says
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa declared today that Japan would not resume commercial whaling unilaterally, a move likely to cheer American environmentalists and prevent a possible rift in Japanese-American relations.
Japan is one of three former whaling countries that have chafed at the six-year-old moratorium on whaling by the 38-nation International Whaling Commission.
Iceland withdrew from the commission on Tuesday, although it has not said that it will resume whaling.
Norway said on Monday that it planned to resume whaling next year and was considering withdrawing from the commission, which is holding its annual meeting this week in Glasgow, Scotland.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 590 money market mutual funds decreased by $9.83 billion, to $482.3 billion, in the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 217 institutional funds decreased by $4.92 billion, to $175.61 billion; the assets of the 282 general-purpose funds fell by $1.94 billion, to $170.65 billion, and the assets of the 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $2.98 billion, to $136.04 billion, the institute said.


INSIDE
An American for Yugoslavia
In a bizarre development in the Yugoslav conflict, a United States pharmaceutical manufacturer has been authorized by the Bush Administration to become the Prime Minister of the federal Yugoslavia.
Page A8.
Navy Acts on Sex Abuse
The Acting Navy Secretary proposed revising military law to specifically bar sexual harassment.
Page A10.
Redistricting Is Decided
New district lines were approved in New York State for Congress and the Legislature.
Page B1.
McEnroe Dazzles Wimbledon
John McEnroe reached the men's semifinals and Steffi Graf and Monica Seles the women's final.
Page B7.


As Jobless Ranks Grow, Hope Falls in California
As the recession has deepened here in Southern California, the unemployment line on Venice Boulevard has grown longer, quieter and more angry.
Shuffling slowly forward, the podiatrist, the financial planner, the insurance saleswoman and others spoke with dignity about the humiliations of joblessness and about their sinking hopes for the future.


Corrections
A headline on June 13 about changes in the nominating committee for the Tony Awards misstated the circumstances under which two members left.
Jerry Bock and Mary C. Henderson resigned; seven other members were dismissed.


Cutting the Deficit Must Cause Some Pain; Solemn Obligations
To the Editor:
Commentators on the budget deficit attack so-called Government entitlement programs as benefits that go to people regardless of need.
This focuses on an irrelevant aspect of such Government payments.
By the same logic, you could lump Treasury bondholders or vendors in the same category.
They get their invoice paid or their interest and principal payments, regardless of need.
The recipients of payments from Social Security, veterans benefits, Government pension programs and others are in a similar relationship to the Government as Treasury bondholders.
They have paid into the system, in effect investing in it, through payroll taxes, combat or other service in the military or loyal and effective Government service (often making retirement fund contributions out of their paychecks).
At a specified time, they receive the payments the Government, in effect, contracted with them to pay.


Lloyd's Council Approves Proposal to Tighten System
In an attempt to restore confidence in the loss-ridden Lloyd's of London, the insurance market's governing council said today that it had accepted in principle recommendations that Lloyd's regulatory system be significantly strengthened.
The recommendations came on Monday from two task forces that investigated allegations of widespread corruption by market professionals and recommended tightening regulations and changing the market's regulatory structure.


UNEMPLOYMENT UP SHARPLY, PROMPTING FEDERAL RESERVE TO CUT ITS KEY LENDING RATE
The nation's unemployment rate, the most politically sensitive economic indicator in an election year, rose sharply in June.
Minutes after the report was released today, the Federal Reserve responded by cutting its key interest rate in an attempt to stimulate the sagging economy.
The White House, counting on an economic pickup to buoy President Bush's re-election chances, had been putting intense pressure on the Fed to lower rates.
Analysts said the unemployment statistics were so grim that the central bank had little choice but to act, despite its concerns that it would appear to be bowing to political considerations.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about tensions between the United States and France referred incorrectly to Sarajevo in some editions.
It is in Bosnia and Herzegovina, not Yugoslavia.


Former Prosecutor Who Is Blind Is Nominated to Federal Bench
President Bush today nominated a former Federal prosecutor who is blind for the Federal bench in Manhattan.
The former prosecutor, Richard C. Casey, is believed to be the first blind person nominated to a Federal trial judgeship.
He was named to fill a vacancy on the court for the Southern District of New York, which covers Manhattan, the Bronx, Westchester and several upstate counties.


Jobless Rate Jumps to 7.8%, Raising Doubts on Recovery
In a stunningly grim set of figures that challenged assumptions of continued economic recovery, the Labor Department reported today that the nation's jobless rate spurted another three-tenths of a point in June, to 7.8 percent, while payroll jobs slumped by 117,000.
Apart from suggesting that seasonal adjustment factors may have unduly magnified some losses, analysts found almost no comfort in data that included a shorter workweek, lengthening spells of unemployment, more layoffs and a swelling in the ranks of the jobless by 470,000, to a total of just under 10 million.


E. Ross Buckley, 71, A Reagan Appointee
E.
Ross Buckley, chairman of the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission for most of the Reagan Administration, died on Tuesday in Memorial Medical Center in Las Cruces, N.M.
He was 71 years old and had lived in Las Cruces since retiring from the panel in 1989.
Mr. Buckley died of leukemia, his family said.


American Flies to Belgrade To Take Top Yugoslav Post
After receiving permission from the Bush Administration, Milan Panic, an American pharmaceutical manufacturer, left today to become Prime Minister of federal Yugoslavia and carry out what he called a "peace mission" to help end the year-long conflict in the Balkans.
Mr.
Panic had to receive United States permission in order to travel to a country that is under an international embargo and whose relations with the United States remain frozen, and to serve there as one of its top leaders while retaining his United States citizenship.


Art in Review
Dorothea Tanning  New York Public Library Fifth Avenue at 42d Street Manhattan Through July 18
At 82, Dorothea Tanning may qualify as the grande dame of Surrealism.
She is the widow of Max Ernst, one of the movement's leading lights.
For most of the 30 years they were married, as well as the 16 since Ernst's death, she has assiduously given the Surrealist vocabulary a feminine -- and increasingly feminist -- slant.
"Hail, Delirium!," Ms.
Tanning's retrospective of nearly 100 fabulously refined, frequently (if subtly) ribald prints and illustrated books is a quiet eye-opener.
In her emphasis on the human body and sexuality and in her penchant for mixing styles, her achievement has many echoes in the work of younger artists.


Waterloo Series to Open
The opening concert of the 1992 Waterloo Festival will take place tomorrow evening at 8 at Waterloo Village in Stanhope, N.J.
The pianist Alexander Toradze will perform Rachmaninoff's Third Piano Concerto with the Waterloo Festival Orchestra, conducted by Gerard Schwarz.
Also on the program are William Schuman's Symphony No. 3 and Rachmaninoff's "Vocalise." The festival's weekly chamber series opens tonight at 8:30 in Princeton University's Richardson Auditorium, with a concert by Waterloo School faculty members.
The program includes music by Bach, Schubert and Ingolf Dahl.
Tickets for tomorrow's concert are $15 to $20; for tonight's, $10.
Information: (201) 347-4700.


Redistricting Plans Approved
New York's protracted redistricting wars were brought to a virtual end today by a pair of long-awaited decisions, one from the Justice Department and one from a Federal court, which approved the new lines drawn for both Congress and the State Legislature.
The Justice Department's finding that the state's Congressional redistricting plan complies with the Voting Rights Act stunned even those legislators who had directed the map making.
They had expected the Justice Department to side with New York Hispanic leaders, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and a panel of Federal judges in Brooklyn, all of whom had maintained that an additional seat with a majority of Hispanic voters should be created in New York City.


Unease Laps Across Shore as Traditions Shift
At New Jersey seaside resorts, highway is destiny.
Earlier in the century, the shortest routes to the Shore established summer vacation traditions that persist today.


TV Weekend; Close-Up on Cagney, the 'Faraway Fella'
Violence may indeed be as American as apple pie, and on this Fourth of July weekend, TNT could be right on the mark with the title of its new documentary: "James Cagney: Top of the World" (Sunday, 8 P.M. and midnight).
The phrase is from "White Heat" (1949), the ultimate psychopathic-gangster movie in which Cagney, as the mother-fixated Cody Jarrett, finally climbs onto an oil tank and blows himself to smithereens while defiantly shouting: "Made it Ma! Top of the world!"
But holiday traditionalists shouldn't get too exercised.
Also prominently on hand in this eager-to-praise biography is the Cagney of "Yankee Doodle Dandy" (1942), in which his portrayal of the song-and-dance man George M. Cohan won him his only Academy Award for best actor.
In fact the dominant theme of this documentary, produced by Carl Lindahl and narrated by Michael J. Fox, is the pattern of contradictions evident in Cagney's life.
One of Hollywood's most popular stars, Cagney led a very private life with his wife of 64 years.
Seeming to be the complete embodiment of a hardened city boy, he spent as much time as possible on farms in Martha's Vineyard and upstate New York.
Pat O'Brien, his longtime co-star and friend, sometimes called Cagney "Faraway Fella."


A Secret Lies Hidden in Vassar and Yale Nude 'Posture Photos'
To the Editor:
In " 'Graduation From Hell' " (letter, June 12), Dick Cavett describes stolen photographs of nude Vassar students as "posture photos." Such pictures were regularly made of incoming freshmen classes in the decades after World War II, not just at Vassar, but also at Harvard, Yale and probably elsewhere.
They had nothing to do with posture, however; that is only what we were told.
I have since learned that the pictures were made for anthropological research.
The reigning school of the time, presided over by E. A. Hooton of Harvard and W. H. Sheldon of Yale, held that a person's body, measured and analyzed, could tell much about intelligence, temperament, moral worth and probable future achievement.
The inspiration came from the founder of social Darwinism, Francis Galton, who proposed such a photo archive for the British population.


Bird's Back Now More Than Just an N.B.A. Question
Larry Bird was asked the other night if he was going to play for the Boston Celtics next season.
Bird said he didn't know, and then shot back with a question of his own.
"Are you going to be alive when you're 90?" he said. "Well, I am. Probably on my back."


Critic's Notebook; A Forgotten Voice From the Fatalistic World of Film Noir
Edgar G. who?
That was the usual response when, in the late 1950's and early 1960's, Francois Truffaut, Jean-Luc Godard and their Cahiers du Cinema associates would cite Edgar G. Ulmer as one of the Hollywood masters who had been cruelly neglected, not only by the major companies but also by the American critics and the public.
Truffaut and his friends were promoting their Politiques des Auteurs approach to film criticism, a theory that dictated, among other things, that a film could be properly understood only if seen in relation to the director's entire work.
The Cahiers people were then in the bomb-throwing phase of their anti-establishment activism.


A Secret Lies Hidden in Vassar and Yale Nude 'Posture Photos'; Inappropriate Attention
To the Editor:
In "The Chaplain's Lament" (letter, June 12), William Muehl, a retired Yale Divinity School professor, complains that women dress and conduct themselves in a way that bombards men with sexual stimuli: "Women as a group contribute to an atmosphere of superheated sexuality that makes inappropriate male attention inevitable."
I am the product of a Roman Catholic education of the 1950's and 60's.
Young women in Catholic schools were sold the same shame-producing bill of goods: dress modestly, for boys when aroused become incapable of self-control and therefore unaccountable for their acts.
Sin requires consent of the will, but these boys were presumed to be driven beyond will and moral choice by their raging hormones.
In sexual matters, they were innocent.
It was the girl's fault.


Vincent's the Issue, Say Howe's Lawyers
Steve Howe had not expected an immediate decision on his challenge to the lifetime ban imposed by Commissioner Fay Vincent, but his lawyers' new plans could make the Yankee pitcher wait even longer to find out if, and when, he will be able to return to baseball.
When the hearing on Howe's challenge resumes today, Eugene Orza, associate general counsel of the Players Association, and Richard Moss, Howe's lawyer, will argue that the commissioner's meeting on Wednesday with three Yankee officials who testified Tuesday had compromised the hearing.


Navy Chief Seeks Anti-Harassment Law
With the Navy reeling from a scandal involving the assault of 26 women at a convention of naval aviators last year, the new acting Navy Secretary has proposed amending military law to outlaw sexual harassment and ordered all Navy units to devote a day in the next two months for sensitivity training.
J.
Daniel Howard, who became the Acting Navy Secretary last Friday after H. Lawrence Garrett 3d resigned, also recommended disbanding the Tailhook Association, a private group of active-duty and retired aviators, because of its convention last year, where the women, including 14 officers, were assaulted.
The Navy severed all ties to the organization last October.


Pact in Albany Limits Profits Of Criminals
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders reached agreement this morning on a bill that would force criminals who profit from books or films about their crimes to share the profits with their victims.
The measure is intended to replace the celebrated "Son of Sam" law that was struck down by the United States Supreme Court last year.
The accord was one of few to emerge from horse-trading in the round-the-clock drive to end the legislative session this morning.
Many other bills were essentially being held hostage to one another, and officials were reluctant to declare final agreements on any measure until they had agreed on all.


On My Mind; Elections And the Gulf War
Sometimes, as the one great triumph of his Presidency unravels, it becomes almost too painful to watch George Bush, and to hear him.
Look at what they are doing, he cries out to Americans -- look at those people out there who want to change the history of the war in the gulf, turn something good and noble into something that is bad, just for election-year gain.


CHRONICLE
The line between real life and television grows blurrier, and the summer reception given on Wednesday by the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights may well have given it another swipe of the eraser.
As the speaker at a party for 780 summer associates, partners and other lawyers from 50 of New York City's top firms, the organization chose JOHN SPENCER, also known as Tommy Mullaney Esq. of the firm of McKenzie, Brackman, Chaney, Kuzak &amp; Becker on the television show "L.A. Law." He was following in the footsteps of two colleagues on the show, JIMMY SMITS, who was the attraction at the committee's party two years ago, and BLAIR UNDERWOOD, who appeared last year.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
A Break From the Big Band
Dizzy Reece Quartet, Condon's, 117 East 15th Street, Manhattan, (212) 254-0960.
Hard on the heels of the JVC Jazz Festival, which ended last weekend, comes a reminder of another annual jazz event, the New York City Jazz Festival, which ran from 1979 to 1986 under the guidance of the Jamaican-born trumpeter Dizzy Reece.
Mr.
Reece, who is now the musical director and arranger for the saxophonist Clifford Jordan's big band, which has been playing on Monday nights at Condon's since October 1990, will lead his own quartet at the restaurant this weekend.
His group will include the pianist Ronnie Mathews, the bassist Kenny Davis and the drummer Charli Persip, who also leads an exciting big band of his own.
The quartet, with Mr.
Jordan as a guest star, will play tonight and tomorrow at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; on Sunday sets will only be at 9:30 and 11:30.
There is a $10 cover charge and a two-drink minimum.
New Orleans Heat
Bill Dillard and "Hot French Quarter Jazz," Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, midtown Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
When the current show at Michael's Pub opened on June 2, it was called simply "A New Orleans Food and Jazz Festival" and the members of the seven-piece band that played tunes and styles associated with New Orleans were not individually identified.
But the 80-year-old trumpet player Bill Dillard proved to be such a charmer with his warm, lyrical performances, his gentle and provocative singing and his personal memories of Louis Armstrong and Jelly Roll Morton that he has now been raised to well-deserved star billing.
The band also includes such idiomatically New Orleans instruments as tuba (Dave Bargeron), banjo (Eddy Davis) and clarinet (Orange Kellin) as well as the pianist Terry Waldo, the trombonist Tom Artin and the drummer Chuck Spies.
They play tonight and tomorrow at 9:30 and 11:30, with a cover charge of $20 and a two-drink minimum.
The Crusades Go On
Wayne Henderson's "Next Crusade," with Wilton Felder, and Dave Valentin's Quintet, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
The trombonist Wayne Henderson and the saxophonist Wilton Felder, two of the early members of the Crusaders, a hard-bop group of the 1950's that turned to fusion in the 1960's and 70's, have joined forces again in a new group called Next Crusade, which is making its New York debut this week after breaking in on the West Coast.
In the new group they are reviving the horn sound that identified them in the Crusaders and, later, the Jazz Crusaders.
Next Crusade, along with the flutist Dave Valentin's quartet, can be heard today and tomorrow at 9 and 11:30 P.M. and 1:30 A.M.
On Sunday there are only two shows, at 9 and 11:30 P.M.
The music charge is $25, with a $5 minimum at tables or $15 admission to the bar.


Steinbrenner's '93 Return Seems Sure as Vincent Ends Inquiry
George Steinbrenner cleared another hurdle yesterday, most likely the last one in his attempt to return to an active role with the Yankees.
Commissioner Fay Vincent, saying he had concluded his inquiry into allegations that Steinbrenner had violated a 1990 agreement by communciating with club officials, said he had found nothing that would prompt him to alter the decision he made prior to the time the allegations surfaced.


People
*
James E. Hartrich, vice president and director of research at Mullen Inc., Wenham, Mass., was promoted to senior vice president, director of research and strategic planning.
And Terri K. Burke, vice president and account director, was promoted to senior vice president. *
Katherine M. Haberkern was named to the new position of international Pacific Rim representative at Bozell Los Angeles.
She was previously an assistant account executive at Leo Burnett-Kyodo, Tokyo and Osaka.


Right Way to Read 'Hate Speech' Opinion
To the Editor:
"Loosing Hateful Speech" (editorial, June 24), your criticism of Associate Justice Antonin Scalia's ruling for the Supreme Court striking down the St.
Paul "hate speech" law, does not do justice to the opinion or the First Amendment values it protects.
It is true that the Court's opinion might well have been based on principles set forth in Associate Justice Byron R. White's concurring opinion: the Minnesota statute is indeed unconstitutionally overbroad in seeking to criminalize cross burnings that did not actually threaten the people at whom they were directed.


Finance Unit At G.M. Taps 2 for Key Jobs
The General Motors Corporation's financing unit today named two executives to posts it created to prevent scandals like its loss of $436 million in what authorities contend was a Long Island car dealer's fraud scheme.
Separately, G.M. named the former president of the financing unit, the General Motors Acceptance Corporation, to a top post in its auto parts operation.
The official, William J. Lovejoy, was removed from his previous post in a June 12 management shake-up, after the fraud charges against the dealer were filed.


Souter Anchoring the Court's New Center
Few people outside New Hampshire had ever heard of David H. Souter when President Bush presented his first Supreme Court nominee to the country two years ago this month.
Even fewer had any idea of where this state court judge without a track record on any major issue might fit on the ideologically polarized Court.
It took a while, but by the time the Supreme Court term ended on Monday, the picture was clear.
Justice Souter's home is at the center of the Court, a center that to a striking degree he is anchoring and helping to define.


Sports of The Times; The English Now Adore The Old Man
THEY like him now, now that he has gray hair.
Most players pluck at their racquets between points but John McEnroe claws at his head, and now there are patches of gray coming through from all that angst over the years.
There is still excruciating tension in the man as he paces the lines, hearing every titter, quivering when some lout clicks a flash camera.
But the gallery likes him now, and even the British public sympathizes with John McEnroe, now that he is a father of three and 33 years old and coming back from the edge.


Quotation of the Day
"This recession is a disaster for real estate, but it is helping Manhattan retain tenants. The deals are so sweet they can't be refused." -- MICHAEL SOLOMON, a New York real estate broker.  [ B2:1. ]


No Vacancy in 'Silver City'


It's Red, White and Hullabaloo at Wimbledon
Once upon a time, Andre Agassi, who has been using his racquet like a power lawn mower at Wimbledon this year, avoided this daunting Grand Slam event as if the big, bad wolf was hiding in the grass.
Once upon a time, John McEnroe, who has been relishing his role as the aged outsider and flirting with his tennis afterlife, was the big, bad wolf here.
But the times have surely changed.


Review/Film; A Wolf, A Princess, A Castle In the Alps
"The Castle of Cagliostro" begins with a robbery and a car chase, which makes it sound like plenty of other cartoonish action films.
But this one really is animated, with the vivid color palette and peculiar pop sensibility that have turned other Japanese animated features (notably "Akira") into cult favorites.
This one should fare nearly as well with animation fans of any age, provided they are unwavering in their devotion to the form and do not think 100 minutes is an awfully long time.
"The Castle of Cagliostro," which opens today at the Cinema Village Third Avenue, is an interestingly wild hybrid of visual styles and cultural references.
Among the latter are a Bavarian-style castle in the Italian Alps, a long-lost Roman city and a meal of meatballs and spaghetti, which is treated as an exciting delicacy by the film's Japanese characters.


Senate Calls for Monitoring Of the Warheads in Russa
Reflecting a change in arms control priorities, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee instructed the Bush Administration today to negotiate verification arrangements with Russia that would cover nuclear warheads in addition to delivery systems.
The committee's move, which was proposed by Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware and supported by other Democratic members of the panel, represents a transformation of the arms control debate.
In the past, lawmakers have insisted on tough monitoring measures for missiles and launchers to guard against possible Soviet cheating.
But with the breakup of the Soviet Union, lawmakers see monitoring of warheads as a means of insuring that nuclear weapons do not fall into the wrong hands.


Art in Review
'Nature Fabrilis'  Stiebel Modern 32 East 57th Street Manhattan Through Aug. 14
The title of this uneven group show was invented for the occasion.
It describes images that depict the natural world as both humanly fabricated and shot through with febrile excitement.
Two of the six artists meet both criteria.
Rosalyn Schwartz sets clusters of immense, sexualized fruits against science-fiction-style landscapes.
The fantastic tableaux seem to palpitate with an unearthly glow that faintly recalls Martin Johnson Heade's 19th-century paintings of tropical flowers.
Equally strange but much different are Katharine Kuharic's small works.
They are painted in tight colored lines that look like a kind of jittery embroidery, and their images of predatory domestic animals (among them a staring cat hunched over a bird's nest in "Long Wait") suggest an unpleasant cross between children's-book illustrations and bad-trip psychedelia.


Feeling Pressure, Cheney Agrees To Allow Work on Novel Aircraft
Yielding to political pressure from powerful members of Congress, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney today reversed his decision to kill one of the Pentagon's most expensive new weapon systems.
The decision to devote $1.5 billion to development of the V-22 Osprey, a tilt-rotor aircraft that takes off like a helicopter and flies like a plane, is both a substantive and symbolic retreat by Mr.
Cheney from Pentagon budget-trimming plans that have been strenuously resisted by Congress.


A Summer of Discontent
Today's bad economic news underscores a serious split on President Bush's staff over whether he should appear optimistic or more sober about the state of the economy at this critical point in election year politics.
Some important advisers like Samuel K. Skinner, the White House chief of staff; Robert M. Teeter, the campaign chairman, and Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady argue that as a rule the President should talk favorably about economic prospects to build public confidence as the election approaches.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Acquired Greg Kite, center, from the Orlando Magic for 1993 and 1996 second-round draft choices.
Extended qualifying contract offers to Matt Bullard and Carl Herrera, forwards, and Avery Johnson and Dvid Wood, guards.
Announced they will not extend a qualifying offer to Buck Johnson, forward.


Operation Sail and the Fireworks on TV
Here are some television shows that will feature Operation Sail and Fourth of July events tomorrow.
OPERATION SAIL '92: THE TALL SHIPS PARADE, Channel 13.
Live broadcast with Dr.
William F. Baker, president of Channel 13, as host. 9 A.M. to 2 P.M.
OPERATION SAIL '92 HIGHLIGHTS, Channel 13. A one-hour show of taped highlights. 7 P.M.


Abortion-Rights Backers Protest at Holland Tunnel
In a well-orchestrated expression of political outrage that briefly snarled downtown traffic, several hundred abortion-rights supporters attempted to close down the Holland Tunnel yesterday afternoon while shouting slogans supporting abortion rights without legal constraints.
The move to close the tunnel was countered by New York City and Port Authority police officers who generally managed to keep traffic moving as they arrested more than 140 protesters, including City Councilman Tom Duane, at the tunnel entrances along Varick Street.


Doing Right by Haitians, and Freedom
In its relentless campaign to keep Haitian refugees out, the Bush Administration betrays America's best traditions and twists the meaning of international legal commitments.
To their great credit, principled members of the House have contested the Administration's policies every step of the way.
But their legislative efforts have been stymied, not just by White House resistance but by a surprising lack of support from the Democratic leadership.


Olympia's U.S. Unit Unable to Make $2 Million Payment
Olympia &amp; York Companies (USA) announced yesterday that it would not make a $2 million payment on a real estate development in San Francisco and that the action could force the company to forfeit about $25 million it paid toward the project.
The property company failed to make the payment to the San Francisco Redevelopment Agency on Tuesday but was allowed a grace period of several days.
The $2 million would have been one of a series of payments toward the purchase of land for the Market Street office building in the Yerba Buena Gardens development.


Topics of The Times; Mr. Michel, Still Ducking
A member of Congress facing Federal bribery and racketeering charges simply doesn't belong in a key post.
Yet the House minority leader, Robert Michel, refuses to ask Representative Joseph McDade of Pennsylvania to step aside as the ranking member on the House Appropriations Committee and its military subcommittee pending the resolution of his case.
Mr.
McDade was indicted two months ago on charges that he took more than $100,000 in bribes and illegal gratuities in exchange for using his influence to help several companies win defense contracts.
He maintains his innocence and contends his legal troubles shouldn't cost him his committee job.


House Passes Aid Plan for Inner Cities
House Republicans and Democrats today overwhelmingly approved a $5 billion urban aid package intended to help a limited number of depressed city neighborhoods attract new businesses, health clinics, job training and enhanced law enforcement.
Few legislators claim that the program will reverse the decline of the inner cities, where the flight of manufacturing industries, drug addiction and violent crime have accelerated in recent years.


Jurors Reject Death Penalty for Mobster
A jury rejected the death penalty yesterday for Thomas Pitera in a case that attracted attention in legal circles because it was the first one prosecuted in New York under a Federal law that permits death sentences for murders in major drug operations.
Mr.
Pitera, a 37-year-old mobster convicted in Brooklyn last week, now faces life in prison without parole for racketeering and drug charges that included six murders.
After the prosecution called for the death penalty at a special hearing, the jury decided that the brutal nature of the murders was not sufficient to require the death sentence.


Goodby, Berlin Wins Sega Business
Sega of America, as expected, yesterday named Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein in San Francisco to handle the creative portion of its consolidated $65 million video games account.
Sega is Goodby, Berlin's first big new account since its co-founder, Andy Berlin, left in April to become president of DDB Needham New York.
In a competitive, two-month review, the agency was chosen over


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States will be closed today in observance of the Fourth of July holiday.
Some banks and businesses will be open, and mail deliveries will be normal.
Federal and New York City offices will be closed, while New York State offices will be open.


Funeral for Slain Exxon Executive


Five-Day Celebration: A Guide


Cutting the Deficit Must Cause Some Pain
To the Editor:
"House Democrats Promise a Deficit-Cutting Plan" (news article, June 13) is enormously encouraging.
Our only hope of overcoming what seems nearly universal dissatisfaction with the apparent ineffectuality of our political institutions -- manifested, among other ways, in the broad support for Ross Perot's candidacy for the Presidency and the surrender of Congressional seats by worthy incumbents -- is for leaders such as the House Democrats to assume the responsibility that their opposition to the balanced-budget amendment entailed and that its passage would have merely postponed.


Sales and Marketing Shifts at Newsweek
In a realignment at Newsweek magazine in New York, the advertising sales and marketing staffs -- and overall ad strategy -- will now be the responsibilities of Harold Shain, executive vice president and general manager, rather than Peter Eldredge, executive vice president and publisher.
In a memo distributed yesterday to the staff, Richard Smith, president and editor in chief, said the changes would enable Mr.
Eldredge, 48 years old, to devote more time to "solidifying our relationships" with current advertisers and "developing new opportunities with other potentially major advertisers." Mr.
Eldredge, who previously reported to Mr.
Smith, will now report to Mr.
Shain, 39.


'Media Elite' Bashing
To the Editor:
Most of the coverage in the news media that followed Vice President Dan Quayle's attack on the "media elite" gave credit to Vice President Spiro T. Agnew as the originator of this sort of thing.
If memory serves, that honor goes to Dwight D. Eisenhower.
At the 1964 Republican National Convention in San Francisco, which nominated Barry Goldwater, the former President, on the third night, attacked "television commentators and political columnists," shaking a fist up at the television anchor booths as he did.


COMPANY NEWS: For the Well-Fed Cat; You Think Milk Is Milk? Alpo Has Another Idea
In the old days, milk was milk.
You put some on your cereal, gave some to the family cat.
You were happy, the cat was happy.
Simple.
But then came marketing.
In a few months, Alpo Petfoods plans to begin selling milk for cats.
Nearly 30 percent of the nation's 60 million pet cats frequently get a bowl of milk, but until now, no company in the United States has found it necessary to market a separate drink for cats.


Art in Review
'The Curio Shop'  Thread Waxing Space 476 Broadway (at Broome Street) SoHo Through July 11
This group show by more than 40 artists, organized by Saul Ostrow, lives up to its name.
It is installed with all the grace and space of a secondhand junk store, and it reflects the current obsession among younger artists with the odd (if not the morbid), the discarded and the overwrought.
The presiding deities here are Alfonso Ossorio (1916-1990), represented by three of his chock-a-block found-object reliefs, and Paul Thek (1933-1988), whose Minimalist plexiglass forms containing trompe l'oeil cross sections of human flesh have lately achieved a kind of cult status.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GLUT OF OFFICE SPACE HAS SIDE EFFECT
A glut of Manhattan office space has produced an unexpected side effect: Declining rents have slowed the pace of business relocations elsewhere.
The glut has become so severe that for the first time the city's midtown business district was surpassed this year by Washington as the nation's most costly place to rent office space.
A1.
CUNY LAW SCHOOL NEARS ACCREDITATION
A pivotal committee of the American Bar Association has recommended that the Law School of the City University of New York -- an innovative institution with a mission to bring minority students into the profession -- be granted full accreditation.
B4.
HAWKING ILLEGAL FIREWORKS DOWNTOWN
From Broadway to the Bowery, Catherine Street to Broome Street, hundreds of peddlers and hawkers crowd Chinatown and Little Italy selling fireworks for the Fourth of July weekend.
B3.
TWO POLICE OFFICERS INDICTED
Two New York City police officers were indicted -- one in Brooklyn for murder, the other in Manhattan for assault -- in the shootings of civilians.
The officer indicted for murder, Robert Cabeza, was accused of shooting a Brooklyn liquor store owner during an attempted robbery in 1991.
In the Manhattan case, Officer Sean Gelfand was accused of shooting an unarmed taxicab driver, who the police said was innocently caught up in a robbery in April.
B3.
AN OFFICER'S ANGRY REACTION
When Officer Michael Dowd, a policeman who is charged with leading a ring of cocaine-dealing police officers, was served with departmental charges at his home early last month, he yelled at the New York City police investigators who confronted him, and his wife ordered them off the family's property, according to investigators.
B3.
JURY REJECTS DEATH PENALTY FOR MOBSTER
A jury rejected the death penalty for Thomas Pitera, a 37-year-old convicted mobster, in a case that attracted attention in legal circles because it was the first one prosecuted in New York under a Federal law that permits death sentences for murders in major drug operations.
B4.
REGION  SOCIOLOGICAL CHANGES ON THE SHORE
When superhighways placed resort towns within an easy car ride of urban centers, the demography of the Jersey Shore uneasily changed.
Nowhere was that change so evident as in Belmar, an oceanfront community of 6,000 that can swell to 25,000 on an average summer weekend.
B5.
A JOB THAT CHANGES HANDS OFTEN
Ever since New Jersey's most famous political boss, Frank Hague, stepped down as Mayor of Jersey City in 1947 after 30 years in office and turned the job over to his nephew, no one has held the position for two consecutive terms.
Lately the term of office has been measured in months, not years.
B5.
Unemployment picture in New York region is bleaker than in other areas of the nation.
A12.
Newark man convicted of murder wins new trial because of videotaped testimony.
B5.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B4
Chronicle B4


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; JOBLESS FIGURES DAMPEN QUAYLE'S ASSAULT IN ARKANSAS
Vice President Dan Quayle waded onto Gov.
Bill Clinton's home ground today, loaded and primed for a political assault on Mr.
Clinton's latest economic growth plan.
Instead, he scrambled through the day to explain new unemployment figures that threatened to focus his Arkansas visit on the White House's own economic stewardship.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  COUP ATTEMPT IN IRAQ REPORTED
Iraqi military forces may have tried to stage a coup against President Saddam Hussein, and intelligence reports have indicated that an armed revolt was crushed by security forces, U.S. officials and Iraqi opposition leaders said.
A1  SENATE VOTES AID TO EX-SOVIETS
The Senate voted 72 to 22 to approve an aid package to the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe that authorizes nearly $1 billion in new spending and billions of dollars in credits and loans, all conditioned on continued movement toward democracy and a free market.
The House is expected to take up a similar package this month.
A3


Review/Art; The Treats and Treasures of Islamic Spain, at the Met
There are not many great cultures still largely unexamined.
The culture of Islamic Spain is one of them.
It encompasses nearly 800 years, from the early eighth century, when Arabs and Berbers crossed the Strait of Gibraltar and began to establish Muslim domain over the Iberian Peninsula, until the surrender in 1492 of Muhammad XII of Granada to Ferdinand V of Aragon and Isabella of Castile.
The great archeological monuments of the period, most notably the palace complex of the Alhambra in Granada, are Islamic Spain's most familiar and conspicuous remnants.
But its art remains little known and, especially in the absence of an important scholarly center devoted to Islamic culture in Spain itself, little studied.
It has not helped matters that so much of the Islamic legacy was systematically destroyed by the Christians who reconquered Spain, nor that the art that remains is dispersed around the world, much of it in places well off the beaten path.


Navy Punishes 2 Officers Because of Lewd Banner
The Navy said today that it had relieved two top officers of their commands for failing to keep subordinates from displaying a lewd banner about a Congresswoman at a naval aviators' banquet in San Diego last month.
A large banner with words about oral sex and Representative Patricia Schroeder of Colorado was hung in the officers club of the Miramar Naval Air Station on June 18, the Navy said.


Review/Dance; A Juliet Who Has Both Brains And Heart
Zhanna Ayupova is a great favorite of New York audiences and it was easy to see why when the young Kirov ballerina danced "Romeo and Juliet" on Wednesday afternoon at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Miss Ayupova had all the necessary technical equipment, including a buoyant jump, beautifully fleet and articulate little feet and easy, centered pirouettes.
What made the performance so interesting was Miss Ayupova's handling of the character.
Her Juliet was an adorable little wren who was as recognizably of her own time and the late 20th century.
This was a thinking Juliet, full of all the required passion but with a considering air, in acting that was naturalistic but that had all the elegance of the classical ballet form in which it was embedded.
Aleksandr Gulyayev was an endearingly young Romeo, a little sad and dreamy from the start and growing in passion and wisdom as the ballet progressed.
Mr.
Gulyaev's long, tapering legs and body made his Romeo elegant, and his partnering had all the right ardor.
There was a profound change in character unusual in most Romeos when Mr.
Gulyayev engaged in a truly frightening all-or-nothing duel with Tybalt. (Why are the Kirov swordfights so much more believable than the deadly boring Western versions in "Romeo and Juliet"?)


Rate Cut Lifts Bonds, but Stocks Fall
The Federal Reserve's decision to cut interest rates yesterday gave a sharp lift to the bond market and drove the dollar lower.
But the stock market, which zoomed in December after the last Fed move, did not attract many buyers and ended the day much lower.
The reduction in the discount rate to 3 percent from 3.5 percent came before the stock market opened for the day, and there was a widespread expectation that stock prices would rise as they had on Wednesday, when the Dow Jones industrial average jumped almost 36 points in anticipation of an interest rate cut.


2 Police Officers Are Indicted In Shootings Involving Civilians
Two New York City police officers were indicted yesterday -- one in Brooklyn on murder charges, the other in Manhattan on an assault charge -- in the shootings of civilians.
A Brooklyn grand jury decided not to indict two other officers who shot and killed a 42-year-old man after he lunged at a psychiatrist and at them with a knife.
The man was under psychiatric treatment.


Jobs Data Push Bonds Up Sharply
Stunning weakness in labor statistics for June and the Federal Reserve Board's equally striking response to the data caused an eruption in the credit markets yesterday.
Prices of fixed-income securities rose sharply and interest rates fell.
A drop of 117,000 in nonfarm payroll employment, and a sharp three-tenths of a percentage point rise in the unemployment rate, to 7.8 percent, were the highlights of a report that analysts said contained no rays of hope.


Of Time And the Sea: A Majestic History
THE first people to gather on the shores of New York Harbor and gaze out on the grace and beauty of the sailing ship were Indians.
The date was April 17, 1524, and the ship was La Dauphine, commanded by the Florentine navigator Giovanni da Verrazano.
One ship was all they had for Operation Sail 1524, and not a single clever promoter to coin such a name for this encounter between people not only of different worlds, but also of different technologies.
The Indians, who had only their canoes, had never seen a ship with white sails billowing in the wind.
The spectacle of the lone exotic ship appearing at the Narrows on a soft southwest wind must have created quite a stir.


CYCLING: Biking in the U.S.A. -- Day 25; Drops of Kindness
Small acts of kindness made a big difference when adversity struck our bicycle group the other day.
A cold rain hit unexpectedly outside Cooperstown, N.D., as we began a 97-mile day.
Twenty-six miles later, rider after chilled rider stopped in the tiny town of Hope (pop. 406), piling into the Hope Cafe and Bowling Lanes in search of coffee and comfort.
Hope was equal to its motto, "The Little City of Friendly People." Waitresses served free seconds of hot chocolate and found plastic bags for us to use as sock liners.
A local grocer gave Howard Bartlett a bunch of free postcards so we could see how pretty Hope looked on a sunny day.


Market Place; Mutual Funds Generally Fizzled in the 2d Quarter
Some stock-picking investors may have enjoyed watching the Dow Jones industrial average repeatedly tick up to new highs in the second quarter, but those with money in stock mutual funds had less to smile about.
The average stock fund dipped 1.14 percent during the last three months, Lipper Analytical Services reported yesterday.
The funds that fell most sharply were generally those that had performed well last year.


A Deck, or a Danger to Wetlands?; Broad Channel Residents Fight Albany on the Environment
From their sun-bleached wooden deck, James and Mary Mills watch the tides of Jamaica Bay wash over the mud shoals and marshes.
Crabs skitter beneath the reeds and grass.
Herons, egrets and gulls swoop over Black Wall Marsh, the Raunt and Yellow Bar Hassock.
In the far distance, on a clear day, the peaks of Manhattan rise to remind the Millses, should the ocean breeze delude them, that they still live in Queens, in New York City.


Knicks Put Ball in Bullets' Court With Offer
The Knicks' offer sheet to Harvey Grant has put the Washington Bullets in a bind.
Grant, a 6-foot-9-inch forward, signed an offer sheet with the Knicks that was presented to the Bullets yesterday.
The contract is a six-year deal that will reportedly pay Grant an average of $2.25 million per season.


A.T.&amp;T. AND UNIONS PRAISE NEW PACT
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company and its two principal unions announced today details of a tentative labor agreement that the company said would make it "more competitive" by helping to reduce its operating costs and that the unions praised as opening more jobs within A.T.&amp;T.


RESULTS PLUS
ROWING  Yale Crew Leads Way Yale University's junior varsity lightweight crew, contesting a morning heat of the Thames Challenge Cup, started a parade of American victories yesterday at the Henley Royal Regatta by defeating the Newark Rowing Club of England.
Cornell's varsity lightweight crew, the national collegiate champion, won their Thames Cup heat over the Thames Rowing Club in the regatta in Henley-on-Thames, England.
In the only all-American race of the day, a heat of the Temple Challenge Cup, Orange Coast College of Newport, Calif., defeated Phillips Academy, Andover, Mass., in a two-and-three-quarter boat length mismatch.
The New York Athletic Club advanced both their four-oared entries in the Britannia and Wyfold Challenge Cups.
GOLF Close but No Record Darren Clark of Northern Ireland came within a stroke of golf's record for a low-scoring competitive round yesterday when he shot a nine-under-par 60 in the second round of the Monte Carlo Open in Monaco.
His round tied the record for the PGA European Tour, and it gave him a five-shot lead with a 126 total, 12 under par for the 6,994-yard Mont Agel course.
Clark, 23 years old, shot nine birdies and nine pars to reach 60.
Ian Woosnam shot a 65 to share second place at 131 with Paul McGinley. (AP)


Washington at Work; Eccentric Still but Obscure No More, Texan Leads Inquiry on Iraq Loans
Henry Barbosa Gonzalez turns heads on Capitol Hill when he dons the electric blue, hand-sewn suit that a Mexican tailor in Texas gave him as a gift 18 years ago. ("I don't like drab," he explains.)
He raises eyebrows when he takes to the House floor late at night to deliver rambling speeches to a cavernous chamber whose audience usually consists of the designated Speaker pro tem and a C-SPAN camera crew.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about layoffs at the Aetna Life and Casualty Company misidentified one business that was sold to Mutual of Omaha.
It was the individual health insurance business, not the group health operations.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
No appearances scheduled.


Abortion-Rights Demonstrators Try to Block the Holland Tunnel


Qian Sanqiang, Chinese Physicist On Atom Bomb Team, Dies at 79
Qian Sanqiang, a French-educated scientist who oversaw the research to develop China's nuclear bomb, died on Sunday, the official New China News Agency said today.
He was 79 years old.
The agency did not give a cause of death.
It is common for China to delay announcing the deaths of prominent people.


Aqueduct Land Will Be Sold
The New York Racing Association reached agreement yesterday to sell 23 acres of parking-lot land at Aqueduct Race Track to the Port Authority, and thereby attempted to defuse a longstanding confrontation with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
The Governor has recently berated officials of the association for not acceding to his plan to sell the land for $50 million and then lease it back.
Since the association is a nonprofit body, the profit from the sale would be turned over to the state.


An Olympics You Don't Want to Enter
THIS is a story about world-class athletes who'll begin competing soon in grueling Olympic events that you won't see on television for $129.95.
Not even for $1.95.
These days major athletic events must begin with an expose or at least some courtroom time.
So here's some dirt on this group of highly trained men and women who'll swim, run, cycle and throw various objects for gold, silver and bronze medals: every single one of these little-known athletes tests positive for steroids!


Mournful, Soulful Hymns for Brown
In a ceremony borne along for two hours by soul-stirring gospel hymns that created the fervor of an old-time tent revival, friends, relatives, players and coaches gathered at the First Baptist Church here to bid farewell to Jerome Brown, the Philadelphia Eagles' two-time All-Pro defensive tackle.
Brown, 27, and his 12-year-old nephew, Augusta Westley Brown, were killed last Thursday in a single-car crash in his 1992 Corvette on a street in Brooksville, a small town about an hour north of Tampa.


For This 4th, They're Putting Out Fewer Flags
Patriotism in advertising has not died, but it certainly has faded away.
A year ago, marketers inundated America with ad campaigns that had patriotic themes, trying to exploit the national mood of celebration over the Persian Gulf war.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon.
Closing This Weekend
"SPIKE HEELS," Second Stage Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, Manhattan.
Theresa Rebeck's comedy about sexual relationships.
Last show: Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Other shows: Tonight at 8 and tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $22 to $28.
Information: (212) 873-6103.
TERRY BERKOWITZ, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
A video installation by the artist.
Closes Sunday.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Museum admission: $5; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
Them and Their Shadows
Sonic Youth at Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, Central Park, in midpark at 70th Street, (212) 360-2777.
Without ever having had a hit, Sonic Youth has twisted popular culture, putting underground comics in record store windows, clearing the way for guys in unwashed clothes on MTV, retuning ears to receive dissonance instead of consonance.
They're heroes without millions, dwarfs casting giant shadows, and the sound of two guitars scraping against each other feels more liberating than a drug.
Their new album, "Dirty" (DGC), to be released on July 21, jumps back and forth between the stupid and the revelatory, between the glory of the groove and the destruction of it.
Tomorrow at 3 P.M. with Sun Ra and His Intergalactic Arkestra.
Free.


Khmer Rouge Still Keeping Arms
The Khmer Rouge refused again today to disarm its 20,000-strong army, a move that is threatening to undermine the peace settlement signed last year to end Cambodia's 13-year civil war.
After a meeting here of senior officials of the Khmer Rouge and other Cambodian factions, diplomats said Khmer Rouge leaders signaled no new willingness to begin the process of disarmament -- a central component of the peace treaty arranged last year by the United Nations.


CHRONICLE
While most people are celebrating the Fourth of July on the ground tomorrow, the ballerina DARCI KISTLER will be in the air, en route to Moscow to perform at "Red Square Invites," an eight-day festival that is the first cultural event to occur in Red Square in more than 70 years.
President BORIS N. YELTSIN is the festival's official patron.
Ms.
Kistler and NILAS MARTINS, dancers with the New York City Ballet, will join performers including the tenor Jose Carreras, the soprano Margaret Price, and Maya Plisetskaya, who gained fame as a member of the Bolshoi Ballet.


CLINTON HANDS OUT TASTEFUL SCOOPS TO REPORTERS
Gov.
Bill Clinton indulged his desire for a little nostalgia today while campaigning in San Antonio.
And as is often the case, his pleasant memory involved food.
Remembering that he had spent time at a downtown hotel that specialized in mango ice cream served with a flavorful sauce, the Clinton campaign motorcade detoured for a sweet-tooth photo opportunity.


A SALUTE TO THE FOURTH: Restaurants; Where to See The Ships And Eat Well
The island of Manhattan was not designed with waterfront frolic in mind.
New Yorkers usually view harbor festivities like those on tap this weekend from a distance -- from an office tower, a bridge, a roof, a highway.
The most commodious perch, of course, is a restaurant, and fortunately the city has a fine selection of places that offer sweeping water views.
Harbor activities are planned for today through Sunday, and many of the waterside restaurants have planned special events for all three days.
Since many of the choice seats are already taken, reservations are essential.
The Amazon Village
Pier 25 on the Hudson River, at North Moore Street, TriBeCa,
(212) 227-2900. Today through Sunday: noon to 3 A.M.
This is one of those only-in-New York City places, a makeshift Malibu atop an old pier in the Hudson River complete with trucked-in sand, a volleyball net, bungee diving over the river, thatched-roof cocktail tables (for nonalcohol drinks; Amazon Village does not have a liquor license) and an open-air restaurant.


House Approves Tax Bill With $14.5 Billion in Breaks
Riding a wave of support for encouraging investment in depressed neighborhoods, the House of Representatives today overwhelmingly approved a broad package of tax legislation that includes an estimated $14.5 billion in tax breaks for businesses and individuals over six years.
But the legislation also raises additional taxes to avoid causing an overall increase in the Federal budget deficit.


U.N. General: In the Middle, Under Attack
For weeks, Sarajevans watched Maj.
Gen.
Lewis W. MacKenzie, commander of the United Nations force sent to seek a cease-fire here, with the growing suspicion that he was little more than a spectator at their annihilation by the Serbian forces that ring the city.
But this week, the general's stock among Sarajevo's 400,000 hungry and frightened residents has risen with the departure of Serbian troops from the airport, where the raising of the United Nations flag on Monday was followed within hours by the arrival of the first planeload of food and medicine.


Seles and Graf Find Different Ways Into Final
Steffi Graf, the silent champion, and Monica Seles, the grunter whose bark is apparently just as devastating as her bite, used different sound tracks today to reach the same destination: the women's final at Wimbledon on Saturday.
While Graf punched onto and off Center Court like an efficiency expert working from a 73-minute timer, Seles, who seems to wear controversy like an extra set of clothing, needed nearly two hours and full support from her vocal cords to reach her sixth consecutive final in the Grand Slam events she has participated in.
Seles, who did not play at Wimbledon last summer, has collected a winner's trophy in each of her previous five Grand Slam finals, and obtained the last of them at Graf's expense after their 6-2, 3-6, 10-8 marathon at last month's French Open.


Celebrating Columbus And the Age Of Sail
AS the tall ship Gazela glided past Penn's Landing in Philadelphia last week, her sails unfurled like a bird in full plumage display, the crowd onshore delivered the ultimate accolade: a thousand-kazoo salute.
The tribute, heartfelt and spontaneous, seemed about right for the Gazela, a hardy old Portuguese barkentine that once hauled codfish between the Grand Banks and Lisbon.
Acquired in 1972 by the Philadelphia Ship Preservation Guild and later restored, she offers sail training to interested civilians, young and old, from her home port.
It's a democratic mission, and the Philadelphia ship got a democratic salute as she led a flotilla of tall ships up the Delaware River.


Senate Votes $981 Million in Aid for Ex-Soviet Bloc
The Senate approved today a long-delayed aid package to the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe that authorizes nearly $1 billion in new spending and billions of dollars in credits and loans, all conditioned on continued movement toward democracy and a free market.
By a 76-to-20 vote, the Senate passed a bill that supporters said established a new framework for friendly relations between Washington and its former cold-war foes.
The House is expected to take up a similar package later this month.


COMPANY NEWS
CABOT OIL &amp; GAS CORP., Houston, and CNG Transmission Corp., Clarksburg, W.Va., announced a joint agreement for Cabot to buy part of CNG Transmission's natural gas production properties and gathering system in southern West Virginia.
Terms were not disclosed.
CTA INC., Rockville, Md., an aerospace systems company, announced the acquisition of Defense Systems Inc., a satellite technology concern in McLean, Va.


Ewing T. Kerr, 92, Federal Judge Who Strengthened Indian Rights
Ewing T. Kerr, a Federal district judge in Wyoming known for a ruling that Indians could regulate all liquor sales on their land, died Wednesday at De Paul Hospital in Cheyenne, Wyo.
He was 92 years old and had lived in Cheyenne since 1925.
The cause of his death was not known, said a granddaughter, Patricia Frey.


Glut of Office Space In New York Market Lessens Relocations
A glut of Manhattan office space has produced an unexpected side effect: Declining rents have slowed the pace of business relocations to the suburbs, the Sun Belt and other cities.
The glut has become so severe, in fact, that for the first time New York City's midtown business district was surpassed this year by Washington as the nation's most costly place to rent office space.


Books of The Times; Shakespeare, the Man Behind the Golden Pen
Shakespeare, the Later Years  By Russell Fraser  380 pages.
Columbia University Press. $27.95.
"Shakespeare," W. H. Auden once remarked, "is in the singularly fortunate position of being, to all intents and purposes, anonymous."
This is not entirely true, of course.
Though his life is crammed with mysteries -- even the composition dates of his plays and poems are still widely debated -- his biography is hardly devoid of facts.
What's more, the gaps in the historical record seem to have encouraged speculation about his life, rather than focusing scholarly debate exclusively on his work.
Hence the reams and reams of paper devoted to uncovering the identity of the Dark Lady of the Sonnets, and proving that his plays were written by others.


Topics of The Times; A 90 Fountain of Youth
Two fortysomething friends strolled home through Central Park the other day after an unsuccessful expedition to find bathing suits that didn't highlight cellulite thighs and expose expanding hips.
"I remember when I looked good in a swimsuit," the first woman said.
"You have a good memory," kidded the second.
Conversation progressed to the diet-and-exercise regimen required to make any swimsuit acceptable.
By the time they approached 67th Street they were feeling not just middle-aged but ancient.
One friend glanced ahead.
"Are we too old to ride the carousel?"


Congress Passes Jobless Aid And Bush Says He Will Sign
Congress passed a major change in unemployment laws today to make it easier for workers out of a job more than six months to collect extended benefits in future recessions, and President Bush said he would sign the bill.
The permanent changes would take effect after the expiration next March of the third emergency benefits extension of the current recession.
That extension is also included in this bill.
It is expected to aid between 2 million and 2.5 million workers who will exhaust their basic 26 weeks of benefits through March.
They will be eligible for up to 26 more weeks of benefits.


Sidney Meredith, 73, Literary Agent, Dies
Sidney Meredith, who with his brother Scott founded the Scott Meredith Literary Agency in Manhattan, died on Wednesday at Mercy Medical Center in Rockville, L.I.
He was 73 years old and lived in New Hyde Park, L.I., and Tamarac, Fla.
Mr. Meredith died of cancer, said his son, Dr. Gary Meredith.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Ever-Shrinking Sound Bites Prompt Edict at CBS News
Warnings about the era of the shrinking sound bite may have been premature.
"The CBS Evening News" instituted a policy this week requiring that Presidential candidates on any of the program's political stories be allowed to talk for at least 30 seconds.


Well-Experienced Jersey City Welcomes Its 3d Mayor of Year
Ever since New Jersey's most famous political boss, Frank Hague, stepped down as Mayor of Jersey City in 1947 after 30 years in office and turned the job over to his nephew, no one has held the position for two consecutive terms.
Lately the term of office has been measured in months, not years.
On Wednesday night, the third person to hold the job this year, Councilman Joseph Rakowski, emerged and promised to keep the seat warm for the winner of a special election in November, who, in turn, will be replaced by the winner of the regular city election next May.
Mr.
Rakowski is not a member of any of the Council's power blocs and has promised that he would not be a candidate for Mayor in November.


If Vincent Is Butting In, Who Is Being Put Out?
"Fay Vincent . . . was more intelligent than Bowie Kuhn, more interested in the game and the problems of the industry than Peter Ueberroth . . . and far less pompous and righteous and less of a dilettante than A. Bartlett Giamatti."
It was respect at first sight for Marvin Miller, the unionist whose leadership brought baseball players collective power and individual riches.
The quote is from his 1991 memoir, "A Whole Different Ballgame" (Birch Lane Press).
Miller was not the only one who hoped that Vincent, Giamatti's assistant, would become a wise and benevolent father figurehead to this factionalized sport, one of the more important and defining soap operas we follow.


Beyond the Parades and the Fireworks
Here is a sampling of holiday events this weekend in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
JULY 3  New York City
FRAUNCES TAVERN MUSEUM, 54 Pearl Street, lower Manhattan.
A fife and drum corps will play at noon.
Informal tours of the revolutionary soldier exhibition will be given from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Also July 4, at 2 P.M.
Suggested contribution: $1.
Information: (212) 425-1778.


De Klerk, Angry With Mandela, Still Offers Concession on Voting
President F. W. de Klerk, in a bid tonight to revive the collapsed negotiations on South Africa's transition from white rule, scaled back his Government's demand for an effective minority veto over the country's political future.
In a letter to Nelson Mandela, president of the African National Congress, Mr. de Klerk said the Government would accept a new constitution ratified by 70 percent of a constituent assembly elected by South Africans of all races, dropping the demand for 75 percent approval that brought talks to an impasse in May.


On Eve of Tour, It's Difficult to Ignore Indurain
From his butcher's stall in the Calle de Urbieta municipal market, Paco Echeverria is happy to talk chuletas, bistecas and even hamburguesas, but what he seems happiest to talk are bicicletas.
As in ciclismo, as in the Tour de France.


Guilty Plea Arranged In Israel Kickback Case
A New Jersey businessman has agreed to plead guilty to two Federal fraud charges in a complex case that Congressional investigators say links the Pratt &amp; Whitney division of the United Technologies Corporation to a kickback scandal involving the sale of jet engines to Israel.
Pratt &amp; Whitney is the second big military contractor to become entangled in the case.
The General Electric Company was briefly suspended by the Pentagon last month from receiving new jet-engine contracts because of its involvement.
G.E. is now negotiating a settlement of civil and possible criminal charges with the Justice Department.


Art in Review
Alberto Giacometti  Yoshii Gallery 20 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Aug. 15
Alberto Giacometti was fascinated by the art that preceded him, and over a long career he made sketches of it, both in museums and from books.
His tastes were broad, ranging from Rubens to Carolingian miniatures to Matisse, and his "copies" (as he called his interpretive drawings) numbered in the hundreds.
This exhibition offers more than a dozen of them, and 12 are of ancient Egyptian figures from the Louvre's collection.
As a sculptor, Giacometti loved this work above all else, but he considered it the most difficult to draw because it was already so fully realized.
It was as if there was nothing further he could do to it.


Staff Changes At the New FCB
A day after becoming president and chief executive at FCB/Lewis, Gilman &amp; Kynett in Philadelphia, Brian J. Gail reassigned staff members and announced a name change.
"We need to be leaner and more focused," Mr.
Gail said in a telephone interview yesterday.


The Latest Polish Prime Minister Offers to Resign


Messier Remains No Big Fan of Neilson
Before Mark Messier went to dinner last night with General Manager Neil Smith, the Ranger captain sounded as resolute as ever about his nonendorsement of Coach Roger Neilson.
"I haven't said one way or another about Roger," Messier said yesterday, during a telephone conference call from Hilton Head, S.C.
"I just think when you don't win when you have as good a team as we do, everyone in the organization has to be evaluated by the organization. You have to have the right people in the right spots."


Accounts
*
Rose's Stores Inc., Henderson, N.C., to W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Southfield, Mich., to handle the discount department store chain's advertising account previously at Fahlgren &amp; Martin, Greensboro, N.C., which closed.
Billings were estimated at $8 million. *
November Co., Washington and New York, to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Media Advantage, New York, and National Media, Alexandria, Va., to handle the Bush-Quayle 1992 re-election campaign's media buying.
Billings were estimated at $40 million.


U.S. Panel Opposes LTV Deal
A Bush Administration panel today recommended blocking the proposed sale of the LTV Corporation's missile division to a French military contractor.
Industry officials said it was still possible that Thomson-CSF of France might work out a new deal by bringing in an American partner, but officials said that avenue was pitted with problems.


Mead Corp. to Lay Off 1,000
The Mead Corporation, a leading maker of paper products and developer of electronic information services, announced yesterday that it would lay off about 1,000 employees, or 5 percent of its work force, over the next two years.
The company, based in Dayton, Ohio, also announced that it would sell the Ampad Corporation, its commercial office products business, to Bain Capital, a Boston-based investment firm.
The sale will generate a cash gain of $56 million, Mead said.
The company said it was selling Ampad because it had found Ampad's products difficult to integrate into Mead's existing product lines.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6-6.5
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.37
3.89
5.77
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.53
5.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.33
3.61
5.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.48
6.66
8.12
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.62
7.74
8.41
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.59
8.67
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.41
6.45
7.18
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


I.B.M. and Toshiba in Pact
I.B.M. and the Toshiba Corporation said yesterday that they would share technology to develop a new class of semiconductor memory chips that many industry executives say will have broad applications in new, highly portable computers.
The technology is known as flash nonvolatile memory and it combines the features of conventional memory chips with the advantage of not losing stored data when power is shut off.


Where Bitterness Is Bountiful
In California, with the highest unemployment rate among the large industrial states, the lines at the benefit office are longer and the people are angrier.
Page A13.


2 Judges Block Cuts In Medicaid Services
Two different judges have temporarily blocked cuts in services to Medicaid recipients that were to have taken effect this week.
One temporary restraining order, issued by Justice Walter M. Schackman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, stops reductions in the hours of home nursing care that the state will reimburse for under Medicaid.


Mets Spend Day Examining Their Aches
There were no major trades made.
There was no major surgery scheduled.
For Al Harazin, the general manager of a 37-41 club, it wasn't a good day and it wasn't a bad day.
It was a lot like the 1992 season has been for the Mets.
Harazin said yesterday that further examination of John Franco's ailing left elbow had revealed "no major disorder," and he said the club hoped the left-hander would be available to pitch again within several days.
Franco, complaining of a burning sensation in his elbow, was ordered to stop throwing earlier in the week and placed on oral medication.


E.P.A. Told to Publish New Air Pollution Rules Before Compliance Deadline
The Environmental Protection Agency cannot wait until next January to publish new air pollution rules that the states are supposed to put into effect this November, a Federal District Court judge has ruled.
The E.P.A. had planned to wait until Jan. 28, 1993, to publish its regulations for a car-inspection program that the Clean Air Act says must be in place by Nov. 15, 1992.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Fed Takes Action
The unemployment rate rose sharply in June, and the Fed quickly responded to the news by cutting two key interest rates in an attempt to stimulate the economy.
Analysts said the data were so grim the Fed had little choice, despite concerns that it would appear to be bowing to political pressure.  [ Page A1. ]  The news underscores a split on the President's staff over whether he should appear optimistic or sober on the economy.
News Analysis.  [ A1. ]
The Labor Department said the nation's jobless rate spurted another three-tenths of a point in June, to 7.8 percent, while payroll jobs slumped 117,000.
The figures were stunningly gloomy and challenged assumptions of continued economic recovery.
Analysts found little comfort in data that included a shorter work week, lengthening spells of unemployment, more layoffs and a swelling in the ranks of the jobless by 470,000 to a total of just under 10 million.  [ A12. ]  In an employment picture nationwide that is unremittingly bleak, the scene in the New York region appears blacker than most.  [ A12. ]


Post-Apartheid Hopes Stained by Bloodletting
Surrounded by shanties fashioned from discarded packing crates, Ben Ndlovu, the leader of a squatter camp outside Durban, struggled to explain why violence was consuming communities like his own.
"It's strange to me," he said.
"We are all blacks, we are all suffering and we are all poor. I find it painful to see a black person burning somebody's property who is poor like him."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; AIDS Demonstrators Disrupt Perot Rally
With 200 American flags held aloft by volunteers standing on the steps of the Capitol under a crystal blue sky, it was the kind of camera-pleasing visual feast that organizers of Ross Perot's rallies strive for.
But in their eyes this snapshot of Americana was marred for a time today by the presence of another image of late 20th century America: protesters.
A handful of members of Act Up, an advocacy group for people with AIDS, briefly took over the stage at Mr.
Perot's rally here today, vowing not to leave until the Texas billionaire addressed issues of AIDS and gay rights.
They wanted him to explain comments he has made saying he would not appoint homosexuals to his cabinet and would not lift the military's ban on homosexual soldiers.


Rabin's Coalition Minuet: Bow to the Left, Curtsy to the Right
As he tries to stitch together the new governing coalition that his Labor Party will lead, Yitzhak Rabin is beginning to resemble a tailor who must make a three-piece suit with only enough material for a jacket and a pair of pants.
Mr.
Rabin, who won in the Israeli election last week but is unable to command a parliamentary majority on his own, wants to build as broad an alliance as possible, encompassing parts of the left and the right, with religious parties tied on at the edges.


Thomas R. Hauck, 47, An Architect, Is Dead
Thomas Raymond Hauck, an architect and architectural historian, died on Wednesday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 47 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, said a friend, Nicholas Hubby.


Dress Code Tyrannizes Women Lawyers
To the Editor:
Although the suits that lawyers wear are perhaps all cut from the same cloth, as you say in At the Bar (Law page, June 5), they nonetheless differ in style.
Men lawyers wear pants suits while women lawyers are still forced to wear dress suits.
Charmaine McClarie-Cox, the "corporate image" consultant you interview, makes no special mention of the inexplicable sexism facing women lawyers through the gender-specific dress code.
As a recent law graduate, I shun the day when I will have to appear before a judge and make a well-reasoned, strongly worded, highly articulate legal argument wearing a dress and stockings!


Unchanged, but Growing as Justice
Last Thanksgiving, David H. Souter took a rare day off to have a holiday meal at the house of one of the people he likes most in Washington -- Sandra Day O'Connor, his fellow Justice.
"David feels very comfortable with her," said Susan McLane, a Republican State Senator in New Hampshire and a friend of Justice Souter for 25 years.


Russian Minister Warns of Coup Threat by the Army
The Russian Foreign Minister has caused a stir in Moscow by his warning this week that Communist and nationalist forces are manipulating the military in an effort to destabilize or overthrow the democratic Government here.
The minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, speaking to Izvestia, warned that pressure for the Russian Army to intervene in support of Russian-speakers living outside Russia's borders, in hotspots like Moldova and South Ossetia, was being orchestrated by politicians opposed to President Boris N. Yeltsin.


Down and Out With the Mets


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
Readings by five poets: Diana Moonmaid, Everton Sylvester, Anthony Spirito, Ed Lin and Ed Lee.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
LECTURES AND WALKS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, near Delancey Street, lower Manhattan.
"Peddler's Pack," a walking tour of the Lower East Side, led by a costumed actor, Sunday at noon; "House of Heritage," a slide show and lecture about the history of the museum, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "Hua Fu: A Chinese Heritage Tour," a walking tour of the area, Sunday at 2 P.M.
Separate admission is required for each event.
Lecture tickets: $4.
Walking tours: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 431-0233.


Shooting Raises Security Concerns
When a gunman opened fire in a Fort Worth courtroom on Wednesday, it was the sixth such incident this year, and it raised again the question of how to safeguard the nation's courts.
"I believe we're all vulnerable, all of us in public service today," the Fort Worth Police Chief, Thomas Windham, said after the shooting, at the Tarrant County Courthouse in downtown Fort Worth.
"We try to operate in a manner to be accessible. We can't lock ourselves away from the public."


Celebrating Op Sail and Columbus
Here is a schedule of
events in New York City this weekend that are part of Operation Sail '92 and the New York City Columbus Quincentenary
, along with a sampling of related activities. For
more information, call the number for the individual event. There is also a
general information number set up by the New York City Columbus Quincentennial Commission
: (800) 892-1492. Today
EAST RIVER SAIL-BY.
More than 100 Class B and Class C vessels -- ships less than 160 feet long -- will sail from Long Island Sound to Gravesend Bay, Brooklyn, accompanied by nearly 1,000 spectator craft.
Noon to 5 P.M.
SPANISH CARAVELS, Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum, Pier 86, Hudson River at 46th Street, Manhattan.
Spanish replicas of the Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria will be on view and open for boarding.
Hours: today, 9 A.M. to 2 P.M.; Sunday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.; and Monday through Wednesday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; the ships are taking part in Operation Sail tomorrow.
Boarding fee: $5 for all three ships; $4 for the elderly; $3 for ages 6 to 12; free for children under 6.
Information: (212) 246-1992.
"1492: TWO WORLDS OF SCIENCE," New York Hall of Science, 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
A new exhibition featuring a replica of the only globe in existence in 1492; a simulation of riding a ship on the ocean; Old World navigational devices; American Indian calendars, number systems, foods and medicines, and daily demonstrations of navigational skills like direction-finding and determining knot speed.
Through Aug. 30.
Hours: today through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3.50; $2.50 for children 3 to 18.
Information: (718) 699-0005.
KIT McCLURE BAND, South Street Seaport, Pier 16, South and Fulton Streets, Manhattan.
Big-band music. 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 669-9424.
QUEENS MUSEUM OF ART, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park."Colombia: Contemporary Images," a display of works by Colombian artists Hours: Tuesdays, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays through Fridays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 5 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Open July 4; Suggested admission: $3; $1.50 for students, the elderly and ages 5 to 12; free under age 5.
Information: (718) 592-5555.
Tomorrow
GREAT PARADE OF SAIL.
More than 260 tall ships will sail from the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge to the George Washington Bridge, joined by thousands of spectator craft. 9 A.M. to 4 P.M.
FLAG RAISING AND FIFE AND DRUM CORPS, Castle Clinton, South Ferry, Manhattan.
A color guard from the Veteran Corps of Artillery, dressed in War of 1812 uniforms, will raise the flag at Castle Clinton at 9 A.M., accompanied by a fife and drum corps.
Information: (212) 861-4896.
CANNON SALUTES, Battery Park Promenade, Manhattan.
The Veteran Corps of Artillery -- at 202 years old the oldest militia unit in New York State -- will fire a salute as each tall ship carrying its nation's colors enters New York Harbor. 10 A.M.
Information: (212) 861-4896.
VISITING TALL SHIPS, at the South Street Seaport, Water and Fulton Streets, Manhattan.
Joining the Wavertree, Pioneer and Lettie Howard, which call the Seaport home, will be the Eagle, the Rose, the Christian Radich, the Danmark, the Sagres II and the Niagara.
Tomorrow from midafternoon (after the parade of sail) to 5 P.M.
Visitors may board the ships on Sunday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free admission.
Information: (212) 669-9424.
THE NEW YORK POPS, South Street Seaport, Pier 16, South and Fulton Streets, Manhattan.
Popular American tunes of the 1930's and 40's, conducted by Skitch Henderson.
At 2:30 and 8 P.M.
Seating is limited, but spectators may bring their own.
Free.
Information: (212) 669-9424.
NEW YORK WORLD'S FARE, Water Street, between Fulton and State Streets, lower Manhattan.
A multi-ethnic festival of food and entertainment, with cuisine ranging from crab cake sandwiches to venison chili from 12 restaurants and assorted food vendors and performances on eight stages sponsored by metropolitan-area cultural organizations.
Information: (800) 892-1492.
GARY (U.S. BONDS) ANDERSON, Austin J. Tobin Plaza, at the base of One World Trade Center, Church Street between Liberty and Vesey Streets, Manhattan.
Rock and soul music. 1 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 435-4170.
TALL SHIPS DISPLAY, Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum, Pier 86, Hudson River at 46th Street, Manhattan.
Tall ships from Argentina, Belgium, Colombia, Sweden and Venezuela that are taking part in Operation Sail '92 will be docked and open to the public through Wednesday.
Hours: tomorrow, beginning in midafternoon, after the parade of sail; Sunday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Monday through Wednesday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Boarding of the tall ships is free.
Intrepid admission: $7; $6 for the elderly; $4 for ages 6 to 11; free under age 6.
Information: (212) 245-2533.
MACY'S FOURTH OF JULY FIREWORKS.
The annual half-hour display, featuring 11,000 shells shot from four barges on the Hudson River.
In addition to the fireworks, the Hudson will be illuminated with several electrical set-pieces, including a 60-foot Statue of Liberty, a 44-foot Liberty Bell and a banner featuring profiles of the Founding Fathers.
The fireworks may be viewed from any point in Manhattan or New Jersey with a clear view of the Hudson River between Battery Park and Pier 40 at West Houston Street. 9:20 P.M. (The fireworks will be telecast live on Channel 11.)
LASER LIGHT BEACON, New York Harbor.
Led by a blue laser emanating from a cruise ship in the harbor, the vessels taking part in Operation Sail will turn on their lights, joined by spectators on shore who will turn on flashlights, creating a "human wave of light." Sponsored by Celebrity Cruises. 10 P.M.
Information: (800) 892-1492.
LASER SPECTACULAR, Pier 16, South Street Seaport, Fulton Street at the East River, Manhattan.
A free, 20-minute laser show on a 70-foot screen, during which the New York Pops will perform the "1812 Overture" and "The Stars and Stripes Forever." 10:05 P.M.
Information: (212) 669-9424.
Sunday
PUBLIC EXHIBITION OF TALL SHIPS.
In Manhattan, piers on the East River at and below South Street Seaport and on the Hudson River at 46th and 52d Streets.
In Brooklyn, at Piers 6, 7 and 8, near Atlantic Avenue.
In New Jersey, at the Newport Center Marina, in Jersey City. 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Also Monday, same times.
Information: (800) 892-1492.
GOVERNORS ISLAND OPEN HOUSE.
Self-guided tours of Fort Jay and Castle William and frequent guided tours of the Dallas and the Gallatin, two 378-foot Coast Guard cutters.
Noon to 4 P.M.
Concert by the United States Coast Guard Band at 1 P.M. on the Village Green.
Free ferry service for the open house departs every 15 minutes from South Ferry (next to the Staten Island Ferry) beginning at noon.
All activities are free.
Information: (212) 668-7114.
UNITED STATES COAST GUARD BAND, South Street Seaport, Pier 16, at South and Fulton Streets, Manhattan.
Patriotic and popular tunes. 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 435-4170.
"CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS," Queens Museum of Art, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
An opera by Andrew Liotta, with zarzuela music, presented by the Bell'Arte Opera Theater, Anthony Petriezzo, director. 2:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $3; $1.50 for students, the elderly and ages 5 to 12; free under age 5.
Information: (718) 592-5555.
Monday
"FIVE CENTURIES: MANY PEOPLES, MANY PASTS," New York University, Tishman Auditorium, 40 Washington Square South, Greenwich Village.
A symposium that focuses on the cultural impact of Columbus's voyage upon the inhabitants of the Americas and those who immigrated to North America for the next five centuries.
Speakers will be Mayor David N. Dinkins; Dr.
Leslie Agard-Jones, a professor of African and African-American Studies at William Patterson College in Wayne, N.J.; Ms.
Ingrid Washinawatok, of the Native American Council of New York City; Dr.
Anne Paolucci, director of a doctoral arts program at St.
John's University in Queens; Enrique Fernandez, editor of the magazine "Mas"; and Dr.
Talat Sait Halman, a professor of Near Eastern language and literature at New York University. 7 to 9 P.M.
Admission is free; tickets are distribted on a first-come basis.
Information: (212) 788-2893.
Tuesday
PARADE OF INTERNATIONAL CADETS.
A parade up Broadway from Battery Park to City Hall, with 1,700 ship cadets dressed in their national uniforms and accompanied by marching bands. 11:30 A.M.
Information: (212) 912-1234.


Gen. Pierre Billotte, 86, Who Led French Forces Into Paris, Is Dead
Pierre A. G. Billotte, a French military hero in World War II who later served in high diplomatic and Cabinet posts, died on Monday in a hospital near Paris.
He was 86 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


Jean Baer, 69, Is Dead; Wrote Self-Help Books
Jean Baer Fensterheim, a writer of personal self-help books and magazine articles aimed especially at women, died on Wednesday at Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
She was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was cancer, said her husband, Dr. Herbert Fensterheim.


Review/Dance; From Israel, A Program Of Yemeni Folk Works
There is nothing quite like New York and its stew of cultures.
Intent discussion of Russian ballet performances uptown at the Metropolitan Opera House floated out over the capacity audience on Wednesday night at La Mama E.T.C. on the Lower East Side, where a performance of Yemenite dance and music was introduced by a black American legend in avant-garde theater, Ellen Stewart, La Mama herself.
At various moments in the 80-minute program, audience members hummed along with the music.
Warm laughter greeted some gossipy on-stage chatting.
"Who Had Kissed Me," conceived and directed by Sara Levi-Tanai, the founder of the Inbal Dance Theater of Israel, was clearly a family affair.
But there was much here for observers steeped in other cultures.


Executive Changes
ALLTEL MOBILE COMMUNICATIONS INC., Little Rock, Ark., a cellular telephone and paging-system unit of Alltel Corp., named Carroll D. McHenry president and John T. Dunbar senior vice president of cellular and distribution operations.
JIM HENSON PRODUCTIONS, Los Angeles, named Charles Rivkin as chief operating officer, Martin G. Baker and Duncan Kenworthy as senior vice presidents of production, and Alex Rockwell as senior vice president of creative affairs.


Corrections
A chart last Friday with an article about a new Federal study on the effectiveness of air bags referred incorrectly to national statistics on motor-vehicle fatalities.
The figures given -- 47,087 in 1988, 45,582 in 1989, 44,599 in 1990 and 41,462 in 1991 -- represent the total number of deaths in motor-vehicle accidents, not the number of deaths per 100 million miles traveled.


One Murder Charge Dropped in Arson Case
The prosecutor in the arson murder trial of a Swiss au pair today withdrew one of four alternate murder counts as the lawyers prepared to deliver closing arguments Monday.
The au pair, Olivia Riner, 20 years old, was charged last December with four counts of second-degree murder and one count of arson after the death of the baby in her care.


Furiously Injured; Will Miss The Dwyer
One day after Pine Bluff was forced to end his racing career with a foot injury, the undefeated colt Furiously was forced yesterday to interrupt his career with a hoof injury that will prevent him from racing Sunday in the Dwyer Stakes at Belmont Park.
Beyond that, nobody in the colt's stable would predict the impact on his career.
A son of Danzig and a grandson of Northern Dancer, Furiously didn't race at all last year at the age of 2 because he was big and awkward and kept barking his shins.
But at 3, he has streaked.
In three starts in three months, he has won by a combined total of 31 lengths and nobody has come within nine lengths of him.


Leonard J. Goldwater, Medical Professor, 89
Dr.
Leonard J. Goldwater, a professor of medicine emeritus at Columbia and Duke Universities, died yesterday at the University of North Carolina Memorial Hospital, in Chapel Hill, N.C.
He was 89 years old and lived in Chapel Hill.
Dr. Goldwater died of cancer, said Debbie Selinsky, a spokeswoman for Duke University.


Corrections
A holiday schedule in The Metro Section yesterday referred incorrectly to the Long Island Rail Road.
Its trains will run on a regular weekday schedule today, with extra trains from Pennsylvania Station in the afternoon, and on a weekend schedule tomorrow, with extra trains into Pennsylvania Station.
A full holiday schedule appears today on page B2.


Argentina Reluctantly Confronts Its Own Pollution Problem
The River Reconquista meanders through the countryside just north of Buenos Aires and eventually empties into the Parana delta, which encompasses this city of picturesque river boats, island restaurants, shaded cottages and summer homes.
But the Reconquista is not the kind of river people want flowing past their homes.
It fouls the air with putrid odors and its waters bring to the Parana River pieces of cow hide, animal hearts, lungs and intestines, mercury, lead, sulphuric acid, chrome, typhus and other diseases.
Upstream along the river's banks are more than 1,000 small and large plants and factories, a dozen shantytowns and a host of garbage dumps that make it probably the most polluted river in this country.


Oiapoque Journal; Perilous Jungle Passage Leads Poor to 'France'
After a few shots of sugar cane rum, fishermen who gather nightly on a riverside wharf here often say that, peering through the tropical haze of the Eastern Amazon, they can see the bright lights of France.
Indeed, 15 minutes downriver by motorized canoe lies a thinly populated corner of Europe: Saint Georges de l'Oyapock, the southernmost town of French Guiana.


New York City Celebrates a Prelude to a Holiday
Like a very merry unbirthday, the Third of July was celebrated yesterday almost as though it was Independence Day -- with flags fluttering, bands blaring and with a parade of ships.
Many businesses were shut; even at those that weren't, a holidaylike mood prevailed as some workers towed children along to see what their parents do at the office.
Federal and city agencies were closed for the day, but in keeping with the pleasant confusion of a three-day weekend that started on a Friday, New York State offices remained open.


Bush on the Environment: A Record of Contradictions
The people who live here in the hazy valleys cut by the Ohio and Big Sandy Rivers, where the air has been among the most polluted in the country, are benefiting from cleaner air these days, thanks to changes in weather patterns as well as to a law passed two years ago.
President Bush saluted that law, the Clean Air Act, and said it would "make the 1990's the era for clean air."


Deadlock In Albany; Sour Finish Taints Productive Session
The enduring legacy of the 1992 session of the New York State Legislature may be that lawmakers, for the first time in eight years, did what they are legally required to do.
They passed a budget on time, or at least almost on time.
It was approved on April 2, one day late, which by Albany standards is considered "close enough for government work," in the words of the Assembly minority leader, Clarence D. Rappleyea .


Information Management Tech reports earnings for Year to March 31


Artists Amid Urban Change: A Grimly Drawn Appraisal
An international gathering of some 200 public officials, artists and arts professionals last week received a bleak and at times apocalyptic view of life in American cities and the challenges facing artists in an often hostile environment.
"The Artist in the Changing City," a two-day conference organized by the London-based British American Arts Organization, was the latest effort in the association's six-year campaign to research, document and stimulate the use of the arts in urban regeneration.


Classical Music in Review
'Marriage of Figaro' Master Theater


Astral Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Juan A. Henares-Levy, Chief of Protocol, 49
Juan A. Henares-Levy, chief of protocol and conference services of the Inter-American Development Bank in Washington, died on Tuesday at his home in Washington.
He was 49 years old.
The bank said he died from complications of AIDS.


A World of High Bids And Quick Decisions
Twice a month bargain hunters from England and Israel, Phoenix and Philadelphia try to outwit and outbluff each other in this tiny hamlet.
Their arena is Dutch Auctions, a creaky warehouse as big as a hockey rink.
Their weapon is practiced indifference.
As auctioneers try to crack their cool, young men tap their baseball caps and women dip their fans ever so slightly, bidding on the possessions of countless lifetimes.
About 7,000 lots are sold by a rotating band of six auctioneers who sell three lots a minute, every minute, from 7 A.M. to 11 P.M.


Cuomo Invited? He's Denying It.
Preparations for a New York political event would not be complete without a last-minute mini-drama involving Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York.
And so it was that Mr.
Cuomo, officials of the Democratic Party and the campaign organization of Gov.
Bill Clinton differed today over whether Mr.
Cuomo had been offered a chance to deliver a major speech at the party's convention, which begins July 13 in New York City.


A Slower But Safer Indy 500
The Indianapolis Motor Speedway and Indy-car racing's two main sanctioning groups have tentatively agreed on a series of rules changes for the Indianapolis 500 that are meant to slow the cars and reduce driver injuries.
The rules, which are subject to final approval by the three groups involved, would apply to the 1993-95 Indy 500 races.
They are part of an agreement between the speedway, the United States Auto Club, which runs the 500, and Championship Auto Racing Teams, which conducts the 15 other Indy-car races on the schedule.
Tony George, president of the speedway, said here today that he was satisfied with the new rules.


New York's Political Parties Vie for Votes of Immigrants
In his crusade to rebuild New York's tattered Republican Party, William D. Powers has sought out Hispanic workers at the Hunts Point market in the Bronx, huddled with Iranian emigres in Manhattan and held countless meetings with Korean immigrants in Queens.
He has even found himself urging the South Korean President to allow Koreans who become American citizens to maintain inheritance rights in their former homeland.
This might seem to be decidedly foreign turf for a state Republican chairman who used to be the party leader of largely rural upstate Rensselaer County.
But Mr.
Powers's pilgrimages are just one sign of the change that a record wave of immigration is bringing to the political life of New York City.


U.S. Puts Victorious Spin on Summit
With President Bush due to leave this weekend for the economic summit meeting in Munich, the White House has begun a campaign to turn it into a pep rally for economic growth to demonstrate Mr.
Bush's determination to do something about the sagging American economy.
Especially after the sharp jump in the nation's jobless rate announced Thursday, which was a blow to Mr.
Bush's re-election hopes, the White House is eager to declare Munich a victory.


A Mask as an Aid In Resuscitation
A physician in East Hampton, L.I., has invented a compact, self-inflating mask to improve the efficiency and safety of delivering mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.
The inventor, Dr.
Michael Israel, said physicians had long agreed that "mouth-to-mask" resuscitation improves the efficiency of pushing air into a person's lungs because it creates a better seal between the two mouths.
In addition, masks can protect a person from being infected with contagious diseases.


Rename Foley Square The African Square
To the Editor:
Why not rename Foley Square in lower Manhattan "The African Square"?
Much of the square is directly on the recently discovered Colonial-era Negroes' Burying Ground.
Thousands of enslaved African men, women and children were buried in the six-acre cemetery, which extended from Chambers to Duane Street and from Broadway to the steps of the United States Court House.
We have squares, parks and plazas to memorialize the people of many nations, but few public spaces that commemorate New York City's African history.
As we proudly display the Avenue of the Americas, why not the African Square?


Cloud Looms Over Police As Rookies Join the Force
The new police officers listened to the rather gloomy graduation message about the perils of corruption and they did not budge.
More than a thousand strong, they sat with their backs stiff, and as trained, stared blankly ahead.
But as one officer would say later, there was no forgetting the "C" word.


Better to Stop Missiles on Ground Than in Sky
To the Editor:
In "Operation Desert Sham" (Op-Ed, June 24), Prof.
Mark Crispin Miller asserts that "U.S. forces did not destroy a single mobile launcher" in the Persian Gulf war.
This highlights one lesson of Operation Desert Storm that the Pentagon has not yet learned -- eliminating missiles before they are launched is better than any missile defense system.
The use of Scud ballistic missiles by Saddam Hussein during the gulf war led a Congress panicky about proliferating missile threats to approve last year's highest-ever budget for "Star Wars," the Strategic Defense Initiative ($4.1 billion), and agree to the Missile Defense Act of 1991, legislation that pushes the nation toward a crash deployment of ballistic missile defenses.


Better to Stop Missiles on Ground Than in Sky; Test Moratorium
To the Editor:
"Look Who's Adding Missiles" (editorial, June 19) expresses dismay that France and Britain are "increasing their nuclear arsenals." Leslie H. Gelb's column the same day states that Israel is militarily secure, but "What most troubles Israeli generals, and civilian hawks and doves alike, is Arab nuclear potential."
An opportunity to address both concerns was wasted by President Bush when Boris Yeltsin displayed the courage to make a less-than-equal deal in which his country would cut strategic weapons to 3,000 while ours could keep 3,500 (front page, June 17).
Mr.
Bush failed to reciprocate in a way free of risk or cost: announce a nuclear arms test moratorium.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL Lithuania Qualifies for the Olympics Lithuania became the first European team to qualify for the 1992 Olympic Games.
Arvidas Sabonis scored 28 points and Sarunas Marciulionis added 20 yesterday as Lithuania defeated Slovenia, 90-73, in the European qualifying tournament in Zaragoza, Spain.
In other games, Valery Tikhonenko scored 40 points as the Commonwealth of Independent States beat Israel, 101-85, while Croatia routed Czechoslovakia, 84-68, behind 21 points from Drazen Petrovic.
Germany defeated Italy, 109-91, as Detlef Schrempf scored 37 points.
The tournament is being dominated by countries that did not exist in their present forms for the last Summer Games: Lithuania is 5-0; Germany, Croatia and the commonwealth are all tied at 3-2 and are competing for the final three Olympic berths, and Slovenia is 2-3. (AP) GOLF January and Snead Tied for Senior Lead Don January and J. C. Snead each shot seven-under-par 65 yesterday to share the first-round lead in the Kroger Senior Classic in Mason, Ohio.
Overnight rain softened the greens and helped 32 of the 78 pros beat par over the 6,628-yard course.
Ben Smith, Gibby Gilbert and Larry Ziegler were one shot behind the leaders.
Al Geiberger, the defending champion, shot a 69, while Lee Trevino shot a 70 and Arnold Palmer 72. (AP) Norman Among Leaders: Greg Norman was one stroke off the lead with some golfers still out in the storm-delayed Western Open in Lemont, Ill.
After Thursday's rain, Norman played two rounds yesterday, shooting a 68 and a 69 that left him one stroke behind Duffy Waldorf's 136 total.
Waldorf, runner-up in the Buick Classic last weekend, shot two 68's over the Dubsdread course at Cog Hill.
Norman was tied at 137 with Ian Baker-Finch, Blaine McCallister and Dicky Thompson.
Eighteen players were on the course when darkness halted the second round.
They will resume this morning, with the third round scheduled for the afternoon. (AP) Fergon Goes on a Roll: Vicki Fergon ran off six consecutive birdies during a round of six-under-par 65, giving her a two-stroke lead over Janice Gibson and Kris Tschetter in the L.P.G.A.
Jamie Farr Toledo Classic in Sylvania, Ohio.
Fergon opened the tournament with a bogey on the first hole, then went on a birdie streak that allowed her to make the turn at five-under 29. (AP)


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Placed Mike Magnante, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 2.
Recalled Steve Shifflett, pitcher, from Omaha of the American Association.
Transferred Luis Aquino, pitcher, from 15-day disabled list to 60-day disabled list.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Recalled Donald Harris, outfielder, from Tulsa of the Texas League.
Sent Dan Peltier, outfielder, to Oklahoma City of the American Association.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Signed Jose Augusto Pett, pitcher.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
PHOENIX SUNS -- Signed Danny Ainge, guard, to a three-year contract.
Extended the contract of Tom Chambers, forward, for one year.
FOOTBALL National Football League
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Mark Duper, wide receiver, to a two-year contract.
Canadian Football League
B.C.
LIONS -- Released Lolo James and Anthony Brown, defensive backs.
HOCKEY National Hockey League
EDMONTON OILERS -- Retained the rights to Dave Manson, defenseman, by matching the contract offer made by the Washington Capitals.
COLLEGE CLEMSON -- Named Gil Sanchez wrestling coach.


Solidarity at A.T.&amp;T.; Managers and 2 Unions Agree in Pact That Real Enemy Is the Competition
Despite nearly three months of sometimes bitter bargaining, the tentative labor agreement announced this week between A.T.&amp; T. and its two principal unions disclosed a remarkable degree of common purpose.
Each side really feared not the other, but an uncompetitive A.T.&amp; T. in a global market.
A weak American Telephone and Telegraph would harm the company's profits and endanger the union jobs that remained, say labor relations specialists who have followed the talks.
And both sides evidently recognized this risk.


U.S. Itches To Rewrite Legend of Schmidt
Had he bought the recruiting pitch of Jud Heathcote 15 years ago, Oscar Schmidt might have gotten more open jump shots than he could have dreamed of.
Magic Johnson would have set him up, but good.
Johnson was a freshman at Michigan State in 1977 when Heathcote, the school's coach, took the Spartans to South America for a game against the Brazilian national team.
"He was only 18 but he was already one of their best players," Johnson said of Schmidt.
"They beat us, and you could see how he could shoot the ball."


Fourth of July
NEW YORK
FIREWORKS 9:20 P.M. on the Hudson River between Battery Park and West Houston Street.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Most closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups or street cleaning.
TRANSPORTATION Subways and buses on Saturday schedules with extra service to and from lower Manhattan this evening; Metro-North on weekend schedules, with extra trains from Grand Central Terminal this evening; Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedules, with extra trains to Pennsylvania Station.
NEW JERSEY  POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Many closed.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit on weekend schedules.
CONNECTICUT
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.  BANKS Local option.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on weekend schedules, with extra trains from Grand Central Terminal this evening.


Valvano Being Treated at Hospital
JIM VALVANO, a former coach at North Carolina State and now a sports broadcaster, has been admitted for treatment at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan, a hospital spokesman said yesterday.
Valvano, 46 years old, entered the hospital Thursday, but his condition and the nature of his treatment were not disclosed.
Valvano's having cancer was disclosed by broadcasting colleagues two weeks ago, but the type of cancer and its extent was not disclosed.
He came to New York for further tests from his home in Cary, N.C. (AP)


Five Frames On America
America views itself on the Fourth of July through familiar public images.
We are used to seeing celebratory and comforting imagery of fireworks, crowded beaches and brass bands on Main Street.
But there are photographers who often see America in other ways as well.
The Op-Ed page asked five to select images that capture important facets of the nation's life and to comment on them.
Mary Ellen Mark
For me, America is one of the most visually interesting countries.
Despite all of the television coverage that standardizes everything and despite the constant bombardment of words and images, we are hardly exposed to our own diversity.
We are an interesting people, full of ironies, both good and bad.
America is often amusing, but it can also be very sad.
It is a country that is constantly reinventing itself.
Joseph Rodriguez
In a Los Angeles high school I visited, a teacher could only watch as studentsdiscussed among themselves the relative merits of the AK-47 assault rifle.
Hollywood has become all too real to these children -- the firepower most of us see only in movies is their reality.
In the United States more than 30,000 people die yearly, including 10 children every day, from guns.
Robert Abrams
People travel to beaches in Oregon and Washington to face away from the deforested interior.
We look for a perspective that can harmonize what we know: The ancient woods of the Northwest were unique, and there is no evidence they can be restored.
Of all the sacred places on the West Coast, none is more comforting than where rivers join the sea.
By the rivers' disappearance, we are reminded of life's passing, while by the ocean's mysterious beauty -- the light --we accept that passing, feeling a hope we cannot explain.
Eugene Richards
It seems to me that Americans are getting better and better at ignoring the lessons of our history.
We are cele- brating the Fourth of July with hardly anyone noticing the dried blood on our flag -- the estimated 200,000 dead from the Persian Gulf War.
As for the racism that's emanating from nearly all of us, the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. might as well have lived 100 years ago.
Just hours after the shooting and burning in Los Angeles, I listened to members of a black church congregation explain, without embarrassment and to applause, that Korean business people were justifiably targeted by rioters since they don't really live, work or behave the way these church members do.
Sylvia Plachy
From the city's rooftops, high above its clutter and noise, one can still be touched by nature.
Peregrine falcons, an endangered species, cannot survive in the wild, where they eat birds migrating from countries that still use DDT.
As a result, their eggshells become too thin and their young are unable to hatch.
In cities they do better, living on top of bridges and on skyscrapers, which are like the cliffs they used to know, hunting primarily for pigeons; in the cities, their shells are fine.
But there are other dangers: Sometimes young falcons mistake reflecting windows for the open sky and crash into them.


Lebanon Journal; When Times Get Tough, Town's Officials Get Boot
If times are tough in America and taxes are high, the angry residents of this small rural town have their own answer -- shut down the government.
Last year they voted to turn off the 100 street lights to save money.
Then they elected to stop financing the town's five-member police department, after which there was a murder and a rash of burglaries.


Conviction May Endanger Team Berth
JIM DOEHRING, a shot-putter who made the United States Olympic team on his final attempt at the national trials, could be in danger of losing his berth because of a recent drug conviction, The San Diego Union-Tribune said yesterday.
Federal court records show that Doehring pleaded guilty Dec. 16 to conspiring to possess methamphetamine with intent to distribute.


Victor E. Ferrell, Telephone Executive, 84
Victor E. Ferrell, a former law professor and official of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, died yesterday at the Medical Center at Princeton in New Jersey.
He was 84 years old and lived in Cranbury, N.J.
Mr. Ferrell died of cancer, said his wife, Lucille Elizabeth Hill.


JAPAN'S TRADE GAP IS GROWING AGAIN
After several years of reduction, Japan's trade surplus with the rest of the world is soaring again to record levels, a development that could increase unemployment in other nations and contribute to a new round of trade tensions.
It is also likely to be a main topic at the summit meeting of the seven leading industrial countries next week in Munich, where Japan will be in the awkward position of being the only participant with a surplus.


Special Television Effects, Simpler and at Lower Cost
ADVANCES in high-speed computer processing have enabled television news shows in the last decade to add zip to their presentations with scores of animated special effects.
Fancy logos bearing a station's call letters fly across the screen, displaying images of the city or of the newscasters as they move.
A videotaped scene appears to spill out of the pages of an animated book, providing an eye-catching way to introduce a story.


Editorial Notebook; Not Just a Mobile Museum
Operation Sail 1992 is billed as the largest fleet of tall ships ever.
Officially it celebrates Columbus's first voyage to the Americas 500 years ago.
But it's much more.
As training ships for yet another generation of ocean sailors, those stately vessels celebrate five thousand years of sail.
The first Op Sail, in 1964, was supposedly the world's last chance to see such an assembly of sailing ships in working order before they rotted or rusted away.
But today's display attests that they function even now as floating classrooms for young men and women who want to go to sea.
Making the point splendidly, Op Sail '92 concludes on Tuesday with 1,700 of those cadets from some three dozen countries parading together up Lower Broadway.


Your Money; Obtaining Money From 401(k) Plans
"HOW can I get at the money in my 401(k) plan?" A surprising number of people well below retirement age have asked that question in recent weeks, according to Avery E. Neumark, a partner in Weber, Lipshie &amp; Company, a New York-based certified public accounting firm.
The first response is a question, he said.
"Why do you need the money?" So is the second, "Do you have any other source of funds?"


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST
LEGISLATIVE SESSION ENDS IN DEADLOCK
The New York legislative session ended in partisan bickering, as lawmakers left town near dawn without acting on two major economic initiatives: an $800 million bond act to create jobs and fiscal bailouts for Nassau and Suffolk Counties.
The Governor squared off against the Senate's Republicans, and the two measures remained hostage to one another.
Page 1.
THE LEGACY OF '92
The enduring legacy of the 1992 session of the New York State Legislature may be that lawmakers, for the first time in eight years, passed a budget almost on time.
But though there was hope that the timely passage of the $56 billion budget would free the Legislature to address the state's most serious problems for three months, that hope dissolved in the final days of the session when more deals fell apart than came together.
News analysis, Page 24.
YOUR TIRED, YOUR POOR, YOUR VOTES
With the foreign-born now making up more than a quarter of the city's population, Democrats and Republicans alike are reaching out into uncharted territory, after immigrants who could one day be as much a force as those at the turn of the century.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY
NEW LOOK,  OLD PROBLEM
Graduation Day for the Police Academy came with the usual pomp, but no one, from the rookies to the dignitaries, seemed able to ignore the event's subtext: that this class was entering the force as suspicions of corruption hovered over the Police Department.
In a speech to the officers, Mayor Dinkins suggested that the problem was largely a creation of news organizations.
Page 23.
BUT WHO'S COUNTING?
Like a very merry unbirthday, the Third of July was celebrated yesterday almost as though it was Independence Day -- with flags fluttering, bands blaring and ships parading.
Page 23.
JEALOUS MAN KILLS THREE, THEN HIMSELF
On Thursday, a man obsessed with the idea that his wife was having an affair shot her and her niece to death in their Bronx apartment, went to the home of his ex-girlfriend and stabbed her to death, the police said.
Last night, according to the police, he took hostages in a Manhattan apartment and killed himself.
Page 22.
REGION
WORLD GOES TO MICKLETON, N.J.
Twice a month at auctions in the tiny hamlet of Mickleton, N.J., bargain hunters from England and Israel, Phoenix and Philadelphia try to outwit and outbluff each other for rosewood armoires, Art Deco lamps shaped like tulips and other possessions from countless lifetimes.
Page 25.
CONNECTICUT'S VOX POP STAR
In this year of popular disgust with politics as usual, public opinion has been particularly unpredictable.
But if anyone in this corner of the country is close to public opinion, it's a University of Connecticut professor named G. Donald Ferree Jr.
Page 25.
About New York by Douglas Martin 23  Chronicle 24


When a Shoreline Home May Be a Public Nuisance
After years of legal wrangling, including a decision this week by the United States Supreme Court, David H. Lucas and the South Carolina Coastal Council are left confronting the question that brought them together in the first place: When is a beach house a public nuisance?
Mr.
Lucas, a developer, owns two ocean-front lots on Isle of Palms, just north of Charleston, S.C.
He wanted to build houses on them but a law passed in 1988, the Beachfront Management Act, prohibited construction.
The law said that houses too close to the shoreline posed a threat to life, property and the environment.


Argentina for Embargo
To the Editor:
An Associated Press news item, "Countries Ignore Haiti Embargo" (May 31), states that, according to records released by the General Accounting Office, Argentina is one of a dozen countries ignoring sanctions recommended against Haiti by the Organization of American States.
The embargo was imposed by Argentina on Oct. 21, in response to O.A.S. urging after the military coup against Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's democratically elected President.


Sports of The Times; Daley Rates Last Trial; Dan Doesn't
A huge double standard is being applied to Daley Thompson and Dan O'Brien.
How come I agree with it?
It was the sneaker commercials what done it, guv'nor.
I suspect a lot of other people had been rooting against Dan and his buddy Dave for six months.
Do not underestimate bad karma.


Super Rite reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Glassboro College to Receive Gift That's Expected to Set a Record
Glassboro State College is expected to receive next week the largest individual gift ever donated to a public college or university.
Declining to identify the donor or the exact size of the gift, a university official said it was "substantially more" than the record $51.4 million given to the University of Houston last year.
The college has scheduled a news conference for Monday to announce the gift and to introduce the donor.
Gov.
Jim Florio and the Chancellor of the State Department of Higher Education, Edward D. Goldberg, will attend the ceremony, college officials said.


Review/Pop; A Ghost of Elvis Presley Does a Bit of Nightclubbing
"So Elvis, wherever you are, this is for you," announced Kelly Garrett on Thursday evening at the Supper Club (240 West 47th Street), where she is appearing through July 25.
The singer wasn't kidding.
Her dedication prefaced a rendition of "You Don't Have to Say You Love Me" in which she reminisced about her friendship with Elvis Presley when both worked in Las Vegas.
She even took credit for introducing him to the song, which was a sizable hit for him in 1970.


When the Carousel Comes Grinding to a Halt
Tranquillity has returned to the Lake Compounce Festival Park.
The once nerve-jangling wooden roller coaster is still, the pop guns and barkers are silent in the Victorian arcade and even the paddleboat is gone from the lake, which reflects the forested hillside of nearby Southington Mountain.
The park gates are locked, with only a handful of guards patrolling this 146-year-old institution that had called itself America's longest continuously operating amusement park.
And, despite intense efforts to revive it, Lake Compounce will remain closed this holiday weekend and for the foreseeable future.


Truckers Vex France With Protest . . .
Almost as if required to pay a hidden price for their long vacations, many Western Europeans began their summer break this weekend with an all-too-familiar dose of pain, this time the result of blockades thrown up by angry truckers across France's major highways.
For thousands of French and foreign tourists, the drive south has already become a nightmare of delays and traffic jams, and ferryloads of Britons have been stuck in Channel ports.
Many Parisians have chosen to postpone their departures until the protests, set off by a Government decision to stiffen traffic penalties, are over.


Man Kills Wife, 2 Others and Himself, Police Say
A man obsessed with the idea that his wife was having an affair killed himself last night, a day after he killed his wife and two other women in the Bronx, the police said.
The man, Jose Dolores Martinez, 41 years old, shot his wife and her niece to death in their Bronx apartment on Thursday night and then went to the home of his former girlfriend minutes later and stabbed her to death, the police said yesterday.


Review/Pop; A Soul Singer From Brazil
Ed Motta's set on Wednesday night at S.O.B.'s exulted in the intricacies of soul singing.
Hardly a syllable passed that Mr.
Motta didn't toy with somehow: stretching it across half a dozen notes, scat-singing it in a staccato flurry, anticipating it with an upward or downward slide, shunting it through his nose for a nasal extension, carrying it up to a falsetto.
At one point he sang bass, guitar and percussion lines as an unaccompanied solo.
Mr.
Motta has learned many of the elaborate and lovingly strenuous vocal displays of singers including Stevie Wonder, Al Green, George Benson, Al Jarreau and Luther Vandross.
What makes such efforts unusual is that Mr.
Motta is from Brazil, and that most of his lyrics are in Portuguese.
The sound mix at S.O.B.'s made it difficult to tell when Mr.
Motta shifted into English; as at an arena concert, the music's verbal messages mattered less than the way Mr.
Motta teased out the notes.


Big Latin American Bet Made by Spanish Airline
To prepare for deregulation of the airlines in Europe, Spain's national airline, Iberia Lineas Aereas, is casting its lot overseas, namely to Latin America, hoping to avoid the nasty price wars expected to develop closer to home.
But given its losses in recent years, some analysts would prefer that the airline concentrate on cutting costs rather than buying operations to bolster its position abroad.
"If Iberia can't make money on its own turf, how is it going to do it in America?" asked Jaime Mariategui of Research Associates, an independent financial analysis company in Madrid.


Managua Army Chief May Face Trial in 1990 Killing
The Government of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro was shaken today by the possibility that Gen.
Humberto Ortega Saavedra, the army commander and a crucial supporter from the rival Sandinista Front, could face trial on charges of covering up a murder.
The possibility arose when a criminal court judge ruled on Thursday that eight bodyguards of General Ortega should be tried for murder and that the general himself be prosecuted for a possible cover-up of the killing on Oct. 28, 1990, of 16-year-old Jean Paul Genie.


Food Supplies Reach the Hungry in Sarajevo


Russian Deficit Is Hampering Aid Deal
Despite President Boris N. Yeltsin's efforts to curb Government spending, the Russian budget deficit is growing at a rapid rate, undermining the Government's attempt to sign a lending agreement with the International Monetary Fund.
The rising deficit, described in interviews and public statements this week, was seen as putting pressure on the I.M.F. to accept, at least temporarily, what many officials describe as the Russian reality: that it will take longer for Moscow to carry out economic reforms than earlier anticipated.


U.N. Airlift to Sarajevo Hits Full Stride
The United Nations airlift to this besieged city hit full stride today, but unsuccessful efforts to restart talks between the warring sides seemed to foreshadow continued bloodshed.
Five days after peacekeeping forces took formal control of Butmir Airport from Serbian nationalist troops, the airport was a scene of frenetic activity.
By dusk, 10 aircraft had landed, carrying close to 100 tons of food, medical supplies and warehouse equipment.


Washington Could Do Something
The sharp jump in unemployment in June, following a similar spike in May, shakes confidence that the economy is improving.
Monthly unemployment data can be unreliable barometers, but the new numbers follow a worrisome trend.
Home sales, durable goods orders and consumer confidence are all off.
Two months ago, people worried that the economy wasn't picking up enough steam.
Now they fear it is slipping back into recession.
None of these figures portend disaster.
But they do warrant corrective action by Washington.
The Federal Reserve did what it could Thursday by lowering interest rates another notch.
But few economists believe monetary policy can do enough soon.
The economy needs another punch, from Congress -- a quick-hitting combination of temporary tax cuts and spending increases.


...and Worry India in Strike Over Hefty Trucking Tariffs
Still struggling to invigorate and recast its old socialist economy, India has been hit with a trucking strike that threatens to bring virtually all commerce in this land of 843 million people to a halt.
India's 1.5 million trucks have been parked in truck stops, gas stations, fields and garages as their owners demand an end to arbitrary road taxes, transport fees and police extortion.


Quotation of the Day
"They're just not spending the money on anything." -- DANIEL L. SCHMEHL JR., a merchant short of customers in Reading, Pa.  [ 35:3. ]


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Bold Ad Firm Is Chosen To Build Clinton's Image
A brash, aggressive advertising agency that created the slogan "It's a big country -- someone's got to furnish it" for a chain of furniture stores has been chosen to help convince voters that if, indeed, America is a big country, Gov.
Bill Clinton's got to run it.
Deutsch Incorporated, a New York agency that creates provocative, sometimes contentious, ads for the Ikea furniture store chain as well as the British Knights athletic footwear maker and New York area Pontiac dealers, was among the Madison Avenue talent selected yesterday for the advertising team of Mr.
Clinton's Presidential campaign.


Machine Technology reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Top Discus Thrower Might Withdraw
KAMY KESHMIRI, the world's leading discus thrower, is ready to withdraw from the Olympics because of a pulled muscle in his lower abdomen, according to his father, who is also his coach.
Keshmiri, a three-time National Collegiate Athletic Association champion at Nevada, won the Olympic trials June 22 in New Orleans.
"After the trials, he got up in the morning and said, 'I can't walk,' " said his father, JOE KESHMIRI, in Reno. (AP)


Oilers Match an Offer to Manson
The Edmonton Oilers have decided to match a multimillion-dollar offer for defenseman DAVE MANSON, a free agent.
Oilers General Manager GLEN SATHER had until yesterday, one week after Manson signed an offer sheet with the Washington Capitals, to decide whether to match the offer and retain the tough defenseman's playing rights.
Had the Oilers chosen not to match the offer, worth $4.6 million over four years, they would have received three first-round draft choices from the Capitals as compensation. (AP)


Hot on the Trail of Opinions, Humble or Otherwise
In this year of popular disgust with politics as usual, public opinion has been particularly unpredictable.
But if anyone in this corner of the country has his finger on, or even close to, the proverbial pulse of public opinion, G. Donald Ferree Jr. is the man.
For a professor teaching here at the University of Connecticut and affiliated with its Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, Mr.
Ferree is strikingly fluent in the language of the political sound bite, ready to quickly digest and interpret the steady stream of results from the Connecticut Poll, which he supervises.


Observer; The Glory of Us
Jefferson is taking dulcimer lessons.
Yes, Tom Jefferson, the famous word man.
Learning to play the dulcimer.
I ask if it's because dulcimer is such a beautiful word.
He has a weakness for words.
Maybe he has been smitten by that beautiful line of Coleridge's:
"A damsel with a dulcimer in a vision once I saw . . ."


Summer Job Hunters Get Unexpected Help
When 14-year-old Leslie Caraballo heard that summer jobs were available through New York City for needy youths, she promptly took herself down to the Grosvenor Neighborhood House on West 105th Street, one of several community centers taking applications.
That was in April.
She was told that she was No. 748 on the center's list of those who wanted work, and at most, maybe only 440 would be hired.
The lanky Ms. Caraballo was disappointed, but did not let the news discourage her.


Newman Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Most of the Stars Will Be on the Flag
The undefeated colt Furiously will be back in the barn mending his ankle, Julie Krone will be riding somewhere else and the entire cast of the Suburban Handicap will be home waiting for the race to be run two weeks later than usual.
But Belmont Park will still fire a few skyrockets over the Fourth of July weekend, featured by four stakes races, another comeback bid by Meadow Star and a public workout by the hometown hero, Strike the Gold.


U.S.-Russia Naval Exercises


Staodyn Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


When It Comes Time to Travel, Pack Smart to Smooth the Way
As vacation time approaches, so does the specter of packing.
Do you have the clothes you need and the bags to hold them?
And do you know how to pack to minimize wrinkling?
The essential skills are rather easy, packing experts say.
You just have to be organized and keep it simple.


Getting Their Sea Legs: Windjammer With a Crew of Girls
THE Milky Way is spilled across the sky like powdered sugar, while the Big Dipper hangs huge, forever poised to pour out dreams.
The air is getting cooler.
The wooden masts creak in the wind.
It is a little past 2 A.M. and we are slicing through salt water that was once home to the America's Cup race.
Newport, R.I., twinkles like tiny diamonds off the starboard bow.


SLOVAKIA DEPUTIES BLOCK RE-ELECTION OF VACLAV HAVEL
Czechoslovakia's Parliament today rejected the re-election of President Vaclav Havel, the spiritual and intellectual father of the "velvet revolution," which overthrew Communist rule in this country in 1989.
With Slovak deputies casting the decisive votes, Mr.
Havel's defeat was widely viewed here as another step toward the breakup of the 74-year-old union of Czechs and Slovaks.


Whaling Panel Agrees to a New Formula for Limited Catches
The International Whaling Commission took a first step today toward eventually allowing a limited resumption of commercial whaling but stopped short of lifting the six-year-old moratorium.
On the final day of its annual meeting, in Glasgow, the commission approved a computerized formula for setting catch limits on minke whales, but put off sanctioning commercial catches at least until next year.


Traffic Alert
Because of Operation Sail and other Fourth of July activities, much of lower Manhattan will be closed to traffic intermittently this weekend.
Here are major closings.
TODAY
Traffic will be limited south of Chambers Street after 8 A.M.; no traffic south of Chambers Street from 6 P.M. to midnight.
Water Street between State and Fulton streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the World's Fare.
The Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel will be closed from 6 P.M. to midnight.  TOMORROW
Madison Avenue between 34th and 59th streets will be closed from 1:30 P.M. to 6 P.M. for the Immigrant Parade.
Water Street between State and Fulton streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Independence Day festival.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  SLOVAK LAWMAKERS OUST HAVEL
With Slovaks casting the decisive vote, Czechoslovak lawmakers rejected the re-election of President Havel, the spiritual and intellectual father of the revolution that overthrew Communist rule in 1989.  1  JAPAN'S TRADE SURPLUS SOARS
After several years of decline, Japan's trade surplus with the rest of the world is soaring once again to record levels.  1  U.S.
HOPES TO SHINE AT SUMMIT
The White House is trying to turn the economic summit meeting in Munich into a pep rally for growth to demonstrate Mr.
Bush's determination to do something about the sagging American economy.  5
Munich prepares to show off its castles and world-class beer.  5  RUSSIA IS COMING UP SHORT
The Russian budget deficit is growing at a rapid rate, undermining the Government's attempt to sign a lending agreement with the International Monetary Fund.  5  AIRLIFT TO SARAJEVO EXPANDS
A United Nations airlift of relief supplies to Sarajevo hit full stride, but an effort to restart talks between the warring sides proved fruitless.  3
Greece gains allies in a fight to withhold the name "Macedonia."3  SEETHING ON FRANCE'S HIGHWAYS
Many Western Europeans began their summer break with an all-too-familiar dose of pain, this time the result of blockades thrown up by angry truckers across France's major highways.  4  STRIKE PARALYZES INDIAN TRADE
Still struggling to recast its old socialist economy, India has been hit with a trucking strike that threatens to bring nearly all of the nation's commerce to a halt.  4  NEAR EQUATOR, A FRENCH AURORA
Attracted by superior salaries and social benefits befitting a European Community nation, many Brazilians are making a perilous river journey to French Guiana.  4  JOLT TO ARGENTINE POLLUTERS
In a campaign to combat inertia, an Argentine judge shut down 17 factories and jailed 32 executives and managers for dumping poisons and other pollutants into a river.  5  BALL IN PALESTINIAN COURT
Now that Israel seems to be on the verge of getting a Government that is serious about peace talks, Washington wants Palestinians and other Arab parties to make some realistic compromise proposals.  3
Another step toward allowing commercial whaling.  2
An African National Congress leader rejects the President's appeal.  2
Luxembourg approves a treaty on European union.  5  National 6-9  BUSH AND THE ENVIRONMENT
Campaigning four years ago, George Bush often said he wanted to be known as "the environmental President." Now his critics, acknowledging that he often took strong pro-environment stands in the first two years of his Administration, complain that the recession has steered him from his course.
Nowhere is that criticism more in evidence than in the attacks on Mr.
Bush for his approach to the Clean Air Act.  1  CHANGE IN THE BUSH CAMPAIGN The latest unemployment figures have caused Bush campaign strategists to abandon their confidence in a coming economic recovery that the President could ride to victory in November.
That change may portend a more negative fall campaign than either Mr.
Bush himself or his advisers have predicted.  1
The Clinton camp hired an aggressive New York ad agency.  7  LIFE IN A TRAILER
Nearly 16 million Americans now live in mobile homes.
For the most part they are people who, if not in poverty, are only one rung above it, people who grasp at the American dream but can clutch only a fragment.  1  THE BATTLE OF THE SHORELINE
After years of legal wrangling and a Supreme Court decision this week, David H. Lucas and the South Carolina Coastal Council are left with the question that brought them together in the first place: When is a beach house a public nuisance?  6  YUCCA MOUNTAIN CONFRONTATION
When an earthquake rattled southern Nevada a few days ago, at least two things did not shake: the competing positions in the battle over whether the area should be the home of a proposed nuclear-waste repository.  6  WHERE THE FOUNDERS GATHERED
For the second straight year, Independence National Historical Park in Philadelphia has been designated a particularly endangered historic site.
The Government has promised to refurbish it, but the promise appears threatened by budget constraints.  8  THE NAVY'S NEW CHIEF
The Acting Secretary of the Navy is a Tennessee native, a Foreign Service veteran, a former spokesman at both the White House and the Pentagon.
To right the naval service, which is listing from its sex-abuse scandal, he'll need all that experience, and more.  8
The Army charged a Reserve sergeant with raping a solider.  8  THE MAN WHO BROKERED URBAN AID
Man in the News: Nicholas E. Calio, the White House liaison to Congress who shepherded the negotiations that yielded a $5 billion urban aid package this week, is a person of low, even stealthy, profile.  8  Metropolitan Digest, 21  LEGISLATURE ADJOURNS
The New York State legislative session ended in exhaustion and bickering without action on two major economic initiatives.  1  WOOING IMMIGRANTS
Fire work.
The students left behind.
Richard Mooney: Tall Ships.
Letters 18  Russell Baker: The glory of us.  19  Five frames on America: Mary Ellen Mark, Joseph Rodriguez, Robert Adams, Eugene Richards, Sylvia Plachy.  19


The Students Left Behind
George Bush, the self-styled education President, insists on undermining public schools in order to save them.
In the name of making public schools more "competitive," he would provide vouchers allowing parents to send their children to private and parochial schools.
It's an odd remedy, but November looms ahead and he is searching for a domestic agenda.
Recently Mr.
Bush announced the State and Local G.I.
Bills for Children.
This latest voucher proposal would provide up to $1,000 that low- and middle-income families could spend at private schools or even another public school.


Aid for Bandage Users: Band-Aids Without String
Amid the chaos of change, the constancy of products that only occasionally work well provide their own reassurance.
Consider the small orange string enclosed in the paper wrapper containing a Band-Aid.
Since the 1940's, when Johnson &amp; Johnson introduced the string on its adhesive bandages, people have accepted the fact that it didn't always perform its stated purpose: opening the wrapper.


CHRONICLE
It's a good thing that TODD ISAAC SHERMAN, 14 months old, began walking several weeks ago, because this afternoon he is to be the ring bearer at the wedding of his parents, JAMES ALLISON SHERMAN and LINNEA LOUISE TODD, in Chicago.
"In years to come, he will appreciate that he was at his parents' wedding," said Mr.
Sherman, a playwright, whose "Beau Jest" is playing at the Lambs Theater in Manhattan.
Ms.
Todd is an actress.


Kohl's Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Dennis R. Karl, Writer, 37
Dennis R. Karl, a writer on military history, died on Wednesday at his home in Hoboken, N.J.
He was 37 years old.
His family said he appeared to have suffered a heart attack.


Krabbe Pulls Out of Olympics
Germany's double world sprint champion, KATRIN KRABBE, who was cleared of doping charges last weekend, has decided not to compete at the Barcelona Olympics, her track club said yesterday.
A Neubrandenburg club official, KLAUS LICHT, said Krabbe and two teammates, GRIT BREUER and SILKE MOELLER, who were also involved in a recent doping affair, would not be going to the Barcelona Games, which open July 25.
"It is certain that the three athletes are not going to Barcelona," Licht said.
"An official statement giving the reason why will be sent out tomorrow."


Friction Seen In Planning Of Convention
Officials of the Democratic National Convention Committee and the Dinkins administration, which worked hard to bring the convention to New York City, are not getting along as well as either side probably hoped in 1990 when the Democrats chose New York over New Orleans.
Behind the scenes, tensions have been building between the Democratic National Convention Committee; New York '92, the city's convention-planning arm, and the New York '92 Host Committee, organized by the Dinkins administration to raise $6.5 million from private contributors and spend it on things not covered by New York '92's $20.8 million budget, like parties for convention delegates.


Readicare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


It'll Hurt Worse If Franco Can't Pitch
From John Franco to the Mets' front office, the reports on the condition of Franco's troubled left elbow are encouraging.
A look at the background, however, raises questions about such optimism.
Franco, the closer for the Mets, said yesterday that the burning pain that forced him to stop throwing earlier in the week had existed to one degree or another for several months and that he had been on oral medication since the first week in May.


Recovering Memories From Storm's Wake


Life in a Trailer Park: On the Edge, but Hoping
Inside a narrow house trailer, where the heat works sometimes and the telephone never does, a fierce Wyoming wind slams against the aluminum walls, rattling the family pictures and everything else that hangs by a hook.
Rising from a threadbare sofa, Molly Prosinski cradles 2-year-old April in one arm, wipes a smudge from the face of 5-year-old Aaron and debates the merits of homework with Crystal, 12, all the while checking the macaroni on the stove.


Munich Cleans Up the Castle To Welcome World Leaders
The regal palace that was the seat of Bavaria's monarchy for nearly five centuries is covered with scaffolding this week.
The elaborately carved clock on the front of City Hall is being oiled.
And some residents are cleaning their lederhosen and feathered hats so they can look their best for world leaders who arrive Monday.
By the time the so-called Group of Seven summit meeting opens, Munich will be glistening even more brightly than usual, and Bavarians are preparing to show off their fairyland state to an unusually distinguished group of visitors.


Lead in Schools Contributes to Low Test Scores
To the Editor:
On June 13 you published unrelated articles about deteriorating student test scores and deteriorating school buildings in New York City.
These two afflictions are related.
In 1991 the Surgeon General declared lead poisoning the principal environmental health hazard afflicting American children: one child in six is lead poisoned.
The most common source of lead poisoning in children is lead dust from lead-based paint.
Your photograph of Boys High School in Brooklyn shows flaking paint from the ceiling showering students in class.
Your article depicts routine paint chip and dust fallout.


Seles Endures More Than the Threat of Rain
As if No. 1-ranked Monica Seles didn't have enough to worry about Thursday as she looked toward the possibility of her first Wimbledon final and the third leg of a possible 1992 Grand Slam, she received a handwritten death threat before she went onto the court for her semifinal match.
Whether the prospective terrorist, who claimed to have a bomb intended for the 18-year-old Yugoslav, was annoyed by her controversial grunting or her nationality was left unclear.
On the eve of Wimbledon, a pro-Croatian coalition had announced it would demonstrate if the Serbian-born Seles was allowed to play here, but so far, her progress has not been impeded by anything, the threat included.


A Series of Visits to Reading, Pa.
Since late 1990, in the early stages of America's ninth postwar recession, The New York Times has been visiting Reading and surrounding Berks County periodically to gauge economic conditions.
The area's mix of retailing, manufacturing and services is typical of the Northeast.
The articles, appearing at intervals of roughly three months and consisting of interviews with shoppers, business people and workers, seek to portray the current activity and mood, thereby providing a glimpse of the future.


Xicor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 14


Rabbi Marc Tanenbaum, 66, Is Dead
Rabbi Marc H. Tanenbaum, a father of modern Christian-Jewish dialogue and, through 25 years of radio commentary, one of the best-known rabbis in America, died early yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 66 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure after undergoing heart surgery last month, said his wife, Georgette Bennett.


A New Formula For Treating Acne
Two researchers at a New Jersey chemical company this week patented what they say is a simple and effective treatment for acne that offers none of the side effects of anti-biotics and could probably be sold without a prescription.
The active ingredient is hydrogen peroxide, the familiar antibacterial compound used in treating cuts and other injuries.
Hydrogen peroxide is not new as a treatment for acne, but until now it has been combined with chemicals like benzene to keep it from decomposing rapidly.
Some experts have recently begun to worry that trace elements of these other chemicals could pose safety problems.


Bailout Hopes Dashed In Nassau and Suffolk
Leaders of Nassau and Suffolk counties huddled in separate emergency meetings today, each faced with bankruptcy, huge layoffs and property tax increases after this morning's adjournment of the State Legislature without approval of deficit borrowing plans critical to the finances of both.
The Republican-controlled Senate voted to approve the multimillion-dollar bailout plans, but the Democratic-controlled Assembly, with backing from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, rejected the borrowing measures.
The Democrats demanded that both counties agree to have financial control boards oversee their finances, which have been crippled by lower sales tax revenues and rising social welfare costs with the recession.


Arista Investors reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
Jan Walters and Sarah Pillow Harpist and Soprano Church of St. Mary the Virgin


Wide-Body What? Golf Drivers?
In an effort to cash in on one of the sport's best-selling products, makers of golf equipment are racing to design the most innovative oversize driver.
The Wilson Sporting Goods Company of River Grove, Ill., recently introduced the Killer Whale, which the company claims is the largest metal driver on the market.
The club head measures 275 cubic centimeters, 40 percent larger than the Callaway Golf Company's Big Bertha, which is 195 centimeters.
Wilson officials concede that Big Bertha set the standard for metal wide-body drivers when it was introduced last year.
A conventional driver is about 145 cubic centimeters.


GUIDEPOST
An Array of Programs for Older People A variety of educational and entertainment opportunities are available for older people, often at no charge or a reduced price.
Here are some examples:


Malawi Merits Not One Penny From U.S.
To the Editor:
"Malawi Needs Assistance and Sympathy" (letter, June 6) by N. W. Mwaungulu, Malawi's United Nations representative, is a feeble effort at obfuscation criticizing a May 22 editorial.
Malawi has not been denied aid from many quarters because it embraced "a free market path to development." Rather, its outcast status resulted from its being the sole country in Africa to recognize and support the apartheid regime of South Africa.


Now at Navy's Bridge, Battling Sexism
J.
Daniel Howard's first trip on his first day as Acting Navy Secretary last Monday was a short walk to Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's office at the Pentagon.
"I said, 'What do you want me to do?' and he said: 'You're Acting. I expect you to act,' " recalled Mr.
Howard, who was the Navy's Under Secretary, the No. 2 civilian, until H. Lawrence Garrett 3d resigned a week ago as a result of the Navy's most notorious sexual harassment scandal.


Why Good Students Turn to Cliffs Notes
To the Editor:
As a member of my high school's honors class in English, I am replying to "For Students, Steinbeck and Orwell Can't Match Cliffs Notes" (letter, June 14) by William C. Clayton, a high school English teacher.
The English curriculum in most schools is similar to those of 30 years ago, and yet what is expected of young people has changed.
This school year we had to read close to 30 books, plays, short stories and poems.
We were given a quiz almost every other day.
Many of the people in my class, including me, purchased Cliffs Notes and Monarch Notes because how can it be expected that we will understand the symbolism in four chapters of "The Scarlet Letter" in two days?
Cliffs Notes are essential for good grades in quizzes and tests these days because students are forced to learn faster and are under more pressure to get those good grades to get into a good college.


INSIDE
Russia Deficit Daunts I.M.F.
The Russian budget deficit is growing at a rapid rate, putting pressure on the International Monetary Fund to accept that reforms will take longer to carry out than expected.
Page 5.
Sandinista May Face Trial
Nicaragua's army chief, considered a stabilizing holdover from Sandinista rule, could face trial on charges of covering up a murder.
Page 2.
Marc Tanenbaum Dies
The rabbi, 66 years old, was a father of modern Jewish-Christian dialogue and one of the best-known Jewish leaders in America.
Page 10.
Rushing to Fill Jobs
New Federal money has spurred a scramble from Connecticut to California to create and fill thousands of jobs for poor youths.
Page 21.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States were closed yesterday in observance of the Fourth of July holiday.


Technology Shift Blurs Future of Japan's New TV System
A shift in technology is causing a quiet re-evaluation of Japan's new system for providing the next generation of television.
Some experts here wonder whether its high-definition system, once the envy of the world, is now doomed to early obsolescence.
The Japanese do not admit that their system, just starting to reach the market, appears to have been eclipsed by technology developed in the last two years in the United States.


Tales of the Tightfisted Consumer
Though some might call it false economy, considering the value of time and gasoline, Linda Startzel was intent all the same on driving 20 miles round trip to buy a picnic cooler at Reading's spanking new 114,000-square-foot Wal-Mart out on Perkiomen Avenue.
Indeed, it was with a certain satisfaction that she emerged from the discount colossus, having spent just $14.88 for an item that had been marked $17.97 at a Kmart -- no slouch at price-cutting itself -- near her home in Pottstown.


McEnroe and Agassi Have to Weather a Wait
He is just two victories away from the ultimate swan song, but John McEnroe, who prefers to be underwhelmed about making an appearance in a Grand Slam semifinal at age 33, has opined that it is going to take a miracle for him to capture this year's Wimbledon championship.
Thanks to the unrelenting showers that spit and sprayed today from morning till night, it may take a miracle for McEnroe even to get on court against Andre Agassi in this event's ultra-marquee, ultra-American semifinal.


Earthquake Raises Concern About Nuclear Waste Dump
Despite the earthquake that rattled the southern Nevada landscape this week, the strongest since people began testing nuclear weapons there more than 45 years ago, the two sides in a bitter dispute over a proposed nuclear-waste site remain stolidly unshaken.
Proponents of a plan to build a national nuclear-waste repository on Yucca Mountain, just 12 miles from where the earthquake registered 5.6 on the Richter scale early Monday, said that the shaking will help them to characterize the region's seismic hazards, which in their view are not worrisome.


SC Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Blazers Add Strickland but Lose Ainge
The Portland Trail Blazers signed free-agent guard ROD STRICKLAND to a multiyear contract today, only hours after losing guard DANNY AINGE to the Phoenix Suns.
Terms of the contract were not announced by the Blazers or Strickland, but it was learned from a person familiar with the deal that it is for longer than four years.
Strickland, 26 years old, played the last two and a half seasons with the San Antonio Spurs after spending a year and a half with the Knicks.


Bridge
It would be interesting to know the luckiest player of all time, but there is no way to know.
A strong candidate would certainly be Warren Haynie of Nashville, who held the South cards on the diagramed deal from the 1987 Summer Nationals in Baltimore.
As can be seen, the bidding was both mysterious and inaccurate.
Haynie planned to open two diamonds, a weak two-bid, but stopped to consider whether his hand should be considered a maximum or a minimum if his partner responded two no-trump.
As sometimes happens in such circumstances, two no-trump came out of his mouth, and before he could correct himself, West passed.


JDS Invest reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


CHRONICLE
What do Governor MARIO M. CUOMO and former Prime Minister MARGARET THATCHER of Britain have in common?
Not much, it would seem, but they do share a reverence for Abraham Lincoln that is now being demonstrated in very public ways.
The Governor and HAROLD HOLZER, the executive vice president of the State Urban Development Corporation, are authors of a commentary that accompanies a rare first printing of Lincoln's second inaugural address, which is on display at the New-York Historical Society.
In their analysis, they contradict popular opinion about the speech, which included the passage beginning, "With malice toward none."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bad Economic News Forces Bush To Refocus Re-election Strategy
Shaken by an ominous jump in the unemployment rate, White House strategists said today that they were reassessing the assumption that an improving economy would revive President Bush's political standing before the November election.
Instead, they said, they must focus their campaign more on social problems and character issues.
The change in emphasis had been under serious discussion since late last month, but it was propelled Thursday, when it was reported that the June unemployment rate had surged to 7.8 percent.
The shift in strategy portends a tougher and possibly more negative re-election effort by Mr.
Bush than he or his advisers had predicted.
Short on Confidence and Time
Mr.
Bush's re-election chairman, Robert M. Teeter, said today that the campaign was making only subtle changes in the campaign's overall strategy, which always included messages about social problems, "family values" and Mr.
Bush's standing as a world leader.
But the decision not to rely on good economic news for an autumn "kick" nevertheless removes an underpinning from the assumptions that Mr.
Bush himself has carried into the race.


Fire Work
Some people will try to start their July 4 dinners early tonight.
For the evening shift at Engine Company 76 and Ladder Company 22 on Manhattan's Upper West Side, Chris Donovan, the designated cook, will serve roast beef before 6:30 P.M.
After that, the rush of calls is likely to accelerate to the year's peak.
"Last year we didn't get dinner until after midnight," recalls Glenn Smith.
As the rest of New York celebrates 216 years of independence and 500 years since Columbus's famous voyage, the Fire Department plans to add 20 extra companies.
Fireworks are illegal, but for some reason even scrupulously law-abiding citizens are willing to wink at them.
And that makes the Fourth of July the busiest day of the year, no fun at all, for firefighters.
Fireworks make fire work.


Braniff Shutdown Strands Passengers at Kennedy Airport


Albany Lawmakers End Session Without Acting on 2 Major Issues
The state legislative session ended today in an angry morass of exhaustion and partisan bickering, and lawmakers left town near dawn without acting on two major economic initiatives: an $800 million bond act to create jobs and a fiscal bailout that would allow Nassau and Suffolk counties to borrow money.
As had been the case all week, the two measures remained, in essence, hostage to each other.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo vigorously sought the bond act as a showpiece of his agenda to lift New York out of the recession, and the Republican-led State Senate desperately wanted the Long Island bailouts to head off the likely alternative, steep increases in local property taxes.


LIBERTY'S SHRINE IS CALLED AT RISK
Most of the 20,000 visitors who are expected to swarm over the flagstone walkways of Independence National Historical Park this weekend will probably not notice that the buff-colored paint on the downspout of Congress Hall is peeling, or that the building's brickwork needs to be re-pointed.
As they wait in line to get a glimpse of where the Founding Fathers once gathered, most of them will have no way of knowing that the sprinkler system in Independence Hall has so badly deteriorated that experts say a fire would level the landmark in less than 30 minutes.


Oh, Danny Boy! Tartabull Homer Puts Yanks at .500
It looks like just another ball park, but Arlington Stadium has typically been a dark hole for the Yankees.
Tonight, their luck finally changed.


U.S. Will Try to Sway Arabs in Talks With Israel
Now that Israel appears to be on the verge of getting a Government that is serious about peace talks with the Arabs, American officials say that Washington's top priority in the negotiations will be to insure that the Palestinians and other Arab parties put forward more realistic compromise proposals.
"The Arabs did their share to get this peace process started," a senior Administration official said the other day on the condition of anonymity.
"But the fact is they have been sitting around for the last year and a half watching the spectacle of the Bush Administration fighting with Israel. It was a great show, but it's over and now their moment of truth is coming."


Corrections
A front-page chart yesterday showing unemployment rates over the years misstated the change from May to June in some copies.
It was three-tenths of 1 percentage point.


Jako Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Folklorist Offers Insight Into Cultural Connections
When the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor, Alan Lomax, who was in charge of the recording unit at the Library of Congress, sent friends out to record what Indians, Mexicans, rural black people and others would say to President Franklin D. Roosevelt if they had his ear.
The people were prompted to begin their comments with: "Dear Mr. President, what I think is . . ."
"One old buddy down in Texas not used to recording machines began by saying, 'Hello, Mr. President,' " Mr.
Lomax recalled in an interview not long ago.
"And that was all. The guy operating the machine said, 'Say something!,' but he finally had to turn the machine off. He asked the old geezer why he hadn't said something more. The geezer said, 'I was waiting for him to hello me back.' "


Rate Cuts Won't Start Big Spree, Banks Say
Bankers said yesterday that they expected no spurt in borrowing and spending by businesses or consumers in the wake of the Federal Reserve's move on Thursday to cut interest rates, or their own cut in the prime lending rate to 6 percent from 6.5 percent.
"It has got to help a little, but I don't think businesses were holding back their borrowing just because they would have had to pay 6.5 percent or 7 percent instead of 6 percent," said Richard M. Kovacevich, president of the Norwest Corporation, a Minneapolis-based banking company.
"What they really want to see is a full order book."


Beliefs
The event probably took no more than two minutes.
In June 1989, at the Nathan Bishop Middle School graduation in Providence, R.I., Rabbi Leslie Gutterman thanked the "God of the free, hope of the brave" for "the legacy of America where diversity is celebrated and the rights of minorities are protected."
Two weeks ago, the Supreme Court ruled that Rabbi Gutterman's prayers violated the First Amendment.
They were, Justice Anthony M. Kennedy wrote for a 5-to-4 majority, a state-sponsored religious exercise in which students were pressured into joining.


Classical Music in Review
Washington Square Music Festival Washington Square Park Through July 28


Kansas City's Barbecue Rift Is Settled
President Harry S. Truman was a regular at Arthur Bryant's barbecue restaurant, the "grease house" that made this city a barbecue capital.
In 1979, President Jimmy Carter brought his entourage unannounced to the restaurant, which the writer Calvin Trillin, a Kansas City native, called one of the best in the world.
At any noon hour, a long line stretches from the counter at the back of the two-room restaurant, past the grease pit and often into the street.
Tourists jostle with construction workers, office employees and professionals who have shed their jackets -- along with such well-known aficionados of barbecue as Robert Redford and Jack Nicholson when they are in town.
The line moves quickly as customers pick up pitchers of beer and plates piled high with three-inch sandwiches of shredded barbecue and inch-thick french fries.


John Buettner-Janusch, 67, Dies; N.Y.U. Professor Poisoned Candy
John Buettner-Janusch, a prominent anthropologist who was convicted of making illicit drugs in his campus laboratory and who then tried to kill the trial judge with poisoned candy, died on Thursday at a medical center for Federal prisoners in Springfield, Mo.
He was 67 years old.
He died of pneumonia, said William B. Wachtel, his lawyer.
He added that Dr.
Buettner-Janusch was in failing health and, disheartened by a recent ruling that he would not be freed until after the year 2000, had stopped eating and been force-fed.


Renovating Unleashes Lead Paint
Mention lead paint, and most people think of children eating paint chips that have peeled off tenement walls.
But three-quarters of all housing units built before 1980 have lead paint somewhere, according to the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development, and single-family houses typically have more lead-based paint than apartments do.
The Conservation Law Foundation, an environmental group in Boston, recently warned that home renovations often spread lead contamination, especially if a contractor sands down old paint, since children and adults can be hurt by breathing lead-filled dust.


International Dairy Queen reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Review/Ballet; Kirov Test: The Giants Of the West
The experiment continues.
The Metropolitan Opera House was packed on Thursday night when the Kirov Ballet presented another historic first for the company, a mixed bill of works by three giants of Western ballet: George Balanchine, Antony Tudor and Jerome Robbins.
In 1989 the company from Leningrad, now St.
Petersburg, triumphed in the same house with two Balanchine ballets, "Scotch Symphony" and "Theme and Variations." Gone were the days when such classics of the American repertory were considered too formalist or abstract for the conservatives and political commissars who ruled Soviet ballet.


Man in the News; Stealthy Capital Go-Between: Nicholas Edmund Calio
Nicholas E. Calio, the White House liaison to Congress who shepherded the negotiations that yielded this week's $5 billion urban aid package, says he is most effective when he remains invisible and lets more senior officials take the credit for policy successes.
Since taking the job in February, Mr.
Calio has been successful in keeping his stealth profile.
He is still not a household name, even in Congress, where he blends in with the army of lobbyists who like him stalk Capitol Hill wearing striped suspenders and tasseled loafers, and who play golf with the top staff members who write the nation's laws.


Vincent Gives Himself an Error and Drops Threat
The clash between Commissioner Fay Vincent and three members of the Yankees' hierarchy took another turn yesterday with their meeting scheduled for Monday postponed, the possibility of discipline dissipated and the agreement of the commissioner's office with an arbitrator that it acted prematurely.
Instead of meeting with Vincent on Monday, General Manager Gene Michael, Manager Buck Showalter and Jack Lawn, a club vice president, will be asked by the Players Association to talk to union lawyers about their meeting with the commissioner last Wednesday.


Dartmouth Loses on Thames
Dartmouth's heavyweight varsity eight brought its Eastern Sprint and Intercollegiate Rowing Association championship credentials to the Henley Royal Regatta today, but ran afoul of a collection of United States Olympic candidates who were not selected for Barcelona, Spain.
Under a steady downpour on the Thames, the former Olympic candidates, rowing together for the first time as the Penn Athletic Club eight, sent Dartmouth to a one-half boat length defeat in the first round of the eight-oared Grand Challenge Cup.
The Big Green crew, the most successful in the school's history, was behind by more than 30 feet over most of the mile and five-sixteenths course.
The Penn A.C. had the fastest time of the day, 6 minutes 17 seconds.


West Supports Athens on Macedonia
Greece has gained the unanimous backing of the European Community and the United States in refusing to recognize the southernmost former Yugoslav republic as "Macedonia," creating chaos this week in the Macedonian Parliament.
Leaders of the 12-member community decided last week in Lisbon to extend recognition to the republic "under a name which does not include Macedonia." Macedonian legislators issued a declaration today saying they could not accept a name for the republic that did not include "Macedonia."


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
Japan's global trade surplus is soaring again to record levels, a development that could increase unemployment in other nations and contribute to a new round of trade tensions.
It is also likely to be a main topic at the summit meeting of the seven leading industrial countries next week in Munich.  [ Page 1. ]
Bush hopes to turn next week's economic summit meeting into a pep rally for economic growth, despite the sharp jump in the nation's jobless rate.  [ 5. ]


Alms for the Pol
RUTH SHARP ALTSHULER sat in a glass-walled conference room here at a teak table so new that the plastic protectors had not been removed from its knobbed feet.
She swiveled in an equally new chair and pointed at workmen who were creating offices out of an empty corner of Ross Perot's campaign headquarters.
"
Everyone
wants to be here," she said, sweeping a manicured hand past the panorama. Her sapphire ring brought to mind a plate-glass window, and her wrist was weighted by a web of gold. "Everyone, just everyone, is calling me and asking, 'How did you get that job?' This is the most exciting place right now.
Everyone wants to be here."


Adams in Eden
One might overlook the fact that Ansel Adams's monumental photographs of the national parks are essentially evangelistic -- unabashed attempts to convert the American public, the National Park Service and various American Presidents to his faith in nature.
Turnage.
These idealized images, with their perfect symmetry and their perfect balance of light and dark, are really, as Mr.
Turnage notes, Adams's cathedrals, places where someone could learn to appreciate the vastness of nature without feeling like a foreigner.
Lest one need further proof of that, here is Adams's pithy response to a proposal that a dam be constructed in part of the Grand Canyon, leaving a lake for tourists to raft on: "I suggest we fill the Sistine Chapel about two-thirds full of water so that visitors can float around and see the ceiling paintings to better advantage."


Batten Down the Hatches, Tie Down the Patio Set
THE Atlantic hurricane season extends from June 1 through Nov. 30.
Although most hurricanes that strike the eastern United States occur in August, September and October, knowing how to protect houses and property, as well as taking appropriate precautions, can be of enormous benefit.
In a hurricane, high winds and flooding are the chief causes of damage.
To protect the house from wind, keep dead wood pruned from trees and avoid letting large branches overhang buildings.


European Conveniences
New York, a traditional proving ground for success, last week became the test site for an idea that is foreign to the American city: European-style public pay toilets.
"As the song says, 'If you can make it here, you can make it anywhere,' " Jean-Francois Decaux said as his company, JCDecaux Inc., of Paris unveiled ornate toilets at three locations.
The company had passed over San Diego and Seattle for the test.


Traffic Alert
Madison Avenue between 34th and 59th streets will be closed from 1:30 P.M. to 6 P.M. today for the Immigrant Parade.


Back Again to Auschwitz to Bear Witness
Take a group of 12 men who shared the cruel fate of being among the first 1,112 Jews deported from France to Auschwitz in 1942 and the inexplicable good fortune of being among the 20 individuals to survive the Nazi death camp.
Persuade them to retrace their steps.
Take them to the apartments or street corners where they were first arrested by the French police.
Bring them to the French camps of Dracy and Compiegne, where they were interned.
Load them onto a train -- a first-class rail car this time, in lieu of the less comfortable accommodations they had previously -- to Auschwitz, which had originally been used as a prison for Russian soldiers.
Lead them to their crowded bunks and, finally, at the end, to their liberation.


Hypermodern Play Still Claims Victims
THE hypermodern style is to hold back, tempt the enemy to rush forward into what he wrongly believes is a power vacuum and then surround and destroy the unwarranted spearhead.
Considering that this strategy was developed shortly after World War I, it is surprising that it still claims many victims.
You must assume that every experienced player knows what he wants, but falls prey to miscalculation of the necessary tactics to achieve it.


Pulling One's Weight at the New I.B.M.
Around I.B.M.'s three-story branch office here, June 28, 1991, was dubbed "Black Friday." That was the day when I.B.M. computers, electronic cash registers and product scanners at a Wal-Mart Hypermart outside Dallas crashed.
Sales came to a halt for hours at the giant discount store, and irritated customers left in disgust.
At the headquarters of Wal-Mart Stores Inc. in nearby Bentonville, Ark., the Texas incident looked like the last straw.
The big retailer had grown increasingly dissatisfied with the International Business Machines Corporation, especially its service and maintenance handled from the Fayetteville office.


The Ins and Outs of 'Boxing Helena'
It takes imagination and faith for an actor to make the leap from alluring script and promising director to a commitment to face the camera.
Success involves not only talent but timing -- being able to pick the right project at the right moment.
Every decision is a gamble.
An A-list writer, director and producer and a fat budget may reduce the risk of professional embarrassment, while a first-time film maker and an independent studio might seem to increase it.
But even a studio movie with vast amounts of money behind it can turn into a belly-flop of a misjudgment, while a modest, offbeat film like "Sex, Lies and Videotape," which won the top prize at Cannes in 1989, jump-started the career of its director, Steven Soderbergh, and made his stars bankable virtually overnight.


Carolyn Clough, David Kilgus
Mr. and Mrs.
Sherman M. Clough of Williamsburg, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Carolyn Neale Clough, to David George Kilgus, a son of Dr.
Donald J. Kilgus of Valhalla, N.Y., and the late Janet C. Kilgus.
An October 1993 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Clough, 28 years old, is a counselor at Personal Performance Consultants Inc., an employee-assistance consulting company in Purchase, N.Y.
She graduated from Hood College and received a master's degree in social work from Washington University in St.
Louis.
Her father retired as an executive-compensation consultant at General Electric in Fairfield, Conn.


More Thoughts on the S.E.C. and Mutual Funds . . . And on Investment Opportunities
To the Editor:
Mr.
Guthary's basic concern seems to be that the small investor get a fair shake from those selling mutual funds.
One fact he overlooks is that many of us who advise individual investors, small-business owners and pension accounts are now offering the choice to buy funds that have no "load" (or commissions) on them.


SURFACING
DRINK --
Iced soya cappuccino:
For those who can't eat dairy.


World Markets; The Rain in Spain, and Elsewhere
It was an unhappy time in world stock markets as the first half of the year ended.
Markets in Spain, Italy and Norway were at 1992 lows.
In Japan, the Nikkei index was hovering around its lowest level in six years.
The British rally that came after the election of Prime Minister John Major had lost its footing; the Financial Times index was 7.9 percent off its 1992 peak and at its lowest level since the election.
Germany and France had retreated from recent highs.
And the Mexican stock market miracle had, at least temporarily, unraveled.


Astute Parents Can Teach Their Children
Praise be to those special parents who have the foresight, courage and intellectual capacity to teach their children at home, rather than send them into the intellectually barren, mediocre, sterile, dumbing-down public schools  [ "For 900, Home Is Where the School Is," June 14 ] .
Is it any wonder that home schooling on the Island has doubled in the last year, considering how ineffectual, insecure and invalid most schools have become?
Good fortune to the Loving Education at Home movement, which most home-schooling families belong to.
Their success and small competition may give the schools an incentive to change, by accepting choice in education, and an impetus to improve.
Without doubt an inquisitive well-read child taught at home can easily achieve more and succeed in learning and thinking than the large majority of public school students, and in far fewer hours of study.
An astute parent can tutor an interested, determined student in all the kindergarten-to-eighth-grade curriculum in less than a year, contrary to the claptrap spewed by the teachers' unions and bureaucrats in Albany.
Those who would extend the school day and year are nincompoops and know nil about true education, because all the extensions would do is compound mediocrity and further dilute the curriculum.
Above all, our monopolistic public-school system needs competition, and until it gets it from the private schools, the home-schooling groups and the voucher-choice options, public schools will continue to be exorbitant, ineffectual, babysitting, spoon-feeding institutions wallowing in the miasma and mire of mediocrity.
Parents who take full charge of their children intellectually and spiritually, as opposed to those who hand over their children to the state, are to be highly commended.
ROBERT GUY ARTHUR Kings Park
The writer is a retired teacher.


Up and at 'Em


Mysteries of the Kitchen
ALTHOUGH a connoisseur of exotic foods, Dr.
Barry Weintraub never ate a body part until he took a cooking class at Sapore di Mare, the restaurant in Wainscott.
"Massimo made me eat an eyeball," said Dr.
Weintraub, a Manhattan plastic surgeon and East Hampton resident.
"It was from a 24-pound poached salmon."


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Centre Island 960,000
122 Centre Island Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 26-year-old farm ranch; den, 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage, 3 acres, 300 feet of waterfront; taxes $8,800.
Coram 115,000
95 Westfield Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 15-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $3,800.
East Norwich 225,000
28 Muttontown Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 65-year-old colonial; dining room, front porch, detached 2-car garage; taxes $1,600.
Jericho 305,000
21 Estate Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old town-house condominium; dining room, 1- car garage, pool, tennis; common charges $389, taxes $7,200.
Ronkonkoma 134,500
68 Fifth Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, new Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, den, basement; taxes $3,100.
Smithtown 190,000
4 Grassy Pond Drive  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room w/fireplace, 2-car garage, pool; taxes $4,800.
OTHER AREAS Mount Kisco, N.Y. 309,000
Old Roaring Brook Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 72-year-old colonial; fireplace, dining room, 1-car garage, 1.2 acres; taxes $5,521.
Guilford, Conn. 605,000
29 Grove Hill Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 48-year-old Cape Cod; water views, large deck, skylights, 0.75 acre; taxes $5,972.
Mahwah, N.J. 160,000
33 Cambra Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old Cape Cod; h/w floors, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,720.


Likud Again? Yes, Says Benny Begin.
On a chilled afternoon in early March, Benjamin Begin stood at a graveside on the Mount of Olives and recited the Kaddish for his father, former Prime Minister Menachem Begin.
In the aftermath of the recent Israeli election, some here would also like to say the Jewish prayer for the dead for Menachem Begin's Likud Party, now that it is about to enter the opposition after 15 years in power.


How Much Is That Doggy in the Courtyard?
Jeff Koons was not among the 44 American artists selected to exhibit his work in "Documenta 9," the international survey of contemporary art in Kassel, Germany, but instead of getting mad, the well-known recycler of kitsch has gotten even.
One of the most talked-about works at the show's previews last month was Mr.
Koons's "Puppy," a giant, irresistibly cuddly terrier made of real flowers.
The sculpture, which is nearly 40 feet high, has nothing, or almost nothing, to do with Documenta.
It's the main attraction in what was meant to be a modest summer show in Arolsen, a small town about 40 minutes by car from Kassel.
Oddly enough, the show, "Made for Arolsen," was organized by Veit Loers, the director of the Museum Fridricianum in Kassel, who was keeping himself busy while Documenta took over his home museum.


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
May 92
Apr. 92
May 91
New York
2,662
2,593
3,104
New Jersey
1,442
1,466
1,313
Connecticut
747
799
778
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.62
8.64
9.88
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.84
5.86
7.30
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.50
8.53
9.72
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.60
5.67
7.31
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.54
8.48
9.74
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.59
5.61
7.14
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.75
8.75
10.11
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.43
6.42
7.71
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.14
4.12
6.36
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.20
8.26
9.23
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Insurers Have    Not    Abandoned the Inner City
To the Editor:
"Did Insurers Abandon the Inner City?" (May 31) misled readers.
The piece was written backward from its inaccurate premise, and key facts that would weaken it were omitted or buried.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Balanced Budget: Vote to cut off debate and allow a vote on a proposed balanced budget amendment.
Rejected, with 56 in favor and 39 opposed (four votes short of the 60 needed), July 1.
2.
Aid to Russia: Vote on passage of a bill to provide a package of foreign aid to Russian and other former Soviet republics.
Approved 76 to 20, July 2.
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
N
N
Lieberman (D) . . .
N
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
A
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
N
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
Y
Y
Moynihan (D) . . .
N
Y
House
1.
Council on Competitiveness: Vote on an amendment that would have provided financing for the Council on Competitiveness, a regulatory review board headed by Vice President Quayle.
Rejected 236 to 183, July 1.
2.
Defense: Vote on passage of a $252 billion defense budget for fiscal 1993 that is $9 billion less than President Bush requested.
Approved 328 to 94, July 2.
3.
Tax/Urban Aid Bill: Vote on passage of a bill that provides an estimated $14.5 billion in tax breaks for businesses and individuals over six years and includes a $5 billion urban aid package that aims to help cities through job training and tax incentives.
Approved 356 to 55, July 2.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
N
N
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
N
N
Y
3. Pallone (D) . . .
N
N
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
N
N
Y
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
N
Y
A
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
8. Roe (D) . . .
N
Y
N
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
N
N
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
13. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
14. Guarini (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
2. Downey (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
N
Y
A
4. Lent (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
5. McGrath (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
N
N
Y
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
A
Y
N
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
N
N
N
9. Manton (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
10. Schumer (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
11. Towns (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
12. Owens (D) . . .
N
N
N
13. Solarz (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
14. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
15. Green (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
16. Rangel (D) . . .
N
N
Y
17. Weiss (D) . . .
N
N
N
18. Serrano (D) . . .
N
N
Y
19. Engel (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
20. Lowey (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
21. Fish (R) . . .
A
Y
Y
22. Gilman (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
23. McNulty (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
24. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
N
N
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
26. Martin (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
27. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
28. McHugh (D) . . .
N
Y
N
29. Horton (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
31. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
N
Y
N
33. Nowak (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
34. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Kennedy Weds in Private Ceremony


From the Last Row, a Show of Summer
THIS is about spikes.
Not the kind that jazz up cocktails, but flower spikes, the kind that jazz up gardens.
Admiration for spikes started last fall during a catalogue search.
The perennial border needed something tall and stately to give it height as well as some kind of spectacular summer flower display.
The plant choices were many.
But the likely candidates settled down to one, the foxtail lilies (Eremurus).


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BARNUM MARCHES BACK
After a year's hiatus due to financial troubles, the P.T.
Barnum Festival Parade, which was held for 43 years on or about the Fourth of July, returns to Bridgeport today.
Stepping off at 1 P.M. from Lincoln Boulevard and Capital Avenue it will proceed south on Park Avenue to Seaside Park.


Social Security Remains a Binding Contract; Not a Relief Program
To the Editor:
William Safire properly chides Ross Perot for proposing a means test for Social Security retirement benefits in "Perot Versus Social Security" (column, June 15).
But why is Mr.
Perot singled out for criticism for espousing what has long been conservative doctrine?


Justice Thomas, the Freshman
The Supreme Court's term began in rancor last fall after the monumental fight to confirm Clarence Thomas and it ended last week in his failed attempt, along with three other justices, to force radical changes in law.
During this first year on the Court, Justice Thomas spoke loudly but not often wisely.
Those who hoped that he would find himself once confirmed more often saw him lose himself in ideology.
In this first year, Justice Thomas has failed the test of judiciousness.
That harsh judgment derives from his performance in a long list of cases on different issues.
In some ways, despite the Anita Hill ordeal and the narrow 52-to-48 Senate vote to seat him, Clarence Thomas has yet to join the Court.


Vincent Fields Slings and Arrows, but a Few Stick
Last month, in a speech designed to end the rancorous behavior in baseball, Commissioner Fay Vincent told major league owners that baseball cannot succeed on any front with dissension and disunity.
Three weeks later, dissension still gnaws at the game, with Vincent at the center of the controversy.
And even though Vincent has proved to be very adept in the past at dodging the slings and arrows, he emerged from a tumultuous week well aware that a lot of weaponry sailing through the air these days is headed in his direction.


Increasing Our Dirty-Word Power
To the Editor:
As one of the contributors to Susie Bright and Joani Blank's anthology "Herotica 2: A Collection of Women's Erotic Fiction," I was pleased to read Walter Kendrick's fascinating survey of erotic writing ("Increasing Our Dirty-Word Power: Why Yesterday's Smut Is Today's Erotica," May 31).


Chinita Leung, Michael Hard Jr.
Johnson and Linda Leung of Hong Kong have announced the engagement of their daughter Yinling Chinita Leung to Michael Wales Hard Jr., a son of Michael and Kathy Hard of Tucson, Ariz.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Leung, 25 years old, is known as Chinita.
She is a project coordinator for Pacific Rim Resources Inc., a public affairs and management consulting company in Seattle.
She is a cum laude graduate of the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
Her father is the president and managing director in Tokyo of Anheuser-Busch Asia Inc.


All Dressed Up, At Saks by Night
Michael Kors previewed his fall fashions, to benefit Phoenix House.


History Through Landscapes
THERE is nothing like a swath of Hudson River School painting to soothe the soul and persuade the mind that life is more than making a buck.
Unfortunately, these images of landscape bring on a desire to see the real thing, and that costs not a few bucks.
So, for some visitors to the Montclair Art Museum here, "The American Landscape: From Cole to Blakelock" may be an exercise in titillation.
It is certainly not art for art's sake.


Budapest Ghetto
To the Editor: To say the least, I was disappointed, certainly surprised, to see no mention in "Budapest's Historic Ghetto" (May 31) of Raoul Wallenberg, the valiant Swede who attempted to save those living in the Budapest Jewish community in 1945.
When in Budapest going on three years ago, my younger son and I undertook to seek out the statue commemorating Wallenberg.
It wasn't easy to find.
After four cabdrivers -- and numerous conversations with citizens in the Buda section, which was the general description we got about where it was situated, we found the statue in a rather remote section of a park.


A Revitalizer of Russian Opera
New York has been a battlefield in the Russian operatic wars over the last year, with competing companies struggling to establish themselves as American favorites.
Unfortunately for the Kirov Opera, which makes its American debut tomorrow evening at the Metropolitan Opera House, the feebler cannons were fired first.
After the visits of the Bolshoi Opera of Moscow last summer at the Met and of the St.
Petersburg National Opera earlier this year at the New York State Theater, New Yorkers may not realize that the Kirov Opera operates on an altogether higher level.
The Kirov, which shares its 175-member orchestra and the Maryinsky Theater with the Kirov Ballet, is currently the best Russia has to offer in terms of big, bold productions deftly blending old and new dramatic values, with stirring singing and thrilling choral and orchestral work.
Or so it seemed on a recent visit to St.
Petersburg, during which the company's artistic director, Valery Gergiev, conducted performances of Mussorg sky's "Khovanshchina" and Tchaikov sky's "Queen of Spades." And so it seems on the recordings Mr.
Gergiev and company have released on Philips.
"Queen of Spades" will be given in New York over the next two weeks, along with Mussorgsky's "Boris Godunov" and Prokofiev's "Fiery Angel."


Business Diary/June 28 - July 3
THE ECONOMY The Fed's Short-Term Medicine for the Economy's Long-Term Ills


Corrections
The Executive Life column last Sunday referred incorrectly to a professor of history.
He is Jon Wiener of the University of California at Irvine.


In American Backyards, the Spirit of Chekhov
MAYBE it is overreaching to say that the Phoenix Theater production of "Morning's at Seven" is as lovely as the 1980 New York revival, which won various awards, one of them for ensemble acting.
After all, that was Broadway with a big-time budget, and this is a summer theater bound by three weeks of rehearsal, a three-week run and the need to scrimp.
But then leave it to Ellis Rabb, the director, to assemble, lure or perhaps just bewitch an ideal cast.
And don't forget that Paul Osborn's ordinary comedy about ordinary people, which is how it was perceived after opening in 1939, is really a quite extraordinary comedy drama.
It is as close as a play set in American backyards gets to grasping the ineffable quality that is called Chekhovian.


Reading Between the Lines
To the Editor:
It is very possible that what Vincent Canby views as elements of Japan-bashing in Michael Crichton's novel "Rising Sun"  [ "Japan Unfolds Through Many Images," June 14 ]  may actually open doors to an understanding of Japanese culture for the majority of Americans.


Mutual Funds; Hidden Risks of Tax-Free Funds
Municipal bond funds are considered among the safest of investments.
But in reality, they carry plenty of risk.
Bond funds are sensitive to changes in interest rates, which are at rock bottom today.
When rates rise, fund prices fall.
While there are some short- and intermediate-term muni funds, most carry maturities that are greater than 20 years.
And the longer the maturity, the further bond prices fall when interest rates finally start to rise.


Johnson Feels at Home As the King of the Court
Outside the playing arena, he is expected to spread a message, carry the political football for the battle against a killer disease.
But the only ball Magic Johnson has ever truly wanted to carry, to advance, is round.
That is a feeling that he finds he can no longer repress.
Not now, not here, perhaps not until his body finally demands that he must.


English Wells
To the Editor: We enjoyed Sue Stiles's "Dressing Up the Wells of England" (May 17); it brought back fond remembrances of our lives in Sheffield and the Peak District.
We would like to suggest one additional place to eat: the Travelers Rest, near Hope on the A625, Derbyshire.
It has, in our opinion, the finest Sunday pub lunch in the Peaks, if not in the whole of the northern Midlands (and we sampled many of them).


Stephen A. Peduto, Law Student, 36
Stephen A. Peduto, who astonished his fellow students in the graduating class of New York Law School last month by saying he had AIDS, died on Wednesday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 36 years old and lived in Jersey City.
He died of pneumonia and other AIDS-related complications, according to a friend, William Diskin.


My N.H.L., My Icehouse, My Rules
Now that Eric Lindros is on his way into the National Hockey League and John Ziegler is on his way out, the time has come to pick the Frozen Chosen, the first real commissioner of the league.
Since January, when I saw my first complete ice hockey game, there has been only one job I have really wanted.
If picked, I will put the equivalent of a puck in every pot.
The TV networks will be turned into one big rink, and American children will cast their eyes down from the hoop to the skates on their happy feet.
My platform: 1. Pump Up the Violence
No more laughing stock of sports with a phony brutality that makes the game resemble a Tom and Jerry cartoon.
Ice hockey should be at least as violent as football, where almost everyone retires hurt, and many are permanently crippled.
No more designated hitters (while Tie Domi suffers, Beezer saves and Paramount invests) and no more Lady Byng Trophies for gentlemanly conduct (no wonder Wayne's World is not about Gretzky).
In my league, everybody fights.
Or nobody fights. 2.
The Penalty Hit
I hate to see a goon smirking in the penalty box for five minutes after he pounded a better man bloody.
In my league, buster, you hit, you get hit back.
At the head official's discretion, the player who has been assaulted has the right to strike his assailant, in the same body part, with the same force.
If he is too injured to retaliate, he can choose a teammate to strike back for him.
If he was struck by a player of inferior ability, he has the right to inflict his Penalty Hit on a comparable player.
This, of course, would have settled that unfortunate Adam Graves-Mario Lemieux flap during the Stanley Cup playoffs.
Mario could have broken Mark Messier's hand.
However, if the official judges that the return hit was harder than the original, caused more damage or was delivered to a more vulnerable area, then a Penalty Penalty Hit will be allowed.
And so on, until satisfaction.
Or until players figure out it might be simpler to keep their hands and their sticks to themselves. 3.
Create a Literary Canon
Hockey has its maven, Stan Fischler, and even its player-author, Ken Dryden, but it has never developed the statistical, journalistic or literary bench that has made baseball seem far more than it really is.
Without a Bill James, Roger Angell, Jim Bouton or Mark Harris, ice hockey will always be only a game, never a metaphor, slice of life, pattern of culture.
Therefore, my league would establish hockey fellowships to the writers' workshops at Stanford, Iowa and Breadloaf.
And at those grade schools in Medicine Hat, Alberta, and Trois Rivieres, Quebec, and Penetanguishene, Ontario, that seem to spawn those coachable wings with mean streaks, special attention will be paid to four-eyed chubsters with a willingness to pay the price in composition class. 4.
Put a Woman in Every Net
Each team in my league will carry a female goalie and guarantee her at least 5 minutes per game and 10 complete games per season.
This may seem like affirmative action or a crude attempt to woo more female fans, but actually it should improve the game.
Recent studies among physicians have shown that women are not only more caring than their male counterparts, but just as aggressive in using new techniques.
That will be translated into a protectiveness of the net as if it were a nest, and a willingess to skate out boldly.
Recent military studies have shown that the presence of women in a unit increases teamwork and cooperation. 5.
Phase Oot the Canadians
There are just too many hosers in the game.
As several of my hockey advisers have pointed out, Canadians do not skate as well as the Europeans or behave as well as the Europeans and the Americans.
They are frozen in a 1950's midlands sensibility and an 1850's manhood thing.
They will have the most difficulty relating to their female goalies and backing off from fights.
Canadians, while often boors on the ice, are boringly nice off the ice.
Hockey needs tasty rock stars.
More Jaromir Jagrs!
My league would limit Canadians to six on any team whose home is not a Canadian city.
Canadian teams may have 10.
The influx of Eastern European players will shrink payrolls, speed up the game and reduce Penalty Hits.
The influx of Americans (there will have to be 4 on every Canadian team, 10 on every American team) will increase the possibility of a hero acceptable to Nike, Reebok, Coke and Jeep.
Naturally, you can count on me to do the small, clever things that the other real commisioners in the smarter, major sports do about drugs, politicians, minority groups and the media.
The owners have 24 hours before my offer expires.
Then they can hire some compliant Zamboni driver with an M.B.A. and watch their game melt back to Saskatch.
Natch.


Molly Reilly, M. J. Hamburger
Mary Eliza Reilly, the daughter of Robert R. Reilly and Mary W. Reilly, both of Ann Arbor, Mich., was married there yesterday to Martin James Hamburger, the son of Henry I. Hamburger of Leonia, N.J., and Adele Alper of Cedar Grove, N.J.
The Rev.
James Wetekam, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother.
Ms.
Reilly, 29 years old and known as Molly, is keeping her name.
She is a legislative aide to Representative Frank Pallone Jr., Democrat of New Jersey.
She graduated cum laude from Bryn Mawr College and received a J.D. from the University of Michigan.
Her father is the general manager of the climate-control division of the Ford Motor Company in Plymouth, Mich.
Her mother is the director of development for Arbor Hospice in Ann Arbor.


Andrea Feingold, Michael L. Jacobs
Andrea Susan Feingold, a daughter of Mark and Bette Feingold of West Newton, Mass., was married last evening to Michael Lee Jacobs, the son of Leonard and Arleen Jacobs of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Rabbi Elaine Zecher performed the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton in Boston
Mrs.
Feingold Jacobs, 28 years old, is a bond analyst for the Colonial Management Company, a mutual-fund company in Boston.
She is a cum laude graduate of Barnard College.
Her father, a certified public accountant, is a principal in the Needham, Mass., accounting firm of Coles &amp; Bodoin.
Her mother is a second-grade teacher at the Old Post Road School in Walpole, Mass.


POSTINGS: Laws Found Inadequate; Seeking Truth in Real Estate
Real estate disclosure laws in most states are inadequate and do not ensure that home buyers know whom their real estate agent represents, according to a Consumer Federation of America report released last week.
Most states, the report said, require some kind of disclosure, but it is usually buried in the contract between the listing agent and the seller.
"Disclosure laws are so important because most agents working with buyers in fact represent sellers, and most buyers are unaware of this fact," said Stephen Brobeck, the executive director of the federation, a non-profit public interest group based in Washington.


Ryan Supplies the Mustard on the 4th
The Express may have gotten a late start on the season, but he was terrifically on track tonight.
Nolan Ryan, 45 years old and struggling for most of the season's first three months, pitched a complete-game three-hitter, beating the Yankees, 4-1, at Arlington Stadium.
Ryan gave up an infield single to Andy Stankiewicz in the third, then didn't allow another hit until Charlie Hayes lined a single through the middle to open the eighth.
Within that span he retired 13 straight.
His shutout was spoiled by Danny Tartabull, who homered with two out in the ninth.
Explosion of Strikeouts
Ryan struck out a season-high 13, getting Matt Nokes three times and Roberto Kelly, Kevin Maas and Hayes twice each.
According to the Elias Sports Bureau, Ryan is believed to be the oldest pitcher ever to strike out at least 10 batters in one game.
His season hasn't been smooth, though.
Ryan spent most of April on the disabled list, didn't record his first victory until last Sunday and was 1-3 as the night began.
On June 1, in his only start against the Yankees this season, he was removed after 10 pitches because of a slight strain in his left hamstring.
He is now 13-8 against the Yankees in his career, and 8-0 since his last loss to them on May 14, 1977, when he was pitching for the California Angels.
Ryan beat Scott Kamieniecki (1-6), whose performance was overshadowed and largely unnoticed by a sellout crowd of 40,726.
The right-hander surrendered two runs in the second inning and wavered in the eighth, giving up a two-run single to John Cangelosi.
Farr on Disabled List
The Yankees began their day with a swirl of roster activity, placing relief pitcher Steve Farr on the 15-day disabled list and calling up left-hander Curt Young from their Columbus, Ohio, farm team.
Farr, who has a team-leading 12 saves, has been bothered for several days by discomfort in his lower back.
The move was made retroactive to last Tuesday, making Farr eligible to return on July 16, the first game after the break for the All-Star Game.
Manager Buck Showalter said that Young, 3-0 with the Class AAA Clippers, was promoted ahead of Bob Wickman, a nine-game winner at Columbus, because of his ability to fill several roles.
Young spent parts of nine seasons with the Oakland A's, primarily as a starter.
"He gives us some versatility," Showalter said of the 31-year-old Young, who was released by the Kansas City Royals on June 10 and signed by the Yankees six days later.
Habyan Now the Closer
In Farr's absence, Showalter passed the role of late-inning closer to John Habyan, who began the night with 3 saves and a 1.67 earned run average.
There was little indication, however, that Habyan would get into this game.
The Rangers took a 2-0 lead against Kamieniecki in the second.
Ruben Sierra opened with a single to left, stole second and scored on Juan Gonzalez's double inside the third-base bag.
Kamieniecki struck out Kevin Reimer, but a long fly ball to center by Ivan Rodriguez moved Gonzalez to third, and he scored on a double by Dickie Thon.
Meanwhile, Ryan seemed to grow untouchable as the night progressed.
He struck out the side in the second -- Tartabull, Maas and Nokes were the victims -- and didn't allow a hit until the third when Stankiewicz poked a low liner toward third.
The ball was flagged by the diving Dean Palmer, but it rolled away before he could attempt a throw.
Ryan had already put the previous batter on base, hitting Mike Gallego with a pitch.
After Stankiewicz's hit, he struck out Mel Hall before Roberto Kelly reached base on catcher's interference, loading the bases.
Don Mattingly, though, grounded to first. INSIDE PITCH
Those four shutout innings that SHAWN HILLEGAS pitched in relief against the Kansas City Royals last Wednesday served him well.
Manager BUCK SHOWALTER said Saturday that Hillegas would start Tuesday night against the Minnesota Twins at Yankee Stadium, effectively demoting left-hander JEFF JOHNSON to the bullpen for the second time this season.


In 3-Way Races The Old Rules Can Trip You
AFTER a month of high panic and strange omens as the two major parties struggled to adjust to Ross Perot and a three-way race for the Presidency, a few rough lessons are clear.
First and foremost, Mr.
Perot's rivals learned that the Dallas billionaire would bleed just like any other pol.
In May and early June, his surge in the polls had crossed most of the lines of ideology, demographics, party and region, a strange new phenomenon from talk-show land that seemed immune to the normal rules of politics.
After a month in the arena, however, getting frisked by the news media and worked over by Republican surrogates for President Bush, Mr.
Perot looked much more vulnerable to both parties.


PEROTSPEAK
What to call Perot supporters is, indeed, a problem.
I would like to submit that the electorate is suffering from an acute case of "Perotonitis" brought on by severe ruptures in the Democratic and Republican Parties.
JAMES I. MOORE
Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, the first paragraph of the article on the front page of Styles of The Times today is partly obscured.
The paragraph should read:


We Are What We Throw Away
RUBBISH!
The Archaeology of Garbage.
By William Rathje and Cullen Murphy.
Illustrated. 250 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $23.


Northern Lights


Christine Kraus, Timothy Parrott
Mr. and Mrs.
George R. Kraus of Naples, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Christine Patricia Kraus, to Timothy Christopher Parrott, the son of Dorothy Parrott of Kenilworth, Ill., and the late Christopher Parrott.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kraus, 23 years old, is the European products development coordinator in the London office of J.B.S.
Associates, a financial service company in Ringwood, N.J.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College.
Her father is the chief executive of J.B.S.
Associates and of Nurses Rx Inc., a personnel agency in Huntersville, N.C.


A Rush of Candidates Courts Restive Voters
IN Connecticut's Second Congressional District the Republicans usually come up with one candidate to take on Representative Sam Gejdenson, the six-term incumbent Democrat.
This year, though, there are three from the G.O.P. seeking the nomination, including a lawyer from Norwich whom Mr.
Gejdenson defeated four years ago, Glenn T. Carberry. .
Across the state, in the Fifth Congressional District, five Democrats have filed candidacy papers to challenge the one-term Republican incumbent, Gary Franks.


Increasing Our Dirty-Word Power
To the Editor:
Walter Kendrick's essay is ill thought out.
There is a clear distinction between pornography and erotica.


Peru Leader's Problems Ease Abroad, but Mount at Home
Two months after President Alberto K. Fujimori seized dictatorial powers in South America's most unstable nation, a promise to elect and install a new Congress within six months is rapidly easing Peru's international isolation.
But Maoist guerrilla violence and rampant cocaine trafficking, two of the problems Mr.
Fujimori cited to justify his suspension of Congress and the courts, have barely been touched by the April 5 crackdown.


Cooler Weather Encourages Gardening
WITH the drought alert lifted, plant growers in the county are breathing a sigh of relief.
An added bonus, they say, has been the cool springlike weather that encouraged homeowners to keep buying flats of impatiens, petunias, marigolds and all the other annuals and bedding plants typical of the season.
"The recent business is especially welcome since we got off to a very slow start in May," said Alfred Krautter, the 57-year-old owner of the Sprainbrook Nursery in Scarsdale, which was established 48 years ago by his parents.


Social Security Remains a Binding Contract; We've Paid Our Dues
To the Editor:
William Safire's "Perot Versus Social Security" (column, June 15) takes an uncommonly sympathetic attitude toward Social Security recipients in acknowledging their benefits as the proceeds of paid-up insurance.
Today's party line is: Social Security recipients get back all they paid in within 21 months (the figure varies, but this is typical), and from then on they are being supported by all of us long-suffering younger people.


Fresh Air Fund Roars Into Summer by the Busful
Eric Pressley stood fingering his black Chicago Bulls hat, nervously awaiting a spot on the bus to Vermont.
Seven-year-old Shiabon Bishop twiddled her foot.
"I think it's going to be like going to Yonkers," she said firmly.
Reginald Williams, a 14-year-old from Queens, was less than enthusiastic.
"The country has too much
room,
" he said. "If you want to go to the store, you have to walk."
More than 200 children squirmed and fidgeted in the waiting area of the Port Authority bus terminal on Tuesday, awaiting a northbound bus.
By 9:30 A.M., the wait was over and Sheryl Quaye, the Fresh Air Fund's station manager for the Port Authority, clicked on a megaphone and called: "Are you ready?" The children shouted and jiggled their assent, and the buses started loading.


PEROTSPEAK
We "Perowners" are taking back our country.
Ross suits us to a T. We are not silent, so who needs a silent T?
JOHN A. ALEXANDER
Old Lyme, Conn.


Corrections
A review on page 22 of The Times Book Review today about "Holograms of Fear," by Slavenka Drakulic, omits the name of the translator.
She is Ellen Elias-Bursac.


Memorable Images In an Anthology of Drawings
THE show "Drawn in the 90's" at the Katonah Museum of Art is a tough one, yet its purpose is conventional, almost commonplace.
As explained by the curator, Joshua P. Smith, it demonstrates "the current status of drawing as a primary medium." Mr.
Smith, who did the job for the traveling exhibition service Independent Curators Inc., enlarges on the separation of drawing from the rest of art in the catalogue, as does Sean Rainbird, assistant keeper of the modern collection at the Tate Gallery in London.
There have been many important shows at Katonah (even when it was just a gallery), but none as au courant.
Much of the credit for this is due Catherine Coleman Brawer, who is on the Independent Curators board as well as that of the museum, where the show is making its debut.


Seles Bows Out Quietly as Graf Retains Title
The defending Wimbledon champion, Steffi Graf, with forehand and eyes ablaze and energized by a serve that pierced her opponent like so many arrows, abruptly ended Monica Seles's hopes for a third Grand Slam title in 1992.
Dodging a trio of distracting rain delays, Graf crushed the world's No. 1 player, 6-2, 6-1, in this afternoon's final.
"I knew I had it in me," said Graf, who hadn't often been able to make that claim over the past two years of professional self-doubt and internal family strife, all of which appears to have been resolved to her satisfaction.
"I think I am playing here the best tennis of my career."


Hannah Finkelstein, David Schwartz
Helen Finkelstein of Ridgefield, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter Hannah Finkelstein to David Philip Schwartz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Schwartz of Holmdel, N.J.
A March 1993 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Finkelstein, 24 years old, teaches kindergarten at the Moriah School in Englewood, N.J., where her mother teaches pre-kindergarten.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her late father, Hirsh Finkelstein, was an architect in New York.


Update; Tests Show School Is Free of Dangerous Levels of Lead
Parents at Public School 3 in Greenwich Village are breathing a bit easier after the results of laboratory tests, ordered by Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, found no dangerous levels of lead at the century-old school.
Tests taken by an outside laboratory, hired by several parents, had shown very hazardous levels of lead during the removal of paint and plaster in key areas of the building.


Making a Difference; Moving Closer to a $500 Billion Dream
A modest snicker went through the international financial community two years ago when Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay announced they would form a common market, called Mercosur, by the end of 1994.
Could these nations with histories of military coups, hyperinflation, corruption and vast amounts of foreign debt actually coordinate their Byzantine tax, customs, fiscal and monetary policies?


Two Parks With Rough-Hewn Beauty
WHAT often makes travel transcendent is the unexpected discovery at the top of a mountain, down a cobblestone alley or, in the case of a recent camping trip through eastern Canada, at the end of the Skyline Trail in Nova Scotia's Cape Breton Highlands National Park.
After hiking about two miles along the trail, which winds along the ridge of a headland cliff, my wife, Vickie, and I rested on a boulder to take in the view of the vast Gulf of St.
Lawrence.
Almost immediately, we heard what became an incessant splashing about a quarter mile off shore.
Using binoculars, we scanned the horizon and soon spotted it -- a school of perhaps three dozen pilot whales parading from north to south.


Making a Difference; A Test of His Versatility
It may seem like a big shift from women's apparel to educational test preparation, but Gregory Rorke doesn't think so.
Mr.
Rorke, 37 years old, is leaving as president of Danskin, a New York-based unit of Esmark Apparel, to take over Sept. 1 as president and chief executive of the Stanley H. Kaplan Education Center Ltd., a unit of the Washington Post Company.


Summery Shakespeare, In the Park
There was, briefly, an image in the director's mind of a canopy of colored lights and an audience entranced by a midsummer night's haze and thoughts of love.
In the shade behind the Delacorte Theater in Central Park on a recent afternoon, Adrian Hall waved his hand over a sun-dappled vista that included a pond, a sward and a castle.
Adjusting his steel-rimmed bifocals and seeing past and possibilities at once, he sighed, rather deeply, recasting it all in his mind: the night, the magic, the applause.
"At the end, for the marriage," he said, "I saw everyone singing, rising to their feet and joining in that moment. I saw locals and yokels and country folk."


His Heart's in the Highlands
A CAPTIVE OF THE CAUCASUS
By Andrei Bitov.
Translated by Susan Brownsberger. 323 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $23.


Ruling in Airport Suit: Don't Spare That Tree!
THE nuns, the residents of a convalescent home and three elderly sisters who live down the road here were unlikely defendants.
But they lost, at least this round, and Westchester County won, in a legal case that presented "the proverbial struggle matching commerce against nature, airplanes against trees," as a judge-turned-poet put it.
"I think that I shall never see a lawsuit as lovely as a tree," wrote United States District Judge Gerard L. Goettel, sitting in White Plains.
But he concluded that "trees lose some of their esthetic appeal when made the subject of litigation."


POSTINGS: 440 Condominium Units; Real Mt. Laurel Homes
It was a challenge to the zoning laws of Mount Laurel, N.J., in the 1970's that led to a statewide requirement that all communities open their doors to low- and moderate-income residents.
Among the projects helping Mount Laurel meet its own affordable-housing obligation is the Commons at Stonegate, a condominium complex being developed near the intersection of I-295 and Route 38.
The developer, the Orleans Company of Huntington Valley, Pa., plans to build 440 homes there over the next three years, completing 48 by the end of the summer.
The architect is the Murphy Architectural Group of Westchester, Pa.


Mary K. Mercein, Arthur Mann Jr.
Charles S. Mercein of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Marilyn M. Mercein of La Jolla, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Karen Mercein, to Arthur Kenneth Mann Jr., a son of Arthur and Mary Mann of Lancaster, Pa.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mercein, 24 years old, graduated from Yale University and is a law student at New York University.
Her father, a former fullback for the New York Giants and the Green Bay Packers, is now an executive vice president at I.I.C.
Resources Ltd., a financial-services company in New York.
Her mother is the president of Golf America Inc., a golf-tour packager in La Jolla.


JUNE 28-JULY 4: Clouds of Benzene; A Derailment Triggers Evacuation of Thousands
Plunging from a bridge into the river chasm below, a Burlington Northern railroad tank car carrying a liquid solution of benzene burst last week and spewed a noxious cloud of vapors toward Superior, Wis., and Duluth, Minn., whose residents fled by the tens of thousands.
A few dozen people were treated after inhaling fumes, which caused dizziness, headaches and stinging eyes.


Home Theater Makes Its Pitch
The recent consumer Electronics Show in Chicago -- the traditional indicator of trends in home entertainment -- was dominated by a single theme: home theater, a concept that implies big screens and big sound.
These elaborate and expensive assemblages of gadgetry were hailed in Chicago as a boon to modern living.
Skeptics argue that a home theater is just a glorified television set with souped-up sound.
But there is more to it than that.
A well-designed home theater makes video watching a formidable experience.


Indian-White Rape Case Splits Brazil
With his yellow parrot headdress, Paulinho Paiakan has emerged in recent years as a worldwide symbol of Brazilian Indians' defense of their Amazon homelands.
"A new Gandhi," proclaimed Anita Roddick, who purchases Brazil nut oil from the Kaiapo Indian chief for her international cosmetics chain, the Body Shop.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Perot Told U.S. To Soften Policy On Vietnamese
As a way to win the repatriation of any American servicemen still held in Southeast Asia, Ross Perot unsuccessfully sought to persuade the Reagan White House to begin limited economic relations with Vietnam and to expand diplomatic contacts.
At the time, Washington was taking a harder diplomatic line with Hanoi to achieve the same end.


Janice Sokol, Hans Auerbach
Dr. and Mrs.
E.
Marvin Sokol of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Janice Flora Sokol, to Hans Kevin Auerbach, the son of Ernest Auerbach of Mexico City and Kay J. Auerbach-Vanatta of Corpus Christi, Tex.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sokol, 30 years old, is a technical director for the United States Information Agency's Television Services, a division of the Voice of America in Washington.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is the chief of gastroenterology at Huntington (L.I.) Hospital.
Her mother, Marianne Sokol, is a travel consultant at the Travel Center of Woodbury on Long Island.


Dinkins Is Mastering The Art of the Mayor
Imagine a Mayor who trims $2 billion from New York City's vast bureaucracy in a single year, cobbles together a $500 million surplus despite a recession, moves aggressively against possible police corruption, stands up to the city's labor unions and demonstrates toughness and guile in outwitting state legislators.
David N. Dinkins? Precisely.


Adding Spice To Baseball
To the Sports Editor:
Why not have more teams in the playoffs in major league baseball to have more contending teams, a more exciting season with more meaningful games during the second half of the season and more fan interest throughout the season and throughout both leagues?


POSTINGS: Sea Cliff Restoration; Rx for an 1885 House
An 1885 wood-frame house on Sea Cliff Avenue in downtown Sea Cliff, L.I., that houses Schoelles Pharmacy has regained some of its turn-of-the-century integrity with the help of John C. Packard, a cabinetmaker, and his wife, Rae, a kitchen/bathroom designer.
Two years ago they paid $350,000 for the rundown building, which housed the pharmacy and two apartments.
To get a sense of the original structure before going ahead with a $200,000 renovation, they tracked down historic photos at the Sea Cliff Village Museum.


Trials Need Common Sense
To the Sports Editor:
I'm writing to comment on Michael Janofsky's article ("Final Shock of Trials, Lewis 4th in the 200," The Times, June 29) concerning the possible advantages of discretion in the selection of the United States Olympic Track and Field team.
In no other country in the world do national sports federations do more to damage their chances of victory at the Games than in the United States.
How many medals did the United States give away at these track and field trials?
It is a sad fact that in many sports the hardest part of winning an Olympic medal is not beating the competition at the Games but surviving an archaic selection process that doesn't allow proven international competitors to be injured, sick or just have a "bad day" on the one day every four years when they could qualify for an Olympic team.


Pauline Wolf, Donald Frankel
Pauline Elizabeth Wolf, the daughter of Anne A. Wolf of Weston, Mass., and the late Howard L. Wolf, was married there last evening to Donald Goodfriend Frankel, a son of Robert and Doris Frankel of Jenkintown, Pa.
Rabbi David F. Sandmel officiated at the home of the bride's mother.
Mrs.
Frankel, 31 years old, is a cum laude graduate of Middlebury College and received a master's degree in education from Tufts University.
Her mother is a guidance counselor at Newton (Mass.) North High School.
The bride's father was a psychiatric social worker at the Walker School in Needham, Mass.


Agreement Is Still Sought For Bailouts
As the Nassau County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, marched in a Fourth of July parade observing the 100th anniversary of the Village of Wantagh today, he remained optimistic that Albany would ultimately approve deficit borrowing plans for both Nassau and Suffolk counties.
Both bailout bills were defeated Friday morning as the state Legislature adjourned for the summer, leaving those counties empty-handed and in the midst of a bitter tug-of-war between the Long Island Republican delegation and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and other Democratic leaders in Albany.


Congressional Memo; Luck and Voter Scrutiny Forge a Rare Harmony
Congress left town for the most patriotic of holidays after its most bipartisan votes of the year on Thursday, with Republicans and Democrats both supporting urban aid in the House and Russian aid in the Senate, and, in both chambers, changing unemployment law for both the long and the short term.
Rare combinations of political necessity and lucky timing helped forge agreement on those measures, after months in which the most frequent item of agreement was on the impossibility of breaking the legislative gridlock.
In coming weeks, conflicting party interests and philosophies seem sure to bring renewed conflicts on issues from abortion to hunger and taxes.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.41
125.70
138.30
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5080
1.5353
1.8265
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2011
1.1938
1.1439
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.9230
1.8585
1.6155
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$346.25
$342.50
$369.55
Republic National Bank
Currency:Thurs. NY Close


IN THE COURT OF THE KING OF TONGA
Polynesian societies, and particularly Tonga's, are deeply conservative and concerned with propriety.
The need to be properly attired in the presence of the King would have come as no mystery to Theroux had he followed the cues people were throwing at him from every direction.
Tongans have many indirect strategies -- among them humor and noncooperation -- to cope with visitors who persist in violating their social conventions.
TAMAR GORDON Assistant Professor of Anthropology, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, N.Y.


Pacino's Star Turn Reflects the Glories of Rep
I CERTAINLY RELISHED AL Pacino's performance in "Salome," just as I relished his performance in "Chinese Coffee." But what I found most satisfying was watching him in "Salome"
and
"Chinese Coffee."
Mr.
Pacino is currently appearing in both plays at Circle in the Square on Broadway.
One night, he wraps himself in gold jewelry and luxurious fabrics, as King Herod, a potentate of some renown.
A few nights later, he's Harry Levine, a Greenwich Village novelist of no reputation whatsoever, and he's wearing a threadbare black raincoat and a shapeless Mexican sweater.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 5, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
12
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
2
23
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
1
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disaster to the town.
4
33
PATRIOT GAMES, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan battles terrorists.
5
6
THE HOUSE OF THUNDER, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A woman recalls the horrors that brought her to a hospital.
6
2
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $5.99.) Attending a family funeral, a woman lawyer finds new understanding and love.
7
7
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
8
1
RAVISHED, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $4.99.) When a British beauty summons a man with a dubious past to stop looting on her property the results are romantic.
9
23
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) An elderly woman reminisces about six decades of life in rural Alabama.
10
3
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
11
1
THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A woman insurance investigator probes the murder of a millionaire.
12
5
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
13 *
1
ONLY YOU, by Elizabeth Lowell. (Avon, $4.99.) Poker games, gold-mine claims and romantic ploys in 19th-century Colorado.
14
6
MAN OF MY DREAMS, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A Victorian beauty inadvertently wins the nobleman she had aspired to marry.
15
2
ICE TRAP, by L. A. Graf. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" adventure.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
7
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series, as recollected by the actor who played Greg.
3
22
ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $5.99.) The rescue of two Americans from an Iranian prison.
4 *
11
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
5
7
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
6 *
2
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France, by a London advertising man.
7
51
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
8
59
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
9
1
ROSS PEROT: WHAT DOES HE STAND FOR? by Jacob Drake, Carri Karuhn and Joyce Werges. (Publications International/Signet, $4.99.) A biography of the Presidential hopeful.
10
452
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
47
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
11
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
3
95
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
76
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
15
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Clinton Camp Finds the Time Is Ripe
Taking advantage of the fruits of discipline, circumstance and political serendipity, Gov.
Bill Clinton is poised to enter the Democratic Party's nominating convention in the best strategic position he has enjoyed since his checkered Presidential campaign began.
Mr.
Clinton is using an extended holiday weekend to mull over his Vice Presidential selection and to formulate a general election campaign that presents him as the most substantive and change-oriented candidate in a three-way race.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; In New Haven, a Struggle for Recovery
THOUGH blessed with some of the state's best legitimate theaters and restaurants, a felicitous green flanked by vintage New England churches and the prestige of Yale University, New Haven is still plagued by persistent crime, blighted neighborhoods and crushing taxes.
Some stalled real estate projects are recovering from the recession and others are being born, but progress is spotty and tentative, and the city, like many others in Connecticut, is rattled by the results of a 1991 property revaluation.


Elizabeth Burr, C. G. Hyams
Elizabeth Shepard Burr, a daughter of David Burr of New York and Bettz Burr of Asheville, N.C., was married on June 27 in Big Sur, Calif., to Christopher George Hyams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Hyams of Los Angeles.
The Rev.
Fred Fenton, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony in Pfeiffer State Park.
Ms.
Burr, who is 27 and is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from Princeton University and is a graduate student in library science at the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father is a health-care consultant in New York.
Her mother is a novelist.


IN THE COURT OF THE KING OF TONGA
As a Peace Corps volunteer in the kingdom of Tonga (1976-78), I can attest to the dead-on accuracy of Paul Theroux's impressions of this wacky country ("In the Court of the King of Tonga," June 7).
While there, I wrote a travel piece for The Los Angeles Times, in which I described the King's beautiful daughter as "pleasantly plump." I was called on the red carpet and ordered to write a letter of apology.


Lila Perelson and Keith Adwar
Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel S. Perelson of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Lila Perelson to Keith Adwar, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Adwar of Merrick, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Perelson, 27 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
In August, she will become an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn.
Her father is the managing partner in Perelson Johnson &amp; Rones, an accounting firm in New York.
Her mother, Ruth Perelson, is the director of volunteer services at Beth Abraham Hospital in the Bronx.


RECORD BRIEFS
Janacek: 'The Cunning Little Vixen'
Soloists; Chorus and Orchestra of the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, conducted by Simon Rattle.
EMI CDCB 54212; two CD's.
TXT&gt;
The idea of Janacek in English has merit, and Simon Rattle sounds less hopelessly out of his depth than usual here.
It is even possible to prefer his paint-splattered-on-the-canvas approach to the sobriety of the World's Greatest Janacek Conductor, Charles Mackerras (with the Vienna Philharmonic; London 417 129-2; two CD's).
At least there are splashes of pretty color, though there is not much sensitivity of line.
Compare the Czechoslovak recordings, led by artist-caliber conductors: Vaclav Neumann, Bohumil Gregor and Mr.
Neumann again (the last two in stereo).
The generally satisfactory Covent Garden cast is noteworthy for its bass-baritone contingent: Thomas Allen as the Forester, Nicholas Folwell as Harashta the peddler, Gwynne Howell as the Parson and the Badger.
Lillian Watson does some nice singing as the Vixen; Diana Montague is an adequate Fox.
As a filler, EMI has recycled Mr.
Rattle's sonically impressive 1982 Philharmonia recording of the orchestral rhapsody "Taras Bulba," which is also structurally loose-limbed, but also a cut above most of his recorded work.


Two Parks With Rough-Hewn Beauty
WHAT often makes travel transcendent is the unexpected discovery at the top of a mountain, down a cobblestone alley or, in the case of a recent camping trip through eastern Canada, at the end of the Skyline Trail in Nova Scotia's Cape Breton Highlands National Park.
After hiking about two miles along the trail, which winds along the ridge of a headland cliff, my wife, Vickie, and I rested on a boulder to take in the view of the vast Gulf of St.
Lawrence.
Almost immediately, we heard what became an incessant splashing about a quarter mile off shore.
Using binoculars, we scanned the horizon and soon spotted it -- a school of perhaps three dozen pilot whales parading from north to south.


When Gravity Strikes Back
WHY BUILDINGS FALL DOWN
How Structures Fail.
By Matthys Levy and Mario Salvadori.
Illustrated by Kevin Woest. 334 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $24.95.


Donna Dorian, Marion Wall
Donna Margaret Dorian, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward S. Dorian of Purchase, N.Y., was married yesterday to Marion Pryor Wall, a son of Tilda Caldwell Wall of Chattanooga, Tenn., and the late Junius F. Wall.
The Rev.
Karekin Kasperian performed the Armenian Apostolic ceremony at All Saints' Church in Harrison, N.Y.


St. Croix Gets A New Hotel
The first new hotel built on St.
Croix in the United States Virgin Islands since Hurricane Hugo struck in September 1989 has opened on the island's north shore.
The 38-room, $2.5 million hotel, the Hibiscus Beach, is west of Christiansted, St.
Croix's main town, and about 200 yards from the Cormorant Beach Hotel.
The Hibiscus Beach is on the former site of Cathy's Fancy Guesthouse, which was destroyed in the hurricane, and is completely new, consisting of six two-story buildings and a single one-story structure.
Jerry Tobin, a hotelier who operates the 38-room Cormorant Beach, set up a limited partnership and bought the 3.3-acre site in early 1991.
Each Hibiscus Beach room has air-conditioning, telephone, cable TV, radio and mini-bar, and patio or balcony facing the Caribbean.
The sand beach is nearly a half-mile long and the hotel also has a freshwater pool and restaurant and bar.
Two of the rooms meet Federal specifications for the handicapped.
Rates: $100 a night for a double room, $90 single, in the March 1 to Dec. 21 season; $175 double, $165 single in winter.


Streetscapes: Glen Span Arch in Central Park; A Romantic Vista Of 1865 Re-Emerges
OVER the last year teams of workers under the supervision of the Central Park Conservancy have dredged waterways, cleared underbrush, reset craggy boulders and rebuilt rustic bridges to bring to life one of Olmsted and Vaux's most exciting landscapes, the 1865 Glen Span Arch area just off 101st Street and Central Park West.
The $295,000 project, which will be completed this summer, will open up a part of the park that most people never see, but to which visitors will return.


Q and A
Tax Refund for Co-op Question: I live in a co-op apartment.
The board recently won from the local town a real estate tax reimbursement of about $400,000.
This money was put into a reserve fund.
I filed a claim for my share -- $1,800 -- and was denied it.
Can the board do this? . . .
Donald Forester, Scarborough Manor, N.Y.
Answer: Probably.
According to Marc Luxemberg, a lawyer who is also a vice president of the Council of New York Cooperatives, in most co-ops the board has no legal obligation to return an excess in taxes or in maintenance payments made by shareholders.
"In the bylaws of most co-ops," said Mr.
Luxemberg, "there can be no collecting maintenance retroactively. By the same token, shareholders are not entitled to rebates when there is a surplus."
The exception would be, he said, if your co-op grants shareholders some kind of a year-end rebate.
Although you will not get this in cash, you will benefit from the tax ruling because the effect will be to lower the amount that you and other owners will pay in the future.
Switching Apartments Question: My aunt and uncle live in a rent-controlled apartment in a building that has been converted to a co-op.
They have been offered a larger, vacant, rent-stabilized unit in the same building.
Would there be any risks in their moving out of their rent-controlled apartment and into the larger apartment? . . .
Ellen Stern, Manhattan Answer: There could be.
Under normal circumstances, when a rent-regulated apartment is vacated in a building that has been converted to a co-op, it is no longer governed by the rules of rent regulation.
The sponsor or other owner has the right to sell or rent the apartment at market rates.
However, according to Joseph D'Agosta, an acting deputy commissioner for rent regulation for the State Division of Housing and Community Renewal, a sponsor or other owner could relinquish those rights.
The owner's motivation might be that there was a buyer for the apartment that the rent-regulated tenants occupied.
In any case, your relatives must be sure that the apartment they accept will be recognized as a rent-stabilized unit by the State Division of Housing and Community Renewal.
For further information on how to proceed, contact the state division rent administration office at 718-639-6400.
Deducting Workspace Question: My husband and I live in a one-bedroom co-op.
We both work in the apartment about 50 to 75 percent of the year.
Our accountant advised us a while ago against writing off part of the apartment on our income taxes because there could be a complication when we decide to sell.
However, we have converted our bedroom entirely into workspace.
It is easily one-quarter to one-third of the apartment's space.
Can we write off a portion of the mortgage against taxes? . . .
Kim Hanneman, Manhattan Answer: Yes.
According to Neil O'Keeffe, a spokesman for the Internal Revenue Service, if you use part of your home regularly and exclusively for business purposes, you may be able to deduct a part of the operating expenses on your home like mortgage, utilities, and insurance payments.
But expenses are deductible only if the space is in your principal place of business.
And if you take a business deduction for anything that is also used for personal or family household purposes, such as a computer, then you must limit the deduction to that portion of the expense that is attributable only to its business use.
The complication to which your accountant referred probably had to do with depreciation rules.
If you depreciate the part of your residence used for the business, it would affect your ability to postpone paying the tax on any profit when you sell.
For additional information, consult I.R.S. publication 587, Business Use of Your Home, which can be ordered by telephoning 800-829-3676.


Weeds Need Love, Too
MY manure pile is covered with a little forest of pokeweed, one large sunflower and, lately, all the mulberries that have fallen from a nearby tree that sprouted up about 20 years ago.
Some might call this mulberry as much a weed as the poke, and so, too, the sunflower.
A weed, as the saying goes, is anything you don't want in your garden.


JUNE 28-JULY 4: The Economy; A Jump in Unemployment For Second Straight Month Is Bad News for Bush
Although President Bush has presided over three and a half years of unusually slow economic growth, his campaign staff had been encouraged by studies showing that voters are influenced heavily by how the economy does in the six months before Election Day.
But Bush supporters who were cheered by the economic pickup in the first three months of the year suffered a rude shock last week when the Government announced that the jobless rate had risen from 7.5 percent in May to 7.8 percent in June, its highest level in eight years.
It was the second large jump in two months; the April rate was 7.2 percent.
"It's not good news," President Bush said.
Instead, he hailed as good news the Federal Reserve's decision to cut the discount rate to 3 percent; it was the lowest level since 1963 for the rate at which the Fed lends banks money.
The President and many economists hope the move will spur banks to lend more and businesses and consumers to borrow more.
But many analysts say the main reason the economy seems to be held down by invisible weights is that the debt explosion of the Reagan years is preventing consumer spending from taking off.


A Cake, a Book, A Toast
Honoring a magazine, some special authors and a special park.


Kazoos at Katonah Herald a Family Series
KAZOOS at Katonah, Peter and a Pumpkin Eater at Lyndhurst, Russian dancers in Yonkers, Camp Granada in Mamaroneck: quite a family entertainment week is shaping up in Westchester.
Youngsters are urged to bring their own kazoos, although whirly tubes, triangles and drums will be provided as the Saturday Brass Quintet leads audience members in fanfares and other "participatory adventures in brass" at the first set of three family programs at Caramoor.
These will be held on Friday and Saturday at 11 A.M. and 1 P.M. both days.
The quintet will add its own set of marches, dances and probably a bit of ragtime, too.


Yardstick Of Success
To the Editor:
In his article "Why the Yanks Don't Make It Over Here"  [ June 14 ]  Matt Wolf distorts the truth for the convenience of his premise.
In stating that "I'm Not Rappaport" (which I produced) had a much briefer run in London than New York, he implies that the play was a failure.
The facts are that the play ran for nearly a year, recouped its initial investment after four months and had two tours of England.


At Work; Bidding the Wage Wars Goodbye
When Ron Moore went to New York last spring to appear on a television show, he was immune to the enticements of that holy city of conspicuous consumption.
Not for Mr.
Moore, an avowed skinflint, designer celery at triple-digit prices in the latest Manhattan chic-ery.
Mr.
Moore and his wife, Melodie, run Skinflint News, a monthly journal of frugality and practical advice, out of their Palm Harbor, Fla., home.
Mr.
Moore is no mere sunshine skinflint.
Because he knew the television appearance would give him a $50 food allowance , he packed a brown bag at home.
"I had a peanut butter and jelly sandwich and a fried bologna sandwich with mustard, a huge bag of popcorn and an orange from a neighbor's tree," Mr.
Moore recounted in the May issue of Skinflint News.
He ate doughnuts at the noon-time taping, during which he suggested such money-saving strategies as collecting the final slivers of bar soap and grinding them in a food processor into laundry powder.
He saved his real appetite for the airline lunch on the flight back to Tampa-St.
Petersberg and arrived home with the $50 intact.
"It went into the general fund," he said.


Lori Lei Beason, Philip S. P. Held
Lori Lei Beason, the daughter of Rose Ann Beason of Neptune Beach, Fla., and the late Robert G. Beason, was married yesterday to Philip Samuel Potter Held, the son of Dr.
Virginia Held of New York and the late Hans W. Held.
The Rev.
Aaron F. Usher Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at the summer home of the bridegroom's mother in Jamestown, R.I.
Ms.
Beason-Held, 27 years old, is a doctoral candidate in anatomy at Boston University.
She and her husband graduated from Jacksonville University.
Her mother directs compensatory education for Duval County in Jacksonville, Fla.


U.S. Embassies In Baltic States
The United States Embassies in Vilnius, Lithuania; Riga, Latvia, and Tallinn, Estonia, have moved into permanent facilities and can provide a limited range of consular services, including emergency assistance to American citizens.
The upgraded status of the embassies, which were opened when the three countries became independent last year, was announced in travel advisories issued by the State Department.
The advisories also said that the three Baltic states have established a reciprocal visa policy under which a valid visa for any of the three will be accepted for admission to all.
Visas may be obtained at the Lithuanian and Latvian Embassies in Washington and the Estonian Consulate in New York.
Lithuanian visas may also be obtained free on arrival at Vilnius Airport but they are valid for only 10 days and require a visit to the local Ministry of Foreign Affairs in order to extend them.


Brown Outlines Anticorruption Moves
By reputation, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown is more a master planner than a politician.
But amid recent allegations of police corruption, he has had to try to be both.
Mayor David N. Dinkins recently appointed a panel to investigate the corruption allegations and also proposed an all-civilian review board to look into complaints of police brutality and misconduct.


Nina Russell, Thomas Rubin
Nina Devol Russell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold S. Russell of Washington, was married yesterday to Thomas Cort Rubin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic P. Rubin of Old Westbury, L.I.
Rabbi Eugene J. Lipsey performed the ceremony at the summer home of the bride's parents in Lakeside, Mich.
Ms.
Russell, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a medical student at Case Western Reserve University.
She and her husband graduated from Yale University.
Her father is a vice president of the FMC Corporation in Chicago.


Boat House Rock
Party in Central Park, for Amfar's AIDS research.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'SHREW' IN THE GRASS
The Shakespeare Festival at Boscobel opens its fifth season with a production of "The Taming of the Shrew," beginning on Saturday at 8 P.M. and continuing for 16 performances through Aug. 2.
Theatergoers may bring a picnic meal at 6 P.M. or order one in advance through the box office.


Budapest Ghetto
To the Editor: Last spring, my late husband and I made our own Jewish identity tour to Vienna, Prague and Budapest.
It was a most rewarding experience.
Judith Ingram's article reminded me that I have not followed up on a project I had planned.
She describes the metal weeping willow tree by Imre Varga, with a leaf naming each Hungarian victim of the Holocaust, in the cemetery behind the formidable major synagogue.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Shows Off Regular-Guy Side on the Fourth
The Munich summit, the crystal chandeliers, the crisp German wines and drama of world statesmanship may have been just hours away, but President Bush showed little sign of caring much today.
Mr.
Bush was engrossed in a more pressing role: that of George Herb, stock-car buff, weekend first baseman and embodiment of the down-home family values that the White House is trying hard to copyright in this election year.
Flying early today to Florida's east coast, the President swapped his suit coat for an open-neck Western shirt, rolled up the sleeves and popped a thick chaw of gum in his mouth before kicking off a 400-mile auto race at Daytona International Speedway.


From the Last Row, a Show of Summer
THIS is about spikes.
Not the kind that jazz up cocktails, but flower spikes, the kind that jazz up gardens.
Admiration for spikes started last fall during a catalogue search.
The perennial border needed something tall and stately to give it height as well as some kind of spectacular summer flower display.
The plant choices were many.
But the likely candidates settled down to one, the foxtail lilies (Eremurus).


At Documenta, It's Survival Of the Loudest
Documenta 9 is the biggest, costliest version yet of the behemoth of contemporary art exhibitions, which takes over this hard-bitten city for a summer every four or five years.
It is also a dud of the first order.
Lifeless, pointless, the show rambles on without any sense that a guiding vision or set of standards has been applied to the choice and arrangement of the works by roughly 200 artists from nearly 40 countries.
There are outstanding things on view, but they must fight for attention in an environment where the strongest, loudest and most aggressive thrive.
As a result, the installations and outdoor works that carve out a space of their own -- by artists like Bill Viola, Bruce Nauman, Ellsworth Kelly, Rebecca Horn, Gary Hill, Tadashi Kawamata and Ilya Kabakov -- have the best chance to make an impression.
But paintings, even the excellent examples of Susan Rothenberg, Gerhard Richter, Per Kirkeby, Brice Marden, Pat Steir and Juan Usle, are mostly overwhelmed in this crammed, dog-eat-dog atmosphere.
The show becomes counterproductive to much of the art it purportedly advocates.


From the Last Row, a Show of Summer
THIS is about spikes.
Not the kind that jazz up cocktails, but flower spikes, the kind that jazz up gardens.
Admiration for spikes started last fall during a catalogue search.
The perennial border needed something tall and stately to give it height as well as some kind of spectacular summer flower display.
The plant choices were many.
But the likely candidates settled down to one, the foxtail lilies (Eremurus).


Daryn L. Abramson, David Grossman
Mr. and Mrs.
Carl N. Abramson of Malvern, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Daryn Lisa Abramson, to David William Grossman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Grossman of New York.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Abramson, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from Tufts University.
She will begin her third year at Brooklyn Law School in September.
Her father is the associate vice provost for information systems and computing at the University of Pennsylvania.


A Look Back At Newport And the Paris
Louis Auchincloss, the author, and Deborah Turbeville, the photographer, are teaming up again.
They collaborated on the 1981 book "Unseen Versailles" and plan to give Newport, R.I., the same treatment.
"It's mainly going to be about the Newport of the gilded age," Ms.
Turbeville said.
"It will be a meditation on what Newport was." Harry N. Abrams will publish the book.


Virtue -- Empty Virtue -- on Health
The New York Legislature surely meant well last week when it passed a radical health insurance reform bill.
The law embodies two estimable principles.
It requires commercial insurers to accept virtually any applicant, and forbids them to charge the chronically ill more than other people.
The trouble with the new law is that it can't work.
Imposed piecemeal, these reforms aren't enforceable.
Eventually, Albany will have to motivate insurers to enroll high-risk applicants.
That will require a far more subtle approach.


Valerie Hartman, Jeffrey Levy
Mr. and Mrs.
William E. K. Hartman of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Valerie Hartman, to Jeffrey Charles Levy, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Paul G. Levy of Lawrenceville, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hartman, 28 years old, is a lawyer at Turner Broadcasting Systems in Atlanta.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Gloria Gay Coats, an apparel maker in New York.


Moderates On Court Defy Predictions
THE center held.
That was the story of this surprising and fascinating Supreme Court term, a term that appeared only months ago to have all the makings of a conservative counterrevolution but that in the end produced powerful, if qualified, reaffirmations of some of the Court's most important modern precedents.


For Foot Fashionists
High tops, low tops, these sneakers are tops around the New York region.
The only question: To tie or not?


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Avon, Conn. 359,000
184 Waterville Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 300-year-old Colonial; beehive oven, 5 fireplaces, c/a, 3 acres; taxes $5,122.
Guilford, Conn. 605,000
29 Grove Hill Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 48-year-old Cape Cod; water views, large deck, skylights, 0.75 acre; taxes $5,972.
Hartford, Conn. 82,500
48 Burnham Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old bungalow; finished basement w/wetbar, formal dining room, vinyl siding; taxes $1,429.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 498,000
15 Ridge Drive  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 60-year-old Norman Tudor; 2 fireplaces, sun room, dining room, family room; taxes $7,731.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 309,000
Old Roaring Brook Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 72-year-old colonial; fireplace, dining room, 1-car garage, 1.2 acres; taxes $5,521.
Pleasantville, N.Y. 252,500
137 Sarles Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; fireplace, dining room, eat-in kitchen, rec room, workshop, porch; taxes $4,723.
OTHER AREAS Metuchen, N.J. 204,900
25 Wistar Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old ranch; skylight, full basement, fireplace; taxes $4,585.
Ramsey, N.J. 164,000
126 North Island Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, eat-in-kitchen, near schools and shopping; taxes $3,351.
Smithtown, L.I. 190,000
4 Grassy Pond Drive  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room w/fireplace, 2-car garage, pool; taxes $4,800.


Illusions Behind School Consolidation
Thank you for informing the public  [ "Schools, Losing State Aid, Ponder Sharing Costs," June 22 ]  that there is no pot of gold at the end of the consolidation rainbow, that reorganization does not always save money and that consolidation often brings with it educational disadvantages.
But, most of all, thank you for quoting a superintendent who reminds us that the purpose of school districts "must be to serve the children." Those of us entrusted with the fiscal responsibilities of a school district will continue to explore ways to cut costs, by reorganizing or consolidating or sharing services or a combination of all three.
But we must not forget that our primary responsibility is to "serve the children"; nor can we forget that education is the solution to many of society's ills -- not the problem.
BARBARA G. ROGUS Huntington The writer is a member of the Harborfields School Board.


Alerts Are Issued at 2 Nuclear Power Plants
Thousands of gallons of radioactive reactor coolant spilled in a containment building at a Nebraska nuclear power plant on Friday, and a transformer exploded near a Pennsylvania reactor yesterday.
Both plants were shut down and alerts were declared but later lifted.
Utility officials said there was no danger to the public or workers and no radiation was released.


Dina Roskind, David Walsh
Dina Lee Roskind, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Robert Roskind of Purchase, N.Y., was married Thursday evening to David John Walsh, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Walsh of Duxbury, Mass.
Justice Samuel G. Fredman of State Supreme Court in White Plains performed the ceremony at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Walsh, 22 years old, and her husband, 25, graduated from Western New England College.
Her father is a real-estate investor in New York.


Amy B. Rosenbaum, Thomas L. Clark
Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Rosenbaum of Springfield, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Beth Rosenbaum to Thomas Lloyd Clark, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Clark of Peshtigo, Wis.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Rosenbaum, 28 years old, is the art historian at the Circle Fine Art Corporation in Chicago, a national chain of art galleries.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree in art history from the University of Chicago.
Her father is an investor in Springfield.


Batten Down the Hatches, Tie Down the Patio Set
THE Atlantic hurricane season extends from June 1 through Nov. 30.
Although most hurricanes that strike the eastern United States occur in August, September and October, knowing how to protect houses and property, as well as taking appropriate precautions, can be of enormous benefit.
In a hurricane, high winds and flooding are the chief causes of damage.
To protect the house from wind, keep dead wood pruned from trees and avoid letting large branches overhang buildings.


Torie Clarke, James Graham
Dr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Clarke of Sewickley, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Victoria Clarke to James Brian Graham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Graham of Channel Islands, Calif.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Clarke, 33 years old, is known as Torie.
She is the press secretary in Washington for the Bush-Quayle re-election campaign.
She graduated from George Washington University.


More Thoughts on the S.E.C. and Mutual Funds . . .
To the Editor:
Congratulations to Barry Guthary for his insightful analysis of the Securities and Exchange Commission's proposed rules to govern mutual funds ("The S.E.C. Misses on Mutual Funds," June 14).
Having both sold and bought mutual funds (before my retirement), I agree with every point he makes -- particularly his emphasis on small investors.
The bulk of people likely to own stock are likely to do so through some kind of mutual fund, including variable annuities.
A clearer and more comprehensive prospectus would aid greatly in choosing among the hundreds of funds now available.


RECORD BRIEFS
Villa-Lobos: The Piano Concertos
Cristina Ortiz, piano; Royal Philharmonic conducted by Miguel Gomez-Martinez.
London 430 628-2; two CD's.
TXT&gt;
The great Brazilian Heitor Villa-Lobos was one of the most prolific composers of the 20th century; there seems to be no end to his literature for orchestra, let alone his many chamber and instrumental works.
His music was better served on records in the LP era than it is now on CD; not one of the 12 symphonies (hardly his best work, it is true) is currently available.
His frequently bizarre juxtapositions of lush romanticism and willful experimentation, shimmering with the raw, earthy glamour of Brazilian folk music, may be a bit too high in cholesterol for the Lite 90's.
Yet his was an eloquent and original voice.
Among the most bewitching pieces he ever wrote are the piano concertos, composed at the end of his career, between 1945 and 1957.
The legendary premiere recording of the Fifth Concerto, performed by Felicia Blumenthal and conducted by the composer, was reissued last year by EMI in a boxed set, "Villa-Lobos by Himself" (CDZF 67229).
Otherwise the piano concertos have not been available for years.
Now London offers the five concertos, well performed with idiomatic flair by the Brazilian pianist Cristina Ortiz.
Though each work was composed for a different pianist, Ms.
Ortiz brings out an underlying unity.
The Third and Fourth Concertos, for example, flicker between moods of darkness and light, nostalgia and joy, with a quicksilvery facility that seems to imply that these dichotomies are all aspects of a single, mysterious truth.
A true Latin, Villa-Lobos was happy only when he was sad, and his lightest moments are shot through with melancholy.


A Quiet Majesty Sails the Hudson With Tall Ships
Majestic in a gray morning mist, the world's largest gathering of tall ships in this century sailed out of the past and up the great amphitheater of New York Harbor yesterday in a stately salute to Independence Day and the 500th anniversary of Christopher Columbus's voyage of discovery to the New World.
Canvas set, pennants fluttering, a breeze singing in the rigging, the 11-mile procession of 34 windjammers and other craft -- 270 ships from 37 nations -- moved across the whitecap-flecked harbor and up the Hudson in an awesome and graceful five-hour parade, reviewed by a flotilla of smaller boats, one million people on shore and a national television audience.


Car Bomb Kills Two in Town in Lebanon


Baboon Liver Recipient Is Taken Off Critical List
Doctors have upgraded the condition of the first human to receive a transplanted baboon liver, and they say he continues to improve as well as any patient who has received a human liver.
The patient is a 35-year-old man whose identity is being withheld at his request.
Today, doctors described his condition as serious, taking his name off the critical list.


Should War Be Left to The Generals?
SHERIDAN
The Life and Wars of General Phil Sheridan.
By Roy Morris Jr.
Illustrated. 464 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $25.
A BATTLE FROM THE START
The Life of Nathan Bedford Forrest.
By Brian Steel Wills.
Illustrated. 457 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $30.


A Colonial Token Of Appreciation
TEN score and sixteen years ago, a group of men met in Philadelphia to sign a document that would revolutionize the colonies and, in years to come, the world.
It was a daredevil decision that could have easily cost them their lives had things worked out differently.
But the only expression of revolution in the form of any coin minted before the signing of the Declaration of Independence was a strange coin that may have begun life as a commemorative medal, the Pitt token.
Until the Pitt token, all colonial coins, whether minted in the colonies or abroad, were either conspicuously bland or even pro-British in design with the busts of British kings.


Nassau Prisoners Fault AIDS Care
A PRISONER with AIDS at the Nassau County Jail recently called the Long Island Association for AIDS Care to complain that he was not getting his medication at the prescribed times.
He must take AZT five times a day, he said, but it is given to him only three times and the dosages are doubled.
Another inmate who has AIDS phoned L.I.A.A.C., the Island's only full-service AIDS organization, because, he said, he was not being taken on a regular basis to the Infectious Disease Clinic at the Nassau County Medical Center, where prisoners are treated.
He told Jeffrey Reynolds, the organization's advocacy and communications coordinator, that his physical complaints were often ignored, that he had signed up for sick call on a Tuesday and still had not been seen one week later.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11  CLOUDED ECONOMIC SUMMIT


Americans Lose a Voice Of Tradition
Gifted with absolute omniscience, infallible ears and impeccable taste, we music critics sometimes forget that we are each granted but a single view of musical life, a limited perspective on an intricate organism.
We are like blind men studying the elephant, each groping for knowledge in a distinct way.
For some the primary aspect of the animal is the texture of its skin and muscles; for others the primary interest is in its habits of feeding and procreation; some focus on the footprints being left in the mud; still others are interested in the creature's evolution.
As the number of publications reviewing music has decreased, and as the space for criticism of art music has tightened, readers and critics have been receiving narrower glimpses of this cultural life form.
The range of views became still more restricted last week, when Andrew Porter left his post as music critic of The New Yorker, which he has held for 20 years; his final column coincidentally appeared just as it was announced that Tina Brown, the editor of Vanity Fair, would become the new editor of The New Yorker.
Mr.
Porter is returning to London, where he started his career, to become the critic of The Observer.
His New Yorker columns from 1972 through the 1985-86 season are collected in five published volumes.


A la Carte; The Many Lives of the Ubiquitous Bagel
THE North Shore Bagel Company, at 108 Woodbury Road in the Woodbury Junction Plaza, next to the Long Island Rail Road tracks, offers more, much more, than bagels.
Its bagels are just fine, but North Shore Bagel is also a restaurant, outdoor cafe and take-out delicatessen.
The light, airy, high-ceiling establishment with nine tables inside and three umbrella-covered ones outdoors is anything but the usual bare-bones bagel carryout with 10 or 12 varieties in wire bins.


New &amp; Noteworthy
WHAT WAS MINE: Stories, by Ann Beattie. (Vintage, $10.) Ann Beattie continues to chronicle the angst of people caught in the middle, whether between marriages and careers or youth and old age.
Last year our reviewer, Ron Hansen, said she "has forsaken irony for honest introspection, and her famous detachment has given way to greater sympathy and tenderness."
A PASSIONATE APPRENTICE: The Early Journals, 1897-1909, by Virginia Woolf.
Edited by Mitchell A. Leaska. (Harvest/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) These diaries, drawn from seven notebooks, trace the life of Virginia Woolf from the ages of 15 to 27, when she was beginning work on her first published novel, "The Voyage Out." Although this period included a nervous breakdown and the death of several close family members, "the impression to be gained . . . is of resilience and determination, and an unquenchable appetite for life," Isabel Colegate said here last year.


Albert L. Fiorillo Is Dead at 93; Ex-Judge Served in Westchester
Albert L. Fiorillo, a retired judge in Westchester County, died on Thursday at the Andrus Retirement Community in Hastings-on-Hudson.
He was 93 years old and a resident of Yonkers until six years ago.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


On the Road, Three Places for Lunch
PLACES that are popular with local people for reliable fare in agreeable, casual surroundings are difficult for out-of-towners to find.
Here, then, for travelers around the state are three places where a pleasant meal can be enjoyed without ado.
The most popular spot in Pomfret for casual eating is the VANILLA BEAN CAFE.
The building, a restored 19th-century barn, is hard to miss, even though it is set back from the road.
In front is a large gravel parking area with a few umbrella tables.


Cubs Are Determined Not to Become a Part Of National Movement
After nearly a quarter of a century, the National League is on the threshold of becoming geographically correct.
Commissioner Fay Vincent, acting on a request by many of the league's club owners, plans to announce his decision on realignment in the next day or two.
The feeling among people in the league is that he will move two teams in the Eastern time zone, the Atlanta Braves and the Cincinnati Reds, to the Eastern Division and two teams west of those cities, the Chicago Cubs and the St.
Louis Cardinals, to the Western Division.


Getting to Know the Italian Flat Bread Focaccia
TEN years ago, not many Americans knew what focaccia was.
But this Italian flat bread has become increasingly popular, whether it is served with a meal, as a snack, as an hors d'ouvre or even a sandwich.
It is a boon for entertaining on the weekend because the dough can be made ahead of time and frozen.
Focaccia is made with a dough similar to the one used for pizza, but it comes out with a thicker crust.
It is good served hot from the oven, flavored with sage or rosemary, or topped with onions and sun-dried tomatoes.
A thick focaccia makes a great picnic sandwich, sliced in half and filled with all manner of ingredients: grilled eggplant, radicchio, onions or sausage, sauteed mushrooms or the classic summer combination of mozzarella, tomato and basil.


Op-Ed Columnists
The days on which Op-Ed columnists appear are customarily rotated every six months.
Here is the schedule through Dec. 31:


Disagreeing to Agree
TV, the cable network playing the music that appeals to young minds, had a good idea: it would make its facilities available to candidates for President, thereby appealing to pulsing brains as well as tapping feet.
"Tonight on MTV," headlined the proud network's full-page ad in some of the nation's most prestigious newspapers, "Bill Clinton faces the generation that holds the future in their hands."


Conversations/Anna Deavere Smith; Racial Turmoil in America: Tales from a Woman Who Listened
"WE are a country of strangers," says the actress and writer Anna Deavere Smith.
"And we are having a great deal of difficulty with our differences. Because ultimately, we lack the ability to look at specific human beings."
It is a warm, sunny afternoon in that country of strangers, and Ms.
Smith is standing at the corner of President Street and Utica Avenue in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn.
Next to her is a large X, the color of blood, painted on the gray sidewalk.
The X marks the place where Gavin Cato, age 7, was crushed last summer when a car driven by a Hasidic man accidentally jumped the curb.
Just a few blocks away is the corner where a 29-year-old Hasidic scholar named Yankel Rosenbaum was surrounded by about 20 black men and stabbed to death in the rioting that followed Gavin's death, rioting that filled four hot summer nights in what were perhaps the worst racial disturbances in New York City since the 1960's.


Worlds Apart in Queens
The tenants of the Pomonok Houses in Queens while away summer afternoons in aluminum lawn chairs, as children play along shady walkways and neat courtyards.
They refer to their homes as garden apartments, not the public housing project that it is.
Some call it the Pomonok Country Club.
At the Astoria Houses, about six miles away in Queens, tenants strolling along the walkways encounter rats rummaging through Dumpsters, drug dealers selling crack, and occasional gunfights, day and night.
They watch their children carefully, and double- or triple-lock their doors.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; In New Haven, a Struggle for Recovery
THOUGH blessed with some of the state's best legitimate theaters and restaurants, a felicitous green flanked by vintage New England churches and the prestige of Yale University, New Haven is still plagued by persistent crime, blighted neighborhoods and crushing taxes.
Some stalled real estate projects are recovering from the recession and others are being born, but progress is spotty and tentative, and the city, like many others in Connecticut, is rattled by the results of a 1991 property revaluation.


Jane Wiener, Craig Parish
Jane Alexandra Wiener, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joel H. Wiener of Teaneck, N.J., was married Thursday evening to Craig Alan Parish, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard I. Parish of Cranford, N.J.
Rabbi Herschel G. Cohen performed the ceremony at the Lincoln Square Synagogue in New York.
Mrs.
Parish, 25 years old, was until recently an English teacher at Ridgewood (N.J.) High School.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
Her father is a professor of history at City College.
Her mother, Suzanne Wiener, is a special-education teacher at Thomas Jefferson Middle School in Teaneck.


IN THE COURT OF THE KING OF TONGA
Unless things have changed drastically since I lived in Nuku'alofa as a Peace Corps volunteer 20 years ago, it is untrue that Tongans have "no desire to see strangers." To the contrary, I found Tongans intensely curious about the outside world.
And I was genuinely surprised that Theroux found these gentle people "abrupt, mocking and quarrelsome." Could the Tongans, who are more sophisticated than Theroux may think, have felt they were being patronized?
FRED DUBOSE
New York, N.Y.


Tennis? Shhh!
To the Sports Editor:
Several ideas are being discussed to change the direction of tennis back from the new power game that is altering the sport by eliminating rallies, and thus spectator interest.
These include thoughts on changing the balls, surfaces, banning the wide-body power racquets, returning to the pre-1959 foot fault rule and even eliminating the second serve, etc.


Ruth Frances Butler, Sean Eugene Rogers
Ruth Frances Butler, a daughter of Peter L. Butler of Boston and the late Marjorie A. Butler, was married June 27 in Newton Centre, Mass., to Sean Eugene Rogers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Rogers of Dundalk, Ireland.
The Rev.
Carl P. Ijams performed the ceremony at the Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Rogers, 28 years old, is an intern at Steffian Bradley Associates, a Boston architectural design firm.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
Mr.
Rogers, 29, is an account representative at Mead Data Central in Boston.
He graduated from St.
Patrick's College in Maynooth, Ireland, and received an M.B.A. degree from Northeastern University.


Fiscal Winners Rethink Homestead Rebate
Call it Republican Budget II: the Sequel.
A day after the New Jersey Republicans' $14.6 billion state budget began its one-year run last week to decidedly mixed reviews, two Republican Senators introduced the first legislation to amend it.


China Will Try Official Linked to Tiananmen
A high-ranking official who supported the Tiananmen democracy movement is about to go on trial, a Chinese who was briefed on the case said today.
The official, Bao Tong, was political secretary to the Politburo's Standing Committee and a member of the Central Committee.
He is the highest official to have been imprisoned in connection with the Tiananmen movement three years ago.


ECONOMIC POWERS FACING THEIR LIMITS AT MUNICH SUMMIT
At the summit meeting of leaders of the world's seven most powerful industrial democracies beginning Monday in Munich, the dominant problems will be global economic stagnation and the danger of violent ethnic conflict in the former Communist countries.
Since the same problems preoccupied the last summit meeting here a year ago, there will be an air of pessimism at the gathering, which many of the leaders had hoped would be a post-cold-war celebration of the triumph over Communism.


DEFIANTLY INCORRECT
Thank you for Timothy Egan's warm and compelling story on John Callahan ("Defiantly Incorrect," June 7).
What would be presumptuous -- even sacrilegious -- for the rest of us becomes high art in the hands of Callahan because the material is based on truth and transformed by the alchemy of the man's wit and bravery and devastating honesty.


Animation's Bad Boy Returns, Unrepentant
AN EXHAUSTED ANIMATOR stands at the door of the director Ralph Bakshi's office.
"Come see if you can live with this," he says.
Mr.
Bakshi rises.
He is so tense that he is calm.
Only five days remain until he has to surrender "Cool World," his $28 million live-action/animation feature, to Paramount.
In the manner of a bear roused from hibernation, Mr.
Bakshi lumbers into a dark, overly air-conditioned editing room and watches a cartoon cat being flattened by a falling anvil.


Serbs Easily Outflank U.N. Arms Embargo
An international arms embargo against Yugoslavia has been thwarted by a steady clandestine flow of arms into the area and huge caches of weapons already stockpiled for decades by the Yugoslav Army, Western military and intelligence officials say.
According to the Western experts, the arsenals of the Yugoslav Army are largely in the hands of Serbian forces.
In addition, they said, the Serbs have supplemented these stockpiles with 14,000 tons of weapons purchased from Christian militias in Beirut shortly before the United Nations ban took effect a year ago.


Behind Bars, Learning to Be Afraid
A year ago, Rafael, a 220-pound, 15-year-old man-child from Washington Heights, plunged into deep trouble with the law by smashing a credit card machine and his bare fist through a display case in a neighborhood variety store.
The provocation, he said, was the the store clerk's refusal to let him get a video game out of layaway without the layaway receipt he had misplaced.
The other day, Rafael found himself alone and afraid and locked into a stuffy, concrete-block Rikers Island cell 8 feet by 6 feet, the size of a Fifth Avenue closet.


A World of Diversity From Realm of Canoe
Emerging from the mouth of the Androscoggin River into the northern end of Lake Umbagog in our heavily laden canoe, we had to make a decision: The northwest wind that had been born two hours before was stiffening and there were about two miles of open water to cross.
Should we go for it or should we wait until sundown, when, it was probable, the wind would die down?
Umbagog, which straddles the Maine-New Hampshire border near Errol, N.H., is a large, shallow lake about 12 miles long with more than 40 miles of shoreline, most of which has no dwellings.
It is well known for its swiftly developing rough water.


Valuable Lessons From a Master of Light
GREAT lighting makes great pictures. If there is a hero in photography, it is light.
Truly creative photographers choose and shape lighting as carefully as they frame and expose their subjects.
The best photographers are comfortable with the entire range of lighting possibilities -- from floodlight to daylight to moonlight.


The Ultimate Hauling Machine?
FIRST, a brief quiz on today's topic, which is BMW.
The answers will be woven skillfully into the text.
Unless I forget.
1. What do BMW's initials stand for?


Linda Brockelman William Ogden Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Anton H. Brockelman Jr. of Simsbury, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Linda Maughan Brockelman to William S. Ogden Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ogden of Annapolis, Md.
A June 1993 wedding is planned.
Miss Brockelman is an institutional equity sales representative for Wheat, First Securities in Richmond.
She graduated from Williams College and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Virginia, as did her fiance.
Her father is the president of Lijoma Sales Inc., a distributor of coal and landscaping supplies in Torrington, Conn.


Making a Difference; Writing a $1.2 Billion Ticket to China
As the head of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation's operations in Asia, Gareth C. C. Chang brought the troubled aerospace company some much-needed good news last week.
After an intense, two-year competition, China selected McDonnell Douglas over the Boeing Company to build a fleet of 40 mid-range jetliners to serve the nation's domestic air routes.
Mr.
Chang, the 48-year-old president of McDonnell Douglas Pacific and Asia Ltd., served as the point man in negotiations with the Chinese and concluded the $1.2 billion deal after countering Boeing's last-minute offers.


Codes and Quotas Were Tools of Housing Bias
The disclosure last week that the New York City Housing Authority has for years steered thousands of black and Hispanic applicants for public housing away from predominantly white projects may have surprised New Yorkers used to the authority's reputation as one of the best in the nation.
Yet the practices were known long ago to officials who might have stopped them but did not.
A review by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development in 1983 discovered evidence of questionable discriminatory practices but found that the authority was in substantial compliance with Federal civil rights laws, legal papers show.
And though the department urged changes, it did not force them.


Round Up the Usual Suspects
THE D. CASE
The Truth About the Mystery of Edwin Drood.
By Charles Dickens, Carlo Fruttero and Franco Lucentini.
Italian chapters translated by Gregory Dowling. 587 pp.
New York: A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/ Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $23.95.


Psychology, Not Muscle, Rules a Jail Without Bars
A NEW jail is not a cause for celebration, suggested speakers at the recent dedication of the new Westchester County Jail, a $68 million structure rising five stories at the county corrections complex here.
But an up-to-date, humane jail, the speakers said, respecting the needs of both its inmates and staff members, holds the promise of a society in which jails will be obsolete.
The 528-cell building, barless and rose colored, represents the latest philosophy in jail design and management and is a result of the largest construction cost approved in a referendum in the county's history.
Voters endorsed building the maximum-security jail by a 2-to-1 margin in 1987 after a Federal judge threatened to order inmates freed if the county did not relieve severe overcrowding of its prisoners.
Drug-related arrests had sent the jail population soaring in the 1980's -- to more than 1,200 in 1987 from fewer than 600 in 1978 -- and classrooms, day rooms and maintenance areas were used to house inmates.


Patricia Crowley and D. J. Kostelancik
Joseph and Ruth Crowley of Pennington, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Patricia Jean Crowley, to David John Kostelancik, a son of John and Emily Kostelancik of Stickney, Ill.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Crowley, 27 years old, is a foreign affairs officer in the State Department Office of Weapons Proliferation Policy in Washington and Geneva.
She graduated cum laude from Franklin &amp; Marshall College and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior vice president at BBDO New York, an advertising agency in Manhattan.


Another Season of Music and Picnicking
THE Summer Music program at Harkness Park in Waterford started with a series of four chamber music concerts in 1984, and it has expanded every year since, becoming the largest classical musicl festival in Connecticut.
This year, Summer Music's ninth, the program will open July 18 with the pianist Leon Fleisher and the Connecticut Orchestra, and will close Aug. 22 with music from Broadway and fireworks by the Grucci family.


JUNE 28-JULY 4: The Philippines; Minimal Pomp Launches The Ramos Administration
Fidel V. Ramos wanted an austere inauguration as President of the Philippines, and that's what he got.
The crowd was small and more polite than enthusiastic.
At Mr.
Ramos's request, heads of state were not invited.
The highest ranking representative from the United States, once the colonial occupier of the Philippines and long its closest ally, was Elaine L. Chao, head of the Peace Corps.
Mr.
Ramos had invited Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, who did not attend.


Counselor Is Honored For Guiding Parolees
MICHAEL GRIFFIN takes along a box of tissues when he visits the state parole office here.
If a parolee can cry about his problems, says Mr.
Griffin, a psychiatric social worker, it is a good sign.
It means that in future sessions the parolee might connect with his own feelings and learn enough about himself to improve his life.
Mr.
Griffin is employed by the County Department of Mental Health and specializes in alcoholism and drug-abuse counseling at the Mount Vernon Community Service Clinic.
In Albany on June 25 he was recognized for his success in helping parolees from central and southern Westchester straighten out their lives.
He received the New York State Division of Parole Linda Mill Award, given for the first time and named for a state parole officer who died last year at the age of 36.


Commercial Property: On the Move in Manhattan; In a Weak Market, Alluring Lease Deals Abound
AS millions watched the parade of tall ships up the Hudson yesterday, employees and partners at LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby &amp; MacRae were busily consolidating the operations of their diversified law firm at 125 West 55th Street.
The firm, which moved from two locations in Manhattan, is occupying 203,000 square feet on eight contiguous floors, plus a portion of the main floor and basement level.
The space is about 40 percent larger than the firm's total leasing commitments in the past.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Monroe
"WE'RE a rural town trying to be suburban," said Kenneth S. Heitzke, First Selectman of the Town of Monroe, in the northern hills of Connecticut's Fairfield County.
"It's not an Easton or a Weston," said Gary L. Sippin, president of the Chamber of Commerce, whose grandfather came from Czarist Russia and bought a farm in Monroe in 1910.
"It's middle-class."


Tough-to-Ask Questions Are Getting Easier to Ask
For four years, Stuttering John's speech impediment has been routinely ridiculed on Howard Stern's radio show, where he is an unpaid intern.
As a paid reporter for Mr.
Stern's television show, Stuttering John, whose real name is John Melendez, comes in for more abuse.
Roaming the city with his camera crew, he tracks down famous people and asks frequently inane, vulgar and insulting questions, to which they respond in kind.


Making a Difference; Plugging Into Printers
With the paint hardly dry on a new line of low-priced personal computers, the Compaq Computer Corporation last week announced its entry into an entirely new, but also very competitive, business: printers.
At least for the outset, however, Compaq intends to concentrate on higher-priced models, in the $5,000 to $9,000 range, for use on personal computer networks.
"I don't think this business is any more competitive" than personal computers, said David Black, vice president and general manager of the company's newly created peripherals division.


With Army Choreography, Nigeria Votes for Parliament
For the first time in 12 years, voters in this West African nation went to the polls today to choose legislative representatives.
The election was an exercise of limited democracy.
Only two parties, the center-left Social Democratic Party and the right-of-center National Republican Convention, were allowed to enter candidates in the voting, the next-to-last phase in a return to civilian rule promised by the military Government.
Parliament has been suspended since the army last seized power, at the end of 1983.


A Failure of Leadership
To the Editor:
Responding to a review of "The Chairman," Kai Bird's biography of John J. McCloy, John J. McCloy 2d repeats in his letter (May 31) three serious errors about the wartime internment of Japanese-Americans.
He first claims that the internment "was purely and simply a reaction to a heinous attack" on Pearl Harbor by the Japanese.
The Pearl Harbor attack was, in fact, an excuse for the internment.
After thorough research, a Presidential blue-ribbon panel concluded in 1983 that there was "no justification in military necessity" for the internment and that its root causes were "race prejudice, war hysteria and a failure of political leadership."


Peru Leader's Problems Ease Abroad, but Mount at Home
Two months after President Alberto K. Fujimori seized dictatorial powers in South America's most unstable nation, a promise to elect and install a new Congress within six months is rapidly easing Peru's international isolation.
But Maoist guerrilla violence and rampant cocaine trafficking, two of the problems Mr.
Fujimori cited to justify his suspension of Congress and the courts, have barely been touched by the April 5 crackdown.


Corrections
An article on June 21 about the Westchester 2000 research group referred incorrectly to a conference in White Plains on consolidating local governments.
It was held at Pace University's Lubin Graduate Center, not its law school.


Welcome to the Honeycomb
NAME: Morgan Puett.
IDENTITY: Owner of Skep, a folksy coffee house and art gallery, and the J. Morgan Puett clothing store.
Both are at 527 Broome Street, near Thompson Street.


Slovaks Here, Czechs There
The rejection of President Vaclav Havel's re-election bid on Friday shows that rising nationalism among Slovaks has now been matched by an equal determination among Czech politicians to divide the 74-year-old nation and to do so quickly.
Deputies from the leading Slovak party twice cast the decisive votes against Mr.
Havel, knowing full well the galvanizing effect that would have on Czech public opinion, which until now has overwhelmingly backed retaining the common state.


Katharine T. Stehli, David Leonard Scharf
Peter H. Stehli of Westport, Conn., and Joan T. Gilmour of Alexandria, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Katharine Thompson Stehli to David Leonard Scharf, a son of Leonard R. Scharf of Deltaville, Va., and Lynn Phillips of Sherman, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Stehli, 33 years old, is a program coordinator at Hospital Audiences Inc. in New York.
Mr.
Scharf, 33, is a carpenter in Sparkill, N.Y.
He graduated from Muhlenberg College.


Corrections
A classical music listing in the Arts and Leisure Guide today includes outdated information for Monday.
Because of a change in plans, the Estonian National Symphony Orchestra will not perform tomorrow at Avery Fisher Hall.


Lucy Garrity, David Young
Lucy Carroll Garrity, a daughter of Thomas J. Garrity of Conifer, Colo., and Ann M. Garrity of Cambridge, Mass., was married on Friday in Denver to David McColl Young, a son of Donald M. Young of West Stockbridge, Mass., and Jane Young Wedemeyer of Riverside, Conn.
The Rev.
Sandra A. Wilson performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Young, 31 years old, is an associate at Browne Bortz &amp; Coddington, an economic research firm in Denver.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received a master's degree in management from Yale University.
Her father, who is retired, was a lawyer in New York.
Her mother, who is retired, was a special-education teacher in Boston.


Jacquelyn Piro, Leigh Catlett
Jacquelyn Piro, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. Piro of Lynnfield, Mass., was married yesterday in Chatham, Mass., to Norman Leigh Catlett Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Catlett of Woodstock, Va.
The Rev.
Walter L. Pitman performed the Congregational ceremony at the Wequassett Inn on Cape Cod.
Mrs.
Catlett is an actress whose credits include Cosette in the Broadway company of "Les Miserables" and, currently, Rose in the first national touring company of "The Secret Garden." She is a graduate of Boston University.
Her father is a radiological oncologist at Salem Hospital in Salem, Mass.
Her mother, Marian G. Piro, owns Costumes by Illusions, a theatrical costume company in Stoneham, Mass.


The New Era Still Demands Bold Strokes Of Leadership
SO the end of the cold war was not the end of history, after all.
The multinational organizations that were supposed to take over from the superpowers to run a more peaceful, stable world have been faltering under the economic, political and ethnic problems that arose after the collapse of Communism.
President Bush and the other world leaders at the summit meeting of the Group of Seven industrial countries in Munich and the 52-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe summit in Helsinki this week have a full agenda.
But what they really need to do is to demonstrate clear leadership, which is still something best provided by leaders of powerful nation-states.


Got The World On a Shelf
A FEW minutes at the Complete Traveller, a bookstore at Madison Avenue and 35th Street in Manhattan that sells nothing but travel guides, and you begin to feel like the most unadventurous person on the planet.
"Do you have a map of Nagorno-Karabakh?" asked JoMarie Fecci.
Miss Fecci, a freelance news photographer, will soon go to the disputed area between Azerbaijan and Armenia, then to Sarajevo.
"I go where there's trouble," she said.


Talking: Contractors; Avoiding Pitfalls On Loans
WHEN Patricia Grimes, a home health aide, decided two years ago to put a porch on her Victorian home in Newark she was overjoyed to learn about a remodeling company that would also provide financing.
"I don't earn very much," she said, "so I knew I would have had difficulty getting a loan on my own."
But Miss Grimes has found herself locked into monthly installments of $520 for the next 18 years (a total of $112,320), a much heavier and longer-term debt than she had originally been told was needed to repay the $35,000 she was borrowing.
Moreover, she now fears it could cost her the house if she falls behind.


Wendy Newman, William Pratt Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Reginald B. Newman 2d of Buffalo have announced the engagement of their daughter, Wendy Valerie Newman, to William Joseph Pratt Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pratt of Rydal, Pa.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Newman, 27 years old, is an advertising account manager at McCall's magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Richmond.
Her father is the president and an owner of the NOCO Energy Corporation, an oil products storage and distribution company in Tonawanda, N.Y.


Getting to Know the Italian Flat Bread Focaccia
TEN years ago, not many Americans knew what focaccia was.
But this Italian flat bread has become increasingly popular, whether it is served with a meal, as a snack, as an hors d'ouvre or even a sandwich.
It is a boon for entertaining on the weekend because the dough can be made ahead of time and frozen.
Focaccia is made with a dough similar to the one used for pizza, but it comes out with a thicker crust.
It is good served hot from the oven, flavored with sage or rosemary, or topped with onions and sun-dried tomatoes.
A thick focaccia makes a great picnic sandwich, sliced in half and filled with all manner of ingredients: grilled eggplant, radicchio, onions or sausage, sauteed mushrooms or the classic summer combination of mozzarella, tomato and basil.


BEST SELLERS: July 5, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
17
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
2
7
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) On a mission to Africa, Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
3
8
6
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
4
5
2
SCRUPLES TWO, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $22.) Continuing the story of the crowd that frequents an ultrachic Beverly Hills store. (LP)
5
4
5
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) An insane Jedi threatens Luke Skywalker in the second volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
6
1
115
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
7
6
8
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones. (LP)
8 *
7
11
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
9
10
3
DOUBLE DEUCE, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) Spenser joins his old friend Hawk to investigate murders in a Boston housing project.
10
11
3
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
11
13
18
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe. (LP)
12
12
4
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
13
20
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles. (LP)
14
1
THE TRAIL TO SEVEN PINES, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $19.) A novel, originally published in 1951, about the exploits of Hopalong Cassidy in the Old West.
15
1
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Random House, $21.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
2
1
6
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
3
3
3
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
15
2
SAM WALTON: MADE IN AMERICA, by Sam Walton with John Huey. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who became the richest American by creating the Wal-Mart store chain.
5
2
6
DIANA IN PRIVATE, by Lady Colin Campbell. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
6
4
5
PEROT, by Todd Mason. (Business One Irwin, $16.95.) An unauthorized biography of Ross Perot, by a reporter for The Wall Street Journal.
7
5
9
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) An economist considers the upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
8
6
5
CHIEF, by Daryl F. Gates with Diane K. Shah. (Bantam, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who headed the Los Angeles Police Department for 14 years.
9
1
LITTLE LEAGUE CONFIDENTIAL, by Bill Geist. (Macmillan, $17.) One Little League baseball season, described by the coach of a New Jersey suburban team.
10
3
MIRACLE MAN, by Nolan Ryan with Jerry Jenkins. (Word Publishing, $18.99.) The autobiography of the record-breaking pitcher.
11
7
11
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.95.) Satirical essays on recent social and political developments.
12
12
3
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $20.) Essays on the pleasures of living extravagantly during the high-flying 1980's.
13
11
9
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A journalist's account of how powerful monied interests and elite groups dominate the Federal Government.
14
8
23
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
15
10
7
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) From childhood in New York to the White House: the first 49 years of a pre-eminent First Lady.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
3
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
3
11
THE JUICEMAN'S POWER OF JUICING, by Jay Kordich. (Morrow, $15.) A program for staying healthy and trim by consuming fresh fruit and vegetable juices.
3
5
31
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
4 *
2
20
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
5 *
4
31
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
WOMAN OF VALOR: Margaret Sanger and the Birth Control Movement in America, by Ellen Chesler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) A spirited biography of a radical and feminist organizer who achieved respectability in her lifetime.
MAKING HISTORY.
The Struggle for Gay and Lesbian Equal Rights, 1945-1990: An Oral History, by Eric Marcus. (HarperCollins, $25.) A portrait gallery of 45 politically involved men and women, gay and straight, for many of whom the coming-out experience was the trigger for activism.
ODD GIRLS AND TWILIGHT LOVERS: A History of Lesbian Life in Twentieth-Century America, by Lillian Faderman. (Columbia University, cloth, $29.95; Penguin, paper, $12.) Many sources combined show how lesbian identity has changed in this century.
THE FAMISHED ROAD, by Ben Okri. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.50.) The post-modern black African novel in English arrives with this engagingly lyrical novel by a Nigerian.
ANTONIA WHITE.
Diaries 1926-1957: Volume One, edited by Susan Chitty. (Viking, $25.) Notebooks, irregularly kept, about marriage, motherhood, sex, religion and mental collapse by a fascinating and quite odd Englishwoman; the editor is her daughter.
HELL'S FOUNDATIONS: A Social History of the Town of Bury in the Aftermath of the Gallipoli Campaign, by Geoffrey Moorhouse. (Holt, $24.95.) Patriotism, stoicism and resentment in the home base of a British regiment 2,000 of whom died in the fiasco of 1915.
AMERICAN GIRL: Scenes From a Small-Town Childhood, by Mary Cantwell. (Random House, $20.) Highly persuasive reminiscences of Bristol, R.I. (a place, by this account, of surprising decency in the 1930's), by a member of The Times's editorial board.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended June 20  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill 1.225 million
1185 Park Avenue (94th St.)  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, fireplace; maintenance $2,450, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Greenwich Village 375,000
115 West Fourth Street  (Petersfield)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. condo in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, 12-ft. ceilings, dining room; common charge $600, taxes $4,560 (Broker: Bascom &amp; Sears)  TriBeCa 230,000
395 Broadway (Walker St.)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. condo in a loft building; elevator, glass-block walls, 11 1/2-ft.-ceilings, 2 exposures; common charge $392, taxes $240 (Broker: J.I. Sopher Co.)  Upper East Side 4.85 million
910 Fifth Avenue (72d St.)  2-bedroom, 4-bath, 4,000-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, library, dining room, Central Park view; maintenance $3,000, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Key Ventures, Inc.)  West Side 320,000
65 Central Park West (66th St.)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 700-sq.-ft. penthouse in a prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 900-square-foot terrace, renovated kitchen and bath, 3 exposures, Central Park view; maintenance $939, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Klara Madlin Real Estate)  BRONX  Morris Park 170,000
1847 Bronxdale Avenue  3-family, detached, frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in the other two units; 1 bath, dining room in each; full basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  Wakefield 152,000
4332 Bruner Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, house in a legal 2-family used as a single-family residence; dining room, kitchen pantry, semi-finished basement, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,320 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  BROOKLYN  Bay Ridge 200,000
356 81st Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, c/a, semi-finished basement, shared driveway, 1-car garage, 20- by 109-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Velsor Real Estate)  Midwood 375,000
1145 East 9th Street  3-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in two units; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room in each unit; full basement, 2-car garage, 38- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,300 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  Park Slope 486,000
550 Third Street  5-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family residence in a 3-story limestone; dining room, renovated kitchen, decorative fireplace, rear deck, south garden, 20- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $2,100 (Broker: Joseph Berman Realty Co.)  QUEENS  Corona 175,000
37-30 100th Street  2-family, semi-attached, frame house; 4 bedrooms in primary unit; 3 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $850 (Broker: Veterans Realty)  Forest Hills 273,800
102-18 Ascan Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, brick and limestone house; dining room, fireplace, full basement, 1-car garage, 19- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  New Springville 150,000
110-A Dinsmore Street  (Rustic Woods)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. condo in a 5-year-old building; dining room, family room, fireplace, Jacuzzi, skylight, 18-by 85-ft. lot; common charge $190, taxes $800 (Broker: RE/MAX Preferred)
Port Richmond 135,000
46 Anderson Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, colonial; dining room, enclosed front porch, 1-car garage, 36- by 121-ft. lot; taxes $1,192 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)


Surprise Interlude for the Kirov In Southport's Grand Battenment
AT the end of a quiet residential street in Southport, a typical American barbecue was winding down.
The lingering smell of grilled marinated steak mingled with the humidity-laden air, and only a few homemade desserts remained on the trays.
As the diners tossed their paper plates into the trash, a sudden downpour hastened the cleanup, and all dashed into the building for cover.
It was nearly time for rehearsal.
The rhythmic sweep of a ballet slipper skimming the floor was a steady counterpoint to the rain's erratic pummeling of the gymnasium windows.
Within a few minutes, about 60 young dancers were stretching and practicing until the ballet mistress signaled the rehearsal accompanist to begin.


THE YALE SCHMIDT LEAVES BEHIND
The Reagan and Bush Administrations have for years been pushing for wider tax relief for people who send their children to private schools, so it seems natural to find George Bush congratulating Benno C. Schmidt Jr. on his move from Yale University president to president and chief executive officer of the Edison Project ("The Yale Schmidt Leaves Behind," by Richard Bernstein, June 14).
The Edison Project will set up 1,000 high-tech, private elementary and high schools that will somehow "force public schools to improve."
The idea that competition from private schools like the Edison Project will serve as impetus for improving public schools sounds somewhat like the notion that cutting taxes of the rich actually increases tax revenue.
Is the Edison Project what is called supply-side education?
LORIN JAY COWELL
Brooklyn


Communism Is Dead. Please Send Videotapes.
Joe Mantegna's latest role is, in his own words, a combination "hero and sleazebag." It's one of the nicest characters he has ever portrayed.
In the HBO film "The Comrades of Summer," which has its premiere on Saturday at 8 P.M., Mr.
Mantegna plays Sparky Smith, a high-priced baseball player-manager whose arrogance gets him tossed out of the major leagues.
His only job offer comes from the Russians; they want him to coach their national team.
At first Sparky objects: "They're Communists." When informed of recent political events, he shoots back: "O.K., so they're only Communists on Mondays, Wednesdays and alternate Fridays."


How the Leading Edge Was Lost
A hidden legacy of the go-go 1980's turns out to be the substantial cuts in private industry's support of scientific research, traditionally the engine of innovation and technological leadership in the United States.
The mountain of corporate debt accumulated during the blitz of takeovers, mergers and acquisitions put the squeeze on investments in scientific research..
"All of you are a variable overhead expense," a Wall Street adviser told hundreds of corporate research chiefs in 1990 at a meeting of the Industrial Research Institute, a trade group.
Worries about the squeeze have sparked a spate of scholarly studies and angst in the pages of scientific journals.
The Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, after studying 19 manufacturing firms involved in mergers or acquisitions, including Stauffer Chemical Company, Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation, Polaroid Corporation, Tenneco Inc., Zenith Electronics Company and Caterpillar Inc., concluded that heavy debt loads have hurt research.


Miss Whiting, Gregory Roll
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles S. Whiting of Irvington, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katherine Grant Ursula Whiting, to Gregory Fabian Roll, a son of Roland and Joyce Roll of Forest Hills, Queens.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Whiting, 26 years old, is the manager of advertising for Alpha Lyracom Space Communications, a satellite telecommunications company in Greenwich, Conn.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father retired as a marketing executive at Norman, Craig &amp; Kummel Inc., a New York advertising agency.
Her mother, Catherine Whiting, retired as a teacher in the New York City schools.


The Word of God?
To the Editor:
In his largely favorable review of "The Unauthorized Version" (June 7), a book on the Bible by Robin Lane Fox, an atheist, John P. Meier, a professor of New Testament at the Catholic University of America, accepts much of Mr.
Lane Fox's evidence but predictably rejects his conclusion, that "the presence of massive historical errors shows the Bible not to be the word of God."


PEROTSPEAK
William Safire was one sentence away from solving "the most urgent linguistic problem in the Presidential campaign" in his On Language column "Perotspeak" (June 14).
He writes that "the Perot campaign will surely stress
volun
teers,"
so I propose the term "Peroteers." This also resolves the messy business of how to treat the silent T. STEPHEN S. PIXLEY
Fairfield, Conn.


Corrections
A review by David Richards in Arts and Leisure today about two plays in which Al Pacino is appearing on Broadway misstates their closing date.
The run of the plays, "Chinese Coffee" and "Salome" at Circle in the Square, has been extended to Aug. 1.


Mutual Funds; Of Loads and Other Curiosities
What impact does paying a front-end sales charge have on an investor's return from a mutual fund?
Following are answers to this and other recent questions from readers about fund performance, taxes and more.
Question: In an annual survey of mutual funds, I found the statement that over a five-year period, an average annual return of 13.01 percent becomes only 6.5 percent when adjusted for a 5.5 percent front-end sales load paid by the investor.
How do the results of load funds and no-load funds compare over all?


Corrections
An article on June 21 about London misidentified a building opposite Hyde Park Corner.
It is the Lanesborough Hotel.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
Auto sales, late June, in millions
6.4
6.5
Tuesday
June wholesale trade, percent change
-1.4.
0.4
Wednesday
Consumer credit for May, in billions
-$3.8
$1.3
Friday
June producer prices, percent change
0.4
0.3
This Weeks Developments Monday: Heads of state from the seven most industrialized nations meet in Munich  Wednesday: G-7 meeting concludes *
Seven-year Treasury note auction *
European Parliament begins plenary session  Thursday : Nation's largest retailers announce sales results for June *
Bundesbank Council meets


Corrections
A caption last Sunday with an article about the 34th Street Partnership misidentified the man in the lower picture.
He was Bruce Cohen, a partnership spokesman.


Europe Has No Dream Team, Just Sleepers
While the Tournament of the Americas has produced some very predictable results in Portland, Ore., the European Olympic basketball qualifying tournament in Zaragoza, Spain, has been a more tumultuous affair.
The round-robin championship, which wraps up today, has produced a series of upsets, disappointments and wild-and-crazy Eastern European shenanigans.


America, Land of the Long-Term Financing for Foreigners
Showing that a pullback in 1990 was only a pause, foreign corporations have resumed their rush to the United States to sell tens of billions of dollars worth of stock and bonds to American investors.
The issuers include British biotechnology companies; Spanish and Portuguese banks; Argentine, Mexican and British phone companies; Venezuelan paper, petrochemical and metal concerns; French oil companies; Indian textile, metals and petrochemical companies, and Japanese and South Korean electronics giants.


Original Sin, as St. Augustine Saw It, Gets Harder to Defend
To the Editor:
Arthur Schlesinger Jr., in his eloquent Op-Ed tribute of June 22 to the preacher and political philosopher Reinhold Niebuhr, born just a century ago, writes, "He persuaded me and many of my contemporaries that original sin provides a far stronger foundation for freedom and self-government than illusions about human perfectibility."


Wall Street; A Shifting Tide on Neglected-Stock Research
The stock market's passion for small stocks in the last two years may be producing some subtle shifts in investment firms' research patterns, at least for the stocks that Wall Street characterizes as "neglected."
These are stocks that, despite listings on the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange or Nasdaq, have fewer than three Wall Street analysts monitoring their financial performance. (By contrast, many large operating companies are covered by dozens of research analysts.)


Page Considers Bid for State Court
ALAN PAGE, an assistant Attorney General who was a Hall of Fame defensive lineman for the Minnesota Vikings, is considering seeking a seat on the Minnesota Supreme Court, the state's highest court.


As Interest Rates Are Cut, Retirees Are Stung
Listen to June Johnston, 84 years old, of Salt Lake City, or to Lois Hair, 79, of Gainesville, Fla., or Homer Weaver, 85, of Houston, and you hear the anxiety and anger of those who see themselves as the economy's other losers.
They are not the unemployed, who need work, or the young families who cannot afford to buy homes.
Their goal is security of another kind: a safe place for their savings and a predictable income.
They invested in savings accounts and certificates of deposit, only to watch their income be drastically reduced as the Federal Reserve sliced its discount rate from 6.5 percent in January of 1991 to 3 percent last week.


It Was a Brisk Season at the Box Office
ATTENDANCE was up.
According to figures released by the state's major professional playhouses, New Jerseyans have been going to the theater in increasing numbers.
That's the unexpected, heartening news about the theater season that ended after last Sunday's final performance of "Chess" at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn.
But it's no surprise that the best-attended shows reflect the audience's need for something familiar and represent the victory of accessibility over adventure.


The Dangers In Privatization
The article "A Rush to Privatize Government Services" (May 31) issue is rather frightening.
It seems to me that whenever there is privatization of services in a governmental agency, the lower echelons like the bus drivers, custodians and kitchen workers in public schools lose jobs and benefits.
Needless to say, there rarely is any attempt to cut down on higher echelons, even where called for in light of economic conditions.


State's Big Stake in Colt Clouds Debate on Guns
A long shadow fell across the debate over gun control in the State Legislature this week.
The shadow belonged to Colt's Manufacturing Company, the famed gunmaker in the onion-domed warehouse that has turned out revolvers, pistols and assault rifles here since the 1850's.
Two years ago Connecticut invested $25 million in state pension funds to help revive Colt, which had been brought to its knees by a four-year strike.
The state, which owns 47 percent of the company, has since made loans and loan guarantees as well, but none of this really helped: in March, the company, which has sales of about $100 million a year, declared bankruptcy.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Glen Rock 165,000
18 Iona Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 92-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, full basement, close to transportation; taxes $3,250.
Lincroft 253,000
211 Yale Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old Tudor; fireplace, brick patio, large rooms; taxes $5,393.
Mahwah 160,000
33 Cambra Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old Cape Cod; h/w floors, fireplace, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,720.
Metuchen 204,900
25 Wistar Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old ranch; skylight, full basement, fireplace; taxes $4,585.
Middletown 277,000
652 Buchanan Boulevard  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old colonial; deck, gazebo, underground sprinklers; taxes $5,047.
Ramsey 164,000
126 North Island Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, eat-in-kitchen, near schools and shopping; taxes $3,351.
OTHER AREAS Mount Kisco, N.Y. 309,000
Old Roaring Brook Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 72-year-old colonial; fireplace, dining room, 1-car garage, 1.2 acres; taxes $5,521.
Guilford, Conn. 605,000
29 Grove Hill Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 48-year-old Cape Cod; water views, large deck, skylights, 0.75 acre; taxes $5,972.
Smithtown, L.I. 190,000
4 Grassy Pond Drive  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room w/fireplace, 2-car garage, pool; taxes $4,800.


Catch a Jitney And Scream
LAST Tuesday, Robert Pittman, the president of Time Warner Enterprises, and his wife, Sandy, took a helicopter to Six Flags Great Adventure, which Time Warner now owns.
There, they met the friends and colleagues they had lured out of Manhattan onto a specially chartered Hampton Jitney and into the humid New Jersey night.
They weren't just fooling around.
They were marking the opening of the Batman Stunt Show.
The boyish Mr.
Pittman, a founder of MTV, calls the Batman Stunt Show a Hollywood-scale extravaganza.
In the tradition of Roman circuses, and like demolition derbies and "Robocop" movies, it relies a bit heavily on the entertainment value of pyrotechnics, explosions and engine noise.


When Your House Goes on Camera
ABOUT once a month, William Mikesell, a Newark architect, opens his front door and finds strangers standing on his threshold.
His uninvited guests have no interest in reading the meter or distributing religious tracts.
They are location scouts for movie, television or advertising production companies, and they think that Mr.
Mikesell's imposing house -- or parts of it -- might be perfect for location filming.
Mr.
Mikesell greets them warily.
He lent his house for a six-week-long shoot of a feature film, "Jacob's Ladder," and he said it cost him $10,000 in damage, effectively wiping out his profit.
"They treated the house like a factory," he said.


Made in New Haven; Racing in Barcelona
THE rowing events at the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, July 27 to Aug. 2 are not likely to receive as much television coverage as the more popular sports like track and field, gymnastics and basketball.
Yet when they are beamed into American homes, Mike Vespoli of Guilford will be right there as NBC-TV's analyst to explain the intricacies of the rowing events to viewers.
It's a job for which he is well qualified.
A member of the United States rowing team at the 1972 Olympics in Munich and the sculling coach for the team that trained for the 1980 Olympics in Moscow, Mr.
Vespoli, 45 years old, today builds racing shells.
At least 5 of the 13 used by United States athletes at Banyoles, the Olympic rowing venue 70 miles outside Barcelona, will be from his company, Vespoli USA.


Kente Cloth
WHAT IT IS: An enormously wide variety of richly patterned cloth principally produced in western Africa.
Its development predates the arrival of Europeans on the African continent by hundreds of years.
Long worn by African royalty to signify power, prestige and a dash of high style, kente cloth is usually woven of cotton, silk and sometimes gold thread.
Authentic kente -- and there are many pretenders in American shops and street stands -- is produced in narrow four- to five-inch-wide strips that, depending on length and quality, cost about $25.
A square yard of kente, made from sewing the strips together in a multicolor patchwork, costs $400 to $500.
Mass-produced kente, while much less expensive, is often printed in combinations of the cloth's primary colors: yellow, red, green, blue, black and white.


Margo Miller and Michael Weill
Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Miller of Livingston, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Margo Miller to Michael Weill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Weill, also of Livingston.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Miller, 24 years old, is a social worker at the Mount Carmel Guild, a mental-health center in Jersey City.
She graduated from the University of Maryland and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father is a vice president and the general counsel of Pfizer Inc. in New York, the pharmaceutical company.
Her mother, Carol Miller, is a partner in Designers 2, an interior-design firm in Livingston.


U.S. Comes Up Short In Henley Competition
The fireworks here this evening were not in celebration of American victories on this Fourth of July.
No entry of rowers from the United States advanced to the finals of the 153d Henley Royal Regatta on Sunday.
When the racing began this morning, there were still six American entries competing in five of the regatta's 15 cup events, but as the day drew on, one after another of the American crews lost.


'Golf Is My Game'
To the Editor:
Say it ain't so, Bobby!
For those who believe Bobby Jones was an amateur when he won all those tournaments and remained a simon-pure athlete right to the end of his long, illustrious career, there now comes George Plimpton's revelation ("The Smaller the Ball, the Better the Book: A Game Theory of Literature," May 31).
"Even the professional
golfer
seems to write decently about what he does," Mr. Plimpton writes, and to prove his point he adduces Bobby Jones's "Golf Is My Game."


John Carroll, Elizabeth Jahncke
Mr. and Mrs.
P.
Roger Jahncke of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Scott Jahncke, to John K. Carroll, the son of Jeanne D. Carroll of Port Washington, L.I., and John A. Carroll of Sea Girt, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Jahncke, 26 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher.
She graduated from Georgetown University, and she and her fiance received law degrees from New York University.
Her father is a partner in the New York accounting firm of Ernst &amp; Young.


Shrines and Designs in Focus
The Institute for Asian Studies in New York is arranging a tour of Japan scheduled for Oct. 12 to Nov. 2 called "Shinto Shrines, Buddhist Temples and Classical Gardens." The itinerary includes the Tokyo area, the Pacific Coast near Ise, the hills and valleys of the Kyoto-Nara area, the Inland Sea region and the shore of the Japan Sea on Honshu as well as the plains and mountains of the southern island, Kyushu.
There will be visits to museums and craft workshops as well as temples.
The group will be led by Robert Moes, former head of the Asian art department of the Brooklyn Museum.
The cost of $5,942 a person (in double occupancy), plus a $350 contribution to the institute, includes air fare, hotels, some meals and fees for all tour sites.
Information: Charlotte Feldman, Travel One, 157 West Lancaster Avenue, Ardmore, Pa. 19003; (800) 523-2786 or (215) 642-7005.


Batten Down the Hatches, Tie Down the Patio Set
THE Atlantic hurricane season extends from June 1 through Nov. 30.
Although most hurricanes that strike the eastern United States occur in August, September and October, knowing how to protect houses and property, as well as taking appropriate precautions, can be of enormous benefit.
In a hurricane, high winds and flooding are the chief causes of damage.
To protect the house from wind, keep dead wood pruned from trees and avoid letting large branches overhang buildings.


Corrections
An answer to a Travel Trivia question in the Travel Watch column on June 21 misstated the number of time zones in China.
It is one; although its territory spreads across the equivalent of five time zones, the country operates on a single time.


On Broadway, A Misnomer
To the Editor:
The word "soundtrack" is often misused by the masses, but when a playwright of Donald Margulies's caliber makes the mistake  [ "A Playwright's Search for the Spiritual Father," June 21 ] , I shudder.


Cresskill Students Win in National Contest
CRESSKILL school officials were pleased but not particularly surprised when one of their students, Zane Curtis-Olsen, was the only third grader in the country to earn a perfect score in a language arts competition this year.
Nor were they surprised that the school district's sixth grade, which placed first as fifth graders last year, won again as a team in the contest, or that the third grade also placed first as a team.
The contest is a series of analogy tests designed to measure students' ability to reason and master vocabulary above their grade level.


Notes Woth Pleasure
The Artist of the Ordinary
For Franz Kafka, the real, modest features of the world were in fact true signs of the marvelous, according to his friend Milena Jesenska.
She is quoted in "The Nightmare of Reason: A Life of Franz Kafka," by Ernst Pawel (Noonday/Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, paper).


Demonstrators Are Targeting The Democrats
In a year in which the trappings and structure of politics have paled in the glare of voter resentment, the Democratic Party had hoped to seal its Presidential nomination in a celebration marked by unity and calm.
Instead, the Democratic National Convention, which begins in New York a week from tomorrow, is expected to play out before a backdrop of protest the likes of which the nation has not seen since the Vietnam War.
With the drama of the streets competing for attention with that on the convention floor, comparisons to the 1960's are inevitable.
Yet the scope of the protests and the variety of their demands could be wider, as more groups with more agendas than ever before try to steal their spotlight from the Democrats.


Update; New York Cancels Plans For PCB-Burning Incinerator
Faced with growing political and community opposition, New York State environmental officials have canceled plans to bring in a portable incinerator to burn PCB's stored in a lagoon at Metro-North Railroad's Harmon Yard in the Westchester County community of Croton-on-Hudson.
The state's environmental commissioner, Thomas C. Jorling, came to the small Hudson River village last week to tell residents that the 12,000 tons of PCB-laden sludge and soil would be excavated and removed for incineration and land burial.
PCB's, or polychlorinated biphenyls, have been shown to cause cancer and have been banned from use in manufacturing.


Maria E. Wogen, Patrick Wall Jr.
Maria Elisabeth Wogen, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Thore Wogen of Enkoping, Sweden, was married Tuesday in Antiparos, Greece, to Patrick M. Wall Jr., the son of Mr.
Wall Sr. and Catherine Sculthorpe, both of New York.
Jorgis Finolius, the Mayor of Antiparos, performed the ceremony at the Old Windmill, a local landmark.
Mrs.
Wall, 33 years old, is a production assistant at Swedish Television in Stockholm.
Her father is a dentist in Enkoping, and her mother, a dental nurse, assists him.


Drugs Found to Keep Lost Flab Off
A four-year study has concluded that prescription appetite suppressants can enable obese people to lose weight and keep it off.
The patients in the federally financed study weighed an average of 200 pounds at the beginning, lost an average of more than 30 pounds and maintained the loss as long as they took the drugs, which for some people was three and a half years.


New Politics of Welfare Focuses on Its Flaws
The platform that George S. McGovern carried away from the Democratic convention in 1972 enshrined "The Rights of Poor People" right after "The Rights of Youth" and before "The Rights of American Indians."
It assailed "the coercion of forced work requirements" for welfare recipients.
It happily predicted that "the handout system of present welfare" would no longer be necessary once the Democrats embarked on an immense new program to create millions of "decent jobs." Wiser or Meaner?
The platform that Gov.
Bill Clinton will carry to the Democratic National Convention in New York next week reflects a sadder but wiser era -- or, in the view of some of its critics, a poorer and meaner one.
It declares that welfare should be "a second chance, not a way of life." It talks of the responsibilities of the poor.
It is a snapshot of the new politics of welfare.


Mostly Mozartean


A Judge Rules: Don't Spare That Tree!
THE nuns, the residents of a convalescent home and three elderly sisters who live down the road in Greenwich were unlikely defendants.
But they lost, at least this round, and Westchester County won, in a legal case that presented "the proverbial struggle matching commerce against nature, airplanes against trees," as a judge-turned-poet put it.
"I think that I shall never see a lawsuit as lovely as a tree," wrote United States District Judge Gerard L. Goettel, sitting in White Plains.
But he concluded that "trees lose some of their esthetic appeal when made the subject of litigation."


New York City
For some New Yorkers, it's almost a reflex action to leave the city in the summer.
But for those who stay -- and those who visit -- summer in Manhattan has a distinctive set of charms.
Even with big events, like next week's Democratic National Convention, summertime Manhattan has a little less bustle, a little less hassle.
And this summer in particular, New York City has lots to offer, including a dazzling lineup of plays on Broadway.
Manhattan is looking good at the moment.
The frenzied building of the late 80's has slowed considerably.
Instead, the city is upgrading what it's got.
Familiar museums, notably the Guggenheim and the Morgan Library, have enlarged their premises and restored old buildings with splendid results.
And in the last two years, more than a dozen old hotels, including Beekman Towers, the Drake and the Plaza, have been renovated top to toe, often with stunning results.
A number of pleasant, modestly priced hotels have sprouted up, as well.


The Death Penalty: Questions to Weigh
Re: "Death-Penalty Law Tightened," May 17:
Lest we be led down New Jersey's path to mindless acceptance of execution of the first in line on death row, I urge New Jerseyans to find the time and courage now to think about capital punishment.


Technology; The Sensory Truck Tire
Trucking companies have typically kept track of the age and life history of tires by marking them with an electric branding iron or applying stickers with serial numbers, alerting the user to how soon the tire might need retreading.
But the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company has developed what it calls a "smart tire," which will ultimately be able to monitor its own durability and give a much more detailed account of performance.


A Monk, a Savior, a Mensch
Some of those he rescued call him a saint and some call him a tzaddik, the Hebrew word for an exceptionally righteous man.
And if there is some trace of religious ambiguity it is because their childhood was so ambiguous.
They were Jewish children who lived for months and even years in Roman Catholic convents or with Catholic families scattered around Belgium.
Still, they are unequivocal about saying they owe their lives to this man, the Rev.
Bruno Reynders, a Benedictine monk who repeatedly risked his own life to spirit away almost 400 children from the Nazis.


Golden, Gifted and Confused About Her Future
Svetlana Boginskaya, one of the world's best gymnasts for a very long time now, is having a case of the 19-year-old jitters.
It's not just the approaching Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, which she has said will be her last.
And it's not so much the usual confusion, in the debris of the former Soviet Union, about where her loyalties lie.
Nor the declining standards of food provided for the Commonwealth of Independent States' best gymnasts, who live at this permanent but deteriorating training center at Osero Krugloye, or Round Lake, in the pretty forests an hour's drive north of Moscow's grime.
Her confusion is really about growing up, and what to do with her life when her already extraordinary career as another of the great pixie gymnasts is over, as it must be, and quite soon.
Brilliant but Unsure
Like Steffi Graf and other tennis stars before her, whose machinelike nervelessness began to collapse with the onslaught of young adulthood, Boginskaya sometimes wonders whether she's any good at anything at all.
It is quite an unsettling thought for a gymnast whose brilliance has been indisputable since she first became all-around winner at the 1989 world championships,
"I try not to think about Barcelona," she said, playing with two thin silver necklaces and touching a line of earrings pierced into one ear.
"I try not to think it's the Olympics, but that it's just another competition." She paused, pulling back her hair.
"The more you think about it," she said finally, "you just get more nervous." No Zmeskal Rivalry
Although much has been made of her rivalry with the younger American star, Kim Zmeskal, 16, who defeated her in April at the world championships in Paris, Boginskaya says she feels "absolutely neutral" toward her competitors.
At the 1991 world championships in Indianapolis, Boginskaya barely lost because of what many believed to have been the overenthusiasm of American judges.
Asked about Indianapolis, Boginskaya began to cry, but only for a moment.
Brushing a tear away and trying to hide it, she said: "Well, it's all in the past."
She stopped again, then said: "Of course, I want to be the best. I've always been that way."
Fidgeting in her pink trousers, rolled up above her molded calves, she said softly: "It may seem strange, but mostly I want to take the upper hand over myself. I feel some uncertainty, and I tell myself sometimes I can't do anything the way I want to do it, and feel I'm incapable of anything." 'Repetition and Repetition'
She knows it's an absurd feeling, she said, because she's been a world champion for so long.
"But the last year and a half have not been so successful for me," she said.
"I'm growing older, and it becomes harder for me to train the same way as before. When I was younger I did many of the elements easier than now, and sometimes I make errors. And of course, when I was younger, we studied new aspects all the time. Now it's more routine work for me; it's repetition and repetition, which is of course less interesting."
It's a little strange to hear such thoughts from someone so girlish and lithe, seeming almost to disappear inside her fashionably loose trousers and tank top, but Boginskaya knows she must plan for her future after sports, and she knows a good show in the Olympics may be crucial to her marketability.
"In the future," she said, "maybe I'll leave for professional sport, or maybe work as a choreographer, or in advertisements for sports clothes. At least that's my plan so far." She said she's already had some proposals from manufacturers.
Competing for Themselves
The Olympics itself, for the last "unified team" the former Soviet Union is ever likely to field, now provides a different sort of motivation than in the past.
If previous Soviet teams were told to win for "progressive socialism" as much as for their motherland, now the athletes know that they are also competing for their careers in a tough, private marketplace.
"Before the Seoul Olympics," Boguinskaya said of the 1988 Games, in which she won the gold medal in the vault and the bronze in the all-around, "we were told we have to protect the honor of the motherland, that you perform not only for yourself, but you display the image of the Soviet Union and socialism. Now they don't say things like this, but we know ourselves what we want."
And that is?
"We want to win the Olympics," she said.
"There can be no minimum performance there." Shows and Endorsements
The chief coach of the women's gymnastic team, Aleksandr S. Aleksandrov, is blunter.
"These girls are only teen-agers, but they understand their future depends on their performance at the Olympics," he said.
"Many will leave the sport afterward, and now that it's easier to leave the country, or come and go, they can take part in various professional shows or sponsorships."
Boginskaya says she's friendly enough with her fellow gymnasts, but they're younger, "and I can't be frank with them." That's why, she said, "I mostly talk with the boys' team. They're mostly the same age, and more interesting for me." Does she have a boyfriend?
Blushing, she pushed aside her hair.
"Well, I have many friends who are boys, but I can't say one is my boyfriend."
She says she feels closer to the young women who were her teammates, but who now have left gymnastics to make their lives in this complicated, dead empire undergoing economic difficulty and reform.
"The girls are practically all married now and many have children," she said.
"They write me in their letters, 'Sveta, enough of this gymnastics! Live a normal life!' But I think it's difficult now to live a normal life, because our country is not in a normal situation."
Aleksandrov thinks Boginskaya has "good prospects" in Barcelona in the vault, the beam (her favorite) and maybe in the all-around.
As a team, he said, "our plan is three gold medals, a silver and a bronze," but he says there is more competition this year than in 1988.
As for Zmeskal, Aleksandrov says he doesn't want to offend her, "but usually each world champion brings something new, some new beauty or complexity, and I didn't see anything new in her." Frankly, he said, "I like Shannon Miller more. She has a good program that meets today's demands, at least as we see them."
Aleksandrov said he thought that some of the American gymnasts emphasize their leaping and dancing ability at the expense of mastering the sport's technical points.
Boginskaya is wistful for life, having hardly lived an ordinary one.
Her father, a builder, and her mother, a housewife, are from Minsk, in Belarus.
Boginskaya started in gymnastics at the age of 7, pushed by her parents.
"It was boring for me at home," she said.
"So in the first years of school, when a lady coach came and asked who wanted to go into gymnastics, I agreed. I wasn't much of a gymnastics fan then, but my parents said they'd better send me to some sports group, because I wasn't obedient at home and didn't listen to them."
Now, of course, her parents are proud, but she sees little of them.
For more than half her life, since the age of 10, Boginskaya has been coming here to the Olympics training camp at Osero Krugloye, at first for 10 days a year, and then for longer and longer periods.
"You could say I've spent most of my life here," she said.
Not that the life is bad amid the forests.
There is a dormitory for the athletes, excellent facilities, no lines for food and few worries.
But now, of course, with the end of large state subsidies, maintenance is lacking, the grass is growing long and the paint is peeling.
And both Boginskaya and her coach agree the food is worse, with less dairy products, fresh fruits and vegetables.
Will she go back to Minsk when her career is finished?
"Maybe," she said.
"I just don't know what will happen. So far I only know gymnastics."
Here she gave a big, grown-up sigh and shrugged.
"Of course I want to do well," she said.
"But life is very complicated, and in the end, you must give in to it."


The Chirps in 'Dr. Faustus,' And the Artist Behind Them
The Theater Am Turm (Theater at the Tower) in Frankfurt is one of those trendy alternative performance spaces that have cropped up all over Europe, putting on Next Wave-like productions for eager young audiences.
Recently, the show was "Dr. Faustus Lights the Lights," a little-known play by Gertrude Stein that Robert Wilson has transformed into a classic Wilson piece.
In other words, the characters in this typically elliptical Stein text, in which the Faustian theme of overreaching ambition is touched on and teased throughout, are portrayed by two or three actors.
They move robotically, with "Cabaret"-like grimaces, as lighting stabs through the darkness.
And there is lots of music, from chirping environmental sounds to patches of quiet instrumental texture to actual songs.


Two at the Wheel of the Batmobile
A sign flutters from the red-tile roof of the sedate beige-brick executive office building at Warner Brothers here.
It reads simply: "The Bat Is Back. Bigger Than Ever."
Robert A. Daly, chairman and chief executive of Warner Brothers Inc., producers of "Batman Returns," grinned as he recalled the morning he saw the unexpected sign, placed there by a Warner executive.
"We had so much riding on 'Batman Returns' because it's not just a movie, it's an industry," Mr.
Daly said.
"Once we saw the movie play before an audience, we became confident."


Exiled Haitian Leader Forms a Movement to Negotiate His Return
Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and a group of Haitians from the Roman Catholic Church, the national Parliament and the business and professional communities have formed a new citizens campaign in an attempt to allow Father Aristide to return to power, Father Aristide said yesterday.
In a telephone interview from Washington, Father Aristide said he would be prepared to return to Haiti within a month to begin negotiations on a political solution.
But he demanded that the Organization of American States and the United Nations establish a presence in Haiti before his return to guarantee the citizen movement's safety.


Ms. Gauthier, Alexander Carswell
Marie-Christine Gauthier, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul E. Gauthier of Montreal, was married yesteray in Georgeville, Quebec, to Alexander Carswell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Carswell of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Hollis Plimpton performed the Anglican ceremony at St.
George's Church.
Ms.
Gauthier, 25 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a student at California State University in Northridge.
Her father is a manager at Laurentian Financial in Montreal.


U.S. Olympic Soling Team Taps a Who's Who of Yachting
An Olympic crew from the United States has developed a unique way of honing its sailing skills before the Summer Games in Barcelona, Spain.
Instead of depending on teammates to tune up against, the Soling Class crew has arranged for a pre-Games clinic in Barcelona with some of the best match-race sailors in the world.
Among the yachtsmen who have accepted the teaching invitation are Chris Dickson of New Zealand, the former America's Cup helmsman who is ranked No. 1 in the world in match racing; and American sailors such as Peter Isler, who is ranked No. 3; Larry Klein, the 1991 Soling world champion, No. 15; and two former America's Cup helmsmen and Olympic silver medalists in the Soling Class, John Kostecki, ranked No. 16, and John Kolius, no ranking.
Only the Best
Ed Baird, the Soling team's coach, said that it only made sense to go to the top.
The crew's skipper is Kevin Mahaney of Bangor, Me.
"We all sat around and said, 'How do we make sure that our matchracing is as good as possible?' We knew we could sail against other competitors. But they're sailing for other countries, and by doing that, we would only make them better."


Editorial Notebook; The Shock of Nonrecognition
For a young man in suburban Cleveland, 1942 was not a vintage year to graduate from Heights High School.
The draft was scooping up every able-bodied 18-year-old in the neighborhood.
The Depression had hit the city hard and except for some sprouting defense industries it was still a town on its uppers.
Until graduation day, however, few members of the class of '42 worried about war or depression.
Heights High was a pleasant school with a big front lawn surrounded by middle-class one-family houses.
Bobby sox and saddle shoes were in.
If there was a school hero, it was Sam Sheppard, later the focus of a celebrated murder trial.
He was class president, captain of the football team and, by graduation, going steady with the most popular girl in the school, Marilyn Reese.


Athletic Official at UMass Resigns
DAVID BISCHOFF, associate chancellor for athletics at the University of Massachusetts, who is under investigation by a state Legislative committee, has resigned.
Bischoff said Friday that he was stepping down to devote all of his attention to clearing his name of allegations of mismanagement within the school.
He said his resignation was effective immediately. (AP)


Social Security Remains a Binding Contract
To the Editor:
Ross Perot says he might ask elderly people making more than $60,000 a year voluntarily to give up their Social Security benefits (front page, June 12).
The American people were, for the most part, forced to contribute to the Social Security system with the specific understanding that they would, on retirement and old age, receive certain benefits.


Two at the Wheel of the Batmobile
A sign flutters from the red-tile roof of the sedate beige-brick executive office building at Warner Brothers here.
It reads simply: "The Bat Is Back. Bigger Than Ever."
Robert A. Daly, chairman and chief executive of Warner Brothers Inc., producers of "Batman Returns," grinned as he recalled the morning he saw the unexpected sign, placed there by a Warner executive.
"We had so much riding on 'Batman Returns' because it's not just a movie, it's an industry," Mr.
Daly said.
"Once we saw the movie play before an audience, we became confident."


Results Plus
GOLF Another Year, Another Lead for Norman Greg Norman shot a three-under 69 that provided him with a one-shot lead going into the final round of the Centel Western Open in Lemont, Ill.
Norman's lead over Duffy Waldorf was cut to one when he missed a two-and-a-half-foot par putt on the final hole.
The bogey put him at 205 through three rounds, or 11 under par on the 7,073-yard Dubsdread course.
At this tournament last year, Norman took a five-shot lead into the last eight holes but had a 41 on the back nine and lost by two shots.
Waldorf, the runner-up at last week's Buick Classic, scrambled to a 70 that included a 35-foot par putt on the 11th hole.
Jeff Sluman shot a nine-under-par 63 that broke the course record set by Robert Gamez in 1989.
Sluman and Ben Crenshaw are tied for third at 207. (AP) Woosnam Wins Again: Ian Woosnam won his third consecutive Monte Carlo Open, closing with a five-under-par 64 for a 261 total.
He won by two strokes over Johan Rystrom and Mark McNulty. (AP) Richard Takes Lead: Deb Richard birdied four of the first five holes on her way to a five-under-par 66 and built a one-stroke lead over Tammie Green and Meg Mallon after two rounds of the L.P.G.A.
Jamie Farr Toledo Classic in Sylvania, Ohio. (AP) Gilbert Tops Leader Board: Gibby Gilbert shot a seven-under-par 64, charging to the front of the $600,000 Kroger Senior Classic in Mason, Ohio, by a stroke over J. C. Snead.
Gilbert is 12 under heading into today's final round. (AP) HARNESS RACING  Suprising Victors at Yonkers Valley Boss B I and Dungeness registered major upsets last night at Yonkers Raceway in two of the three trials of the $493,685 Yonkers Trot, the opening leg of the triple crown.
In the first of the trials, Valley Boss B I, the 3-year-old colt, went wire to wire in a lifetime best of 1:583/5 for the mile to advance to the nine-horse final on July 11, when the purse will be $370,265.
Valley Boss B I returned $26.40, $14.80 and $2.80.
Dungeness, with Harold Kelly, was an even bigger upset winner in the second trail, defeating McCluckey by five lengths in 1:592/5 .
The 3-year-old ran away from the field to pay $80.60, $22 and $2.10. (AP) RUNNING Larrieu-Smith Sets Record in Peachtree Francie Larrieu-Smith broke a nine-year-old record yesterday in winning the women's division of the Peachtree Road Race in Atlanta, her final tuneup for the Olympic marathon.
Larrieu-Smith ran the 10 kilometers in 31 minutes 49 seconds, a time that beat the record by 12 seconds.
Sammy Lelei of Kenya won the men's race, tying the record of 27:56. (AP)


The Antarctic On an Icebreaker
A series of expeditions to the "far side" of Antarctica are among trips to remote areas scheduled for next fall and winter.
The trips to Antarctica are being arranged by Quark Expeditions, which is using a Russian icebreaker, the 112-passenger Kapitan Khlebnikov.
The three journeys, ranging from 28 to 31 days, begin in November and end in February.
The route of the first trip is from Cape Town to Antarctica and then on to Fremantle, Australia.
Passengers will visit the Sub-Antarctic islands to see emperor penguins and other wildlife in the Indian and Pacific Oceans.
Fares range from $11,975 to $16,475 a person in double occupancy.
Air fares, ranging from about $1,900 to $2,700, depending on which trip is taken, are extra.
The route of the second voyage is Fremantle to Fremantle and the third, Fremantle to Bluff, New Zealand.
Information: Quark Expeditions, 980 Post Road, Darien, Conn. 06820; (203) 656-0499 or (800) 356-5699.


Public &amp; Private; The Truth Telling
When she wrote about a Supreme Court decision on the liability of tobacco companies, New York Times reporter Linda Greenhouse included a paragraph, part human interest, part factoid, explaining which of the justices smoked.
She was in no position to do something along the same lines last week when the Court handed down its decision on abortion.
There was no obvious way of telling if anyone on the Court had family or friends who had once ended a pregnancy.


Batten Down the Hatches, Tie Down the Patio Set
THE Atlantic hurricane season extends from June 1 through Nov. 30.
Although most hurricanes that strike the eastern United States occur in August, September and October, knowing how to protect houses and property, as well as taking appropriate precautions, can be of enormous benefit.
In a hurricane, high winds and flooding are the chief causes of damage.
To protect the house from wind, keep dead wood pruned from trees and avoid letting large branches overhang buildings.


Why Whale-Lovers and Whale-Hunters Can't Agree
The six-year-old ban on whale hunting collapsed last week when Norway said it would begin hunting minke whales again and Iceland quit the International Whaling Commission, which oversees the ban.
Japan, which now takes 300 whales a year for "research purposes" but sells them to expensive restaurants, has also said it wants minke hunting reopened.
At issue is whether the species has recovered enough to hunt without danger of extinction.
The whaling commission's best estimates are that there are 86,000 minkes in the northern hemisphere and 600,000 in the southern (whales don't migrate or mate across equators).


Keeping the Hearts Racing
Action News, touted as the Arab world's first tabloid and filled with the staple tales of love and gore, burst onto newsstands three months ago and has shaken the foundations of the stodgy Egyptian press.
The weekly paper, which often sells out quickly, is now the second largest in the country, with a circulation of 750,000 copies, just behind Al Ahram, with nearly one million daily.


The Antarctic On an Icebreaker
A series of expeditions to the "far side" of Antarctica are among trips to remote areas scheduled for next fall and winter.
The trips to Antarctica are being arranged by Quark Expeditions, which is using a Russian icebreaker, the 112-passenger Kapitan Khlebnikov.
The three journeys, ranging from 28 to 31 days, begin in November and end in February.
The route of the first trip is from Cape Town to Antarctica and then on to Fremantle, Australia.
Passengers will visit the Sub-Antarctic islands to see emperor penguins and other wildlife in the Indian and Pacific Oceans.
Fares range from $11,975 to $16,475 a person in double occupancy.
Air fares, ranging from about $1,900 to $2,700, depending on which trip is taken, are extra.
The route of the second voyage is Fremantle to Fremantle and the third, Fremantle to Bluff, New Zealand.
Information: Quark Expeditions, 980 Post Road, Darien, Conn. 06820; (203) 656-0499 or (800) 356-5699.


JUNE 28-JULY 4: 'A Natural'; Hollywood Zooms In On a Kidnapping Story
As the full story behind the kidnapping and death of Sidney J. Reso, the president of Exxon International Co., began to become clear last week, Hollywood headed for the telephones.
Combining the abduction of an influential oil executive with a massive Federal Bureau of Investigation manhunt and a troubled family caught in a cruel, seemingly unstoppable spasm of greed, the horrible saga, said one producer, was "a natural" for television.


California Hit by Most Powerful Quake in 40 Years


Dance and Song Are Cheek to Cheek on Broadway
If they're dancing like mad on Broadway this summer, it is thanks to four musicals that have checked in with trunks full of choreography and decided to stay.
"Crazy for You," "Jelly's Last Jam" and two Frank Loesser revivals, "Guys and Dolls" and "The Most Happy Fella," are widely dissimilar, but they give show dancing a pride of place through a freshness, even sassiness, that theatergoers have not seen in years.
This happy state stems largely from a new look at the so-called integrated musical, with its historic disdain for set pieces outside the narrative framework.
Dance is back up front in these productions where, in show-business parlance, it "carries the story forward": It is equal to the dialogue and the songs, not subordinate to music as in so many of Broadway's British imports.


The Road to Hell Is Paved With Yellow Bricks
WAS
By Geoff Ryman. 371 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


With or Without A Playing Partner
PERHAPS the most valuable solo bridge teacher ever devised is Autobridge, still popular after more than half a century.
The student places a deal sheet at the back of the Autobridge board and opens small windows to expose his hand.
He then selects his bids and plays, exposing more windows to verify his choices.
Finally, he reviews the deal in a companion booklet.
Autobridge is available from Baron-Barclay Bridge Supplies, (800) 274-2221.
The first of many experts to prepare deals for Autobridge was Maurice Seiler, who used to win at the national level many years ago: in 1948 he won a National Mixed Team title with Waldemar Von Zedtwitz as a teammate.
Mr.
Seiler recently celebrated his 87th birthday at his home in New York City, and he plays regularly at the Manhattan Club.
On the diagramed deal, reported by one of his regular partners, Dr.
Paul Metz of Brooklyn, he was in action holding the South cards at the Beverly Club.


Judith B. Wolk and Jason Katz
Judith Bess Wolk, the daughter of David H. Wolk of Pittsburgh and Mrs.
Richard H. Margolin of Palm City, Fla., was married Thursday to Jason Katz, a son of Curtis Katz of Great Neck, L.I., and Nahum Nave of New York.
Rabbi Melissa Crespi performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Sholom in Roslyn, L.I.
Mrs.
Katz, 28 years old, is a director of Morgan Grenfell Capital Management in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is a stockbroker at Prudential-Bache Securities in Pittsburgh.


Employment: Not Great, but Not Horrible
More people were working in America in June than in any month since the end of 1990.
If that's not what you thought you read in the papers last week, don't worry.
It isn't.
The report that employment plunged in June, with nonfarm payrolls declining by 117,000, helped to persuade the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates yet again and spurred more talk about a "triple-dip" recession.


Interest Rate Bubble Is Going to Burst
To the Editor:
"Bush Calls on Fed for Another Drop in Interest Rates" (front page, June 24) makes me sad.
This overuse of monetarism is unsound.
The excessive use of monetary theory interferes with the more rational play of supply and demand in the bond market.
Keith Trauner rang the bell in an article in Barron's last April 13, stating: "Never in my experience has the price of a commodity doubled in a time where its supply has quintupled." The flaw in the Nicholas Brady-Alan Greenspan bond scheme will be that the law of supply and demand will eventually catch them.
One of the dangerous consequences of this bond scheme is the redistribution of wealth taking place on Wall Street.
To keep the Bush-Brady bond scheme greased, Mr.
Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, has continually had to lower interest rates.
This continual lowering of interest rates has pushed the public out of certificates of deposit to seek higher returns.
This has caused excessive evaluation in the stock market.
The public is being fleeced.
This will only serve to multiply the social dislocations when the bubble bursts.
President Bush, like Ronald Reagan before him, is playing stooge for the Stock Exchange.
The Federal Reserve has lowered the interest rate more than 20 times since 1989.
Unfortunately, gross debt keeps increasing.
The things the Bush Treasury has done to sustain this hoax go beyond the absurd.
The Treasury postpones borrowing.
It postpone taking over savings and loan institutions.
It postpones the marking to market of bank assets.
Withholding schedules have been changed, veteran benefits accelerated.
The breakdown of Treasury refunding has been changed (lowering the 30-year offering).
Now, President Bush calls for lower interest rates to keep this bank-fed Treasury bond scheme going.
He's over his head.
The longer it takes the public to realize it, the further in the hole we get.
We've already reached the point of social dislocations.
What next?
Anarchy?
RUDE KERVEN Fayetteville, N.Y., June 24, 1992


On the Street: Drug Gangs Thrive as Arsenals Expand
ON a blustery blue-sky day in New Haven recently, a 21-year-old drug boss stood on a street corner and chewed on a meatball sub while praying that it wouldn't rain.
"I guess it really doesn't matter," said the man, as he licked tomato sauce from his fingers.
"I've been in this business long enough to know that if people want dope they'll find a way to buy it even if the snow is six feet high."


Overactive
ACTIVE WEAR WAS MADE FOR JUMPING, STEPPING AND LEAPING.
IT takes up no room in the suitcase and washes out in the sink.
Though these outfits may never look the same on you as they do on these spectacular performers from the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus, the beauty of active wear is that it looks as sleek on a morning bike ride as it does midtumble.
In fact, it adapts to any exertion with less strain than you would have refusing that last piece of Mississippi mud cake -- which you'd better do if you intend to look good in any of this stuff.


Getting to Know the Italian Flat Bread Focaccia
TEN years ago, not many Americans knew what focaccia was.
But this Italian flat bread has become increasingly popular, whether it is served with a meal, as a snack, as an hors d'ouvre or even a sandwich.
It is a boon for entertaining on the weekend because the dough can be made ahead of time and frozen.
Focaccia is made with a dough similar to the one used for pizza, but it comes out with a thicker crust.
It is good served hot from the oven, flavored with sage or rosemary, or topped with onions and sun-dried tomatoes.
A thick focaccia makes a great picnic sandwich, sliced in half and filled with all manner of ingredients: grilled eggplant, radicchio, onions or sausage, sauteed mushrooms or the classic summer combination of mozzarella, tomato and basil.


Mandela Sets Terms for Resuming Talks: No White Minority Veto
Nelson Mandela, president of the African National Congress, said today that he would resume negotiations on South Africa's future only if President F. W. de Klerk abandoned demands for a white minority veto.
Mr.
Mandela said that he welcomed concessions this week from Mr. de Klerk aimed at reviving talks, but that the white Government still failed to accept the "fundamental principle" of majority rule.


All Americans Share Forest Inheritance
To the Editor:
What do the ancient trees of our virgin forests have in common with Yellowstone Park, Niagara Falls, the Grand Canyon or Yosemite National Park?
Answer: they belong to all Americans in common, not to any Wall Street corporation, to the Japanese who buy them so cheaply or even to the rapidly shrinking work force of loggers who are waiting to cut them down.


'Have You Heard the One About . . . ?'
THEY are traveling in a smoking compartment, but Gerard, the "Parisian skirt chaser," nevertheless asks the pretty young woman opposite him, would she mind if he lit a cigarette?
The conversational gambit sounds archaic today; in the early 1920's, on a train trip to Constantinople (not yet Istanbul), it works.
Little does Gerard know that his companion has been waiting for just such an opening; she is a Soviet spy, he is her target, as Maurice Dekobra's 1925 novel "La Madone des Sleepings" ("The Madonna of the Sleeping Cars") will eventually reveal.
The book glamorizing deluxe train travel was translated into many languages and sold 15 million copies around the world.
It is all but forgotten today.
When Dekobra was 86 years old, he wrote a "Madonna of the Boeings," but it went nowhere.
Is there less magic in flying, even executive class, than in the old Orient Express?
Just listen to the Madonna of the Sleepers, Lady Diana Wyndham, as, at the end of Dekobra's best seller, she languidly announces: "I have a train ticket for Constantinople. But I may stop in Vienna or Budapest . . . that depends on chance or on the color of the eyes of the passenger in the neighboring compartment."


Fugitive Kidnaps 2 and Eludes Search
A prison escapee who has eluded searchers for weeks in the forested hills and gulches near the rim of this magnificent chasm, kidnapped two women today and slipped out of the national park, officials said.
The escapee, Danny Ray Horning, a 35-year-old convicted bank robber who is wanted for questioning in a California slaying, kidnapped the women and forced them to drive out of the park in their rented vehicle, said Maureen Oltrogge, a spokeswoman for the National Park Service.


Jaunty and Festive Mediterranean Fare
THE East End shuffle is in full swing.
In Westhampton Beach, Starr Boggs has taken his restaurant to the beach.
In its former village quarters is Saffron, presided over by its chef and owner, Ali Fathalla.
The talented Mr.
Fathalla is also the chef and a partner at Ca'Nova in Manhattan and at All Seasons at the Inn at Quogue.
Saffron's jaunty orange marquee and seaside mural herald the lusty yet stylish Mediterranean food.
In cooling contrast are sky-blue walls, alabaster sconces, sharp black-and-white photographs and white billowing, diaphanous cloth covering the sunny yellow ceiling.


INSIDE
Graf Wins Wimbledon
Steffi Graf won her fourth Wimbledon title with a 6-2, 6-1 victory and stopped Monica Seles's bid for a 1992 Grand Slam.
SportsSunday, section 8.
A Diet That Works
A study has found prescription appetite suppressants enable obese people to lose weight and keep it off.
Page 12.
Mandela Sets Conditions
Nelson Mandela said he would resume talks if South Africa's leader stopped seeking a white veto.
Page 8.


Technology; The Sensory Truck Tire
Trucking companies have typically kept track of the age and life history of tires by marking them with an electric branding iron or applying stickers with serial numbers, alerting the user to how soon the tire might need retreading.
But the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company has developed what it calls a "smart tire," which will ultimately be able to monitor its own durability and give a much more detailed account of performance.


Stop Ticketing Nudists In East Hampton
The use of "undercover" police officers to arrest nude sunbathers on the village beaches in East Hampton  [ "All Nudes Off the Beach," "Long Island Journal," May 31 ]  is a misguided effort to enforce an archaic law.
Nude recreation is becoming increasingly popular nationwide.
The vast majority of those who enjoy nude beaches have shown consistent respect for the rights of non-nudist beachgoers.
On Long Island, this is most apparent at Fire Island National Seashore, where nudists actively cooperate with National Park Service officials to preserve clothing-optional use of the Lighthouse Beach area.
The Naturist Society, a national nudist organization, has begun efforts to amend the New York State "exposure of a person" law, a poorly drafted statute that prohibits all public nudity.
The proposed change would allow nude recreational activity where appropriate while continuing to ban lewd and disorderly conduct.


Mongols, Ignored by Stepmother Russia, Are Left Adrift by Democracy, Too
Adiya's larder is empty and his much-patched trousers have split open, revealing an expanse of equally sorry underwear, but his clothing is not nearly as tattered as his illusions about democracy.
Two years ago, when a democratic revolution swept across Mongolia as well as most of the Communist world, Mr.
Adiya was delighted, and expected that life would improve.
But these days, as he scours this dusty town for bread, butter and clothing, often unable to buy even what his ration card entitles him to, he has been shorn of his enthusiasm.


Catherine O'Brien, L. H. Cooke 2d
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. O'Brien of Smithtown, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Catherine Jain Elizabeth O'Brien, to Lawrence H. Cooke 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward M. Cooke of Monticello, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss O'Brien, 27 years old, is the associate editor with Faulkner &amp; Gray, a business publishing company in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University, as did her fiance, who also received his law degree there.
Her father is the first vice president of research and development at the Long Island Savings Bank in Melville, L.I.


The Executive Computer; Michael Dell Says He's More Than Ready for a Good Fight
While much of the personal computer industry struggled through the last two years, and giants like I.B.M. and Compaq reported their first quarterly losses, the Dell Computer Corporation was recording quarterly sales gains of 75 percent or more.
The company, which started less than a decade ago in a dormitory room at the University of Texas, is expected to report sales this year of $1.7 billion.
At the helm sits Michael Dell, now 27 years old.
His business plan has not changed much: He builds innovative computers, prices them below most of the competition, sells them directly to customers who call Dell's toll-free number, and, according to a succession of surveys of corporate buyers, offers the best after-sale service and support of any computer maker.
Many rival executives who ridiculed his approach are no longer around, and their companies are struggling to copy his success.


Data Bank/July 5, 1992


Sports of The Times; Power Play For Women: Noises Off
HAIR braided neatly, straight out of a Robert Herrick poem, a sprightly young ballgirl bent down for a loose tennis ball yesterday, only to encounter pure living terror, the Yank From Hell.
Looming above her was the grim executioner himself, J. P. McEnroe Jr., wielding a tennis racquet at the offending ball but about to clobber her directly on the wrist.


String Quartets Take Center Stage
IT'S a good week for lovers of the string quartet repertory, with the Cleveland Quartet in residence at the Norfolk Festival, and the Cassatt String Quartet, a young ensemble, spending today and next Sunday afternoon at Music Mountain.
The Cleveland players have chosen quartets of Beethoven, Prokofiev and Dvorak for their 3 P.M. recital today in Norfolk.
The group's founding cellist, Paul Katz, then presides at a pre-concert musical conversation, Friday evening at 7:30, before joining his colleagues an hour later for Mendelssohn's Quartet in D (Op. 44, No. 1), "Quartessence," by the contemporary American composer Stephen Paulus, and, with the assistance of the pianist Claude Frank, the F Minor Brahms Quintet.


Documents Warned in '85 of Iraqi Nuclear Aims
Newly declassified Pentagon documents describe warnings as early as 1985 that there was a danger that American technology could be illegally diverted from Iraq's nuclear energy program into an effort to make nuclear weapons.
The documents indicate that Administration officials had warnings about Iraq's dangerous nuclear ambitions much earlier than previously known.
They were released this week as Congressional Democrats pressed their case that the policies of the Reagan and Bush Administrations toward President Saddam Hussein of Iraq were flawed up to his invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, and may have also been criminal.


Ms. Hazard, Lawrence Flynn
Katharine Belden Hazard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Michael Hazard of Dedham, Mass., was married yesterday to Lawrence Paul Flynn, a son of Dorothy C. Flynn of Rochester and the late John M. Flynn.
The Rev.
Larry Washburn performed the Episcopal ceremony at Mr. and Mrs.
Hazard's summer home of in Saunderstown, R.I.
Mrs.
Flynn, 32 years old, is a principal in Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons, the New York investment bank.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is the chairman and president of Westfield Capital Managememt in Boston.
Her mother, Susan Hazard, is a real-estate broker at Vantage Properties in Wellesley, Mass.


Companies Working Out of the Recession With No Added Jobs
After two years of being battered by recession, the Timken Company, a producer of bearings and high-quality steel in Canton, Ohio, is beginning to stir.
In its cavernous plant in a quiet city an hour south of Cleveland, forklifts whiz back and forth, and men and women in bright yellow hard hats scurry to fill the growing level of new orders.


Housing Cuts
To the Editor:
Your article on April 5 headed "New York Slashing an Array of Programs" paints a distressing scenario for one of the most impressive government-led efforts since the New Deal.


Ms. Holliday, Jonathan Kelly
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Franklin of Boston have announced the engagement of her daughter, Margaret Carter Holliday, to Jonathan Michael Kelly, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Kelly of Glastonbury, Conn.
No wedding date has been set.
Ms.
Holliday, 29 years old, graduated from Williams College.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in environmental studies at Yale University.
Her mother, Christine Franklin, is the director of alumni relations at Simmons College in Boston.
The future bride is also a daughter of Richard C. Holliday of Westerly, R.I., the president of R. C. Holliday Inc., a consultant to the printing industry.
She is the stepdaughter of Ardis S. Holliday of Westerly.


Hope, Too, Is Gunned Down in Algeria
THE assassination of President Mohammed Boudiaf by a bodyguard came as a profound shock to Algerians last week, and it was only in part because the 73-year-old man had grown into something of a national hero in the six months since he returned from a 28-year exile to become head of state.
More important, the grief reflected a widespread hopelessness about breaking the deep political, economic and social paralysis into which Algeria has fallen.


Even Bats Have Their Buzzwords
ANIMAL TALK
Science and the Voices of Nature.
By Eugene S. Morton and Jake Page.
Illustrated. 275 pp.
New York: Random House. $22.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Georgetown, Del.; Resort-Area Affordables
A MARYLAND businessman has won approval to build a 220-acre, affordable housing community southeast of this Sussex County seat with homes on half-acre lots priced at $80,000 to $110,000.
The businessman, John P. Tunnell of Oxford, Md., whose family has owned the property at the southern end of the state for 53 years, said his 212-home South Forest development has been in the planning stages about seven years.


Lisa Seiden, Gerald McGowan
Mr. and Mrs.
Steven A. Seiden of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Brooke Seiden to Gerald Gunter McGowan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald F. McGowan of Floral Park, Queens.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Seiden, 25 years old, is an investment analyst at the Portfolio Group, an investment advisory concern in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is the president of Seiden Associates, an executive search concern in New York.
Her mother, Katherine Seiden, is an interior designer at Seiden-Baker Interiors in New York.


Susan Hawe and Marc Parent
FOUR years ago, Marc Parent and Susan Hawe were living in a tiny, crowded apartment in Greenwich Village.
"There were three guys, two bedrooms and three girlfriends," Mr.
Parent, an actor, recalled.
Many of the roommates -- Mr.
Parent and Ms.
Hawe among them -- had moved to New York from rural Wisconsin, and at night they would play country music together, with two of the guys on guitars, one on pots and pans, and Ms.
Hawe, now a teacher at St.
Luke's School in the Village, singing.
The mood of those nights was recaptured in their wedding on June 27 when Mr.
Parent and Ms.
Hawe, both 29 years old, were married outside an 18th-century house on a farm owned by friends in Stillwater in northwestern New Jersey.


Sharon E. Brady, James W. Lowe
Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Brady of Omaha have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sharon Elizabeth Brady, to James Willard Lowe, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Nobles Lowe of Carmel, N.Y.
Ms.
Brady, 29 years old, is a marketing specialist in the Washington office of the Kenan Systems Corporation, a custom software development company in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is a vice president of the Leo A. Daly Company, an international architectural engineering firm in Omaha.


Quilt Festival In Vermont
Several thousand enthusiasts are expected to attend New England's largest quilt event, the Vermont Quilt Festival, at Norwich University, Northfield, Vt., July 10 to 12.
More than 300 antique and new quilts will be on display, and there will be a quilt contest and quilting supplies for sale and an antique quilt appraisal service by Caroline Fernandez, a Vermont antique dealer who specializes in quilts.
The appraisal fee is $20 a quilt.
Four lectures on quilting subjects are scheduled; the $5 admission to each lecture is not included in the festival entrance fee.
The festival will be open from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. on July 10 and 11 and 10 to 5 on July 12.
Admission is $6, children under 18 free.
Northfield is 10 miles southwest of Montpelier.
Information: (802) 485-7092.


The Beautiful South Twists Old Forms Into New Shapes
On the song "36D," the British band known as the Beautiful South urges, "Close your legs/ Open your mind/ Leave those compliments well behind/ Dig a little deeper into yourself/ And you may find . . ." The ellipsis is an important, lyrical strategy: it makes listeners pay attention to the song's implications -- to go beyond the superficial brashness of much of rock music to find answers within themselves.
The song shows how the group subverts pop conventions only to rise above them on its contemplative new album, "0898 -- Beautiful South" (Elektra 61308; CD and cassette).
The band's trio of vocalists -- the lyricist Paul Heaton, plus Briana Corrigan and Dave Hemingway -- cover topics ranging from drinking to old age to that rock staple, love.
Yet what they sing about is anything but commonplace.
Rather than repeating pop cliches, they resemble actors in a musical, making an argument through tuneful rhyme.


Economy Is a Pawn In China's Power Game
SECRETIVE power struggles have been a way of life here for millenniums, but now the jousting is growing particularly intense.
China's octogenarian rulers must decide within the next few months on a political platform and a roster of leaders to be approved at the crucial 14th Communist Party Congress late this year.
Deng Xiaoping already has launched his campaign -- a virtual road show -- for swifter change across the nation, and he remains the single most important political figure in China even though he no longer holds any official posts.
But there are a half-dozen other octogenarian leaders who collectively also have great influence.
The result is a protracted bargaining process, now under way behind the scenes, to determine the outcome of the party congress.


The Intensely Imagined Life of Daniel Day-Lewis
In a suite at the Bel-Air Hotel in Los Angeles, a plush refuge for stars who crave their privacy, Daniel Day-Lewis is fortifying his immune system for an interview.
On a coffee table he has placed a tiny box.
Every half-hour or so, whenever a pensive cloud seems to eclipse his mood, the lid is opened and a glass ampule removed.
Breaking off one end, he slips a golden fluid under his tongue.
"I'm counteracting the effect of having to talk about myself," he mumbles, trying not to swallow shards of glass.
"It's an anti-self-obsessional potion. This is nothing. You should see what I take in the morning."


The Cheaper Skies, $14.95
Fly free!
That's the lure of "The Insiders Guide to Air Courier Bargains" by Kelly Monaghan (Inwood Training Publications).
In fact, most flights are not free, just a lot cheaper.
You have to fly alone, at the last minute and without major luggage.
And log a lot of phone time tracking down deals.
The book is a best seller at the Complete Traveller.


JUNE 28-JULY 4: Czechoslovakia; Parliament's Rebuff of Havel May Speed Nation's Split
The event had been widely expected, but when it finally unfolded last week , the federal Parliament's rebuff to President Vaclav Havel's reelection added momentum to the quickening dissolution of Czechoslovakia.
Mr.
Havel, the dissident playwright who led the nation's Velvet Revolution in 1989, may well have been one of his country's best known figures on the world stage.
But during this June's elections, he offended the leading Slovak party, the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia, and he paid the price.
Czechoslovakia's constitution gives Czechs or Slovaks what amount to veto rights over the presidency, and the Slovaks exercised theirs Friday .


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the effect of unemployment on Bush campaign strategy described the advance delivery of the latest unemployment figures to the White House incorrectly in some copies.
The confidential report was delivered by the Labor Department, not campaign officials.


Coals To Newcastle?
To the Editor:
Paul Goldberger's essay on Euro Disney, "A Curious Mix of Versailles and Mickey Mouse"  [ June 14 ] , prompts these thoughts: For Americans, Disney theme parks represent architectural portrayals of an idyllic, manageable world: human scale, neat and freshly whitewashed.
Americans go to theme parks seeking a fictitious, simpler time of cultural homogeneity.


Virtual Reality: Is It Art Yet?
You're floating, weightless, high above an impossibly regular landscape of little blue houses, neatly arrayed in seemingly endless rows.
Tilt your head up and you see a starry sky: look to your right and you see in the distance the massive, fortresslike factories of this unnamed city.
You decide to move in for a closer view, and so you point your finger downward.
As you do so, you swoop effortlessly lower, until you're hovering just over an empty suburban street lined with featureless houses that resemble the wooden hotels in a Monopoly game.


The Greats Sing a Great
An evening of songs and reminiscences to celebrate two new historic recordings of music by Cole Porter.


Isabel Newman, Israel Sanchez Jr.
Isabel Bettoney Newman, the daughter of Lawrence W. Newman and Dr.
Ruth Dowling Bruun, both of New York, was married yesterday to Israel Michael Sanchez Jr., a son of Mr.
Sanchez Sr. and Aida Vila, both of New York.
The Rev.
Rick Spalding performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church of the Covenant in Boston.
Mrs.
Sanchez, 30 years old, is a vice president of the Shawmut Bank National Corporation in Boston.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is a partner in the New York office of the Chicago law firm of Baker &amp; McKenzie.
Her mother is a psychiatrist in New York and Westhampton, L.I., and is a clinical assistant professor at the Cornell University Medical School in New York.


Foreign Affairs; The Curse Of Nations
Around 1776, there were about 35 empires, kingdoms, countries and states in the world.
By World War II the number had doubled to roughly 70.
And that figure almost doubled again to more than 130 in the late 1960's.
Today some 190 entities are generally recognized as sovereign nation-states.
It is debatable whether these new entities have behaved better than the cruel and distant empires they displaced.
Most nation-states, in any event, have been a curse -- to their own people, especially to minorities, and to each other.
For the most part, they have oppressed their citizens and preyed on their neighbors.


Sadly, the Stereotypes Keep Cropping Up
To the Editor:
It's a sad commentary on the lack of progress for powerful executive women that even an article devoted to one woman's extraordinary achievements ("Fashion Avenue's $100 Million Woman," May 17) veers off the topic smack into pandering to that continual stereotype of women: emotionalism.


Summer Deals In the Caribbean
THE Caribbean, always eager for visitors in the off season, is making a special effort to attract them this year.
Hotel prices in the islands ordinarily drop 40 to 60 percent from April to mid-December, when mainlanders no longer need to escape the cold.
But this summer the discounts may be even deeper.
The Caribbean has been affected by the same recession that has hurt all leisure travel, but on top of that it has lost the services of Eastern Airlines and Pan American, both of which had big Caribbean route systems.
So, according to Marcella Martinez, spokeswoman for the Caribbean Tourism Organization, when the June domestic fare wars came, and the Caribbean was left out, many hotels sought to recoup customers with better summer deals.


Bush Takes Stock at Daytona Speedway
PRESIDENT BUSH celebrated the Fourth of July as grand marshal of the Pepsi 400 stock-car race at Daytona International Speedway in Florida.
He shared the occasion with RICHARD PETTY, the driving legend who was making his swan song to Daytona in his farewell tour of the racing circuit this year.
Before the race, Bush, who had been sitting in his box in the stands wearing a green Ford racing cap, took a stroll through the pit area with his son JEB BUSH and chatted with Petty and other drivers.
The drivers gave Bush an autographed race flag.
Then the President took a quick spin in a pace car to start the race.


Slugs, Beware
As hot, dry days descend, regularly soak trees and shrubs that were planted this spring, to help roots become well established.
If slugs are chomping on leaves and vegetables (they leave a shiny silvery trail behind), clean the garden of any debris or weeds.
The slimy pests, which don't like the sun, hide in wood piles and under cool, shady things like fallen leaves or boards.
In fact, a board can be used as a good trap to attract slugs, which can then be dropped in alcohol.
Or use beer: I stick tuna cans around the garden -- pushed into the soil to ground level -- and fill them with beer.
The slugs are attracted to the yeasty smell and fall in and drown.
Terrible, but who can feel sorry for a slug?


Kiss and Run


American Royale Returns To Top
American Royale made a record-breaking comeback from the only loss of her racing career yesterday when she overtook the Canadian filly Debra's Victory in the final strides and won the Prioress Stakes, the main event of the Fourth of July horse festival at Belmont Park.
The 3-year-old filly also showed a sense of theater to match that patriotic name.
After winning the first five starts of her career, she tried to challenge older horses one month ago and ran sixth.
So, she was embarked on a bit of a rescue mission yesterday, and carried it out with drama.


Legislators Beset by New Public Anger
STILL reeling from one of the most acrimonious budget battles in the state's history, lawmakers of both parties say they are experiencing unprecedented expressions of public anger and hostility.
Massive letter-writing campaigns, harassing phone calls to their homes and even occasional anonymous death threats have left many legislators shocked and sometimes intimidated by the vociferous nature of politics in New Jersey today.


LeMond Has New Foe And He Is That Person
Greg LeMond insists that he does not believe in omens and that is just as well for him after events of the last few days.
For starters, LeMond finished 15th this evening in the prologue to the 79th Tour de France bicycle race, which he has won three times but in which he finished seventh last year.


Corrections
A report in the Postings column last Sunday about the sale of the Parc Fifty-One Hotel to StarHotels omitted the name of the broker.
It was the Sonnenblick-Goldman Company of Manhattan.


Rent-Loan Fund Expanding to Manhattan
A NEW, privately financed program that pays the back rents of Westchester County tenants facing imminent eviction is planning to expand to New York City this fall.
The 18-month-old program, the Bridge Fund, hopes to raise $150,000 for a nine-month trial period in a Manhattan neighborhood, which has not yet been selected.
Fund-raising efforts are to begin this summer.


The Mild West; Tourists Ride Into Town, Cowboys Ride Into the Sunset
BIG Sky.
Open Space.
A man's got to do what a man's got to do.
These sentiments are selling better than ever, in Ralph Lauren-styled clothing and furniture, vacations built around cowboy themes, and range country sliced into 20-acre "ranchettes" tailored for the urban refugee.
At high noon it's easier to get espresso in Bozeman, Montana, than it is to find an available spittoon.
But many of those people sipping their iced caffe lattes have come to Bozeman, not far from where Ted Turner is raising buffalo on his vast ranch, precisely because tobacco-spitting is part of the mythic landscape.


Sports of The Times; Howe, Vincent and the Yankees
IN all the commotion over Fay Vincent's scolding of the Yankee hierarchy for disagreeing with Steve Howe's permanent suspension, the issue has been fogged, if not forgotten.
The issue remains Steve Howe, not the commissioner.


Jani Aronow, Daniel Gerard
Mr. and Mrs.
William Aronow of Commack, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jani Aronow, to Daniel Gerard, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Egon Gerard of New York.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Aronow, 34 years old, is the president of Aronow &amp; Pollock Communications, a public-relations concern in New York.
She graduated from Ohio State University.
Her father is the principal in the William Aronow Company, an apparel business in New York.
Her mother, Audrey Aronow, is the founder of College Choice Consulting in Commack, which provides information on colleges to high school students.


POSTINGS: Benjamin Moore in Flanders; State-of-the-Art Paint Center
For four years, the Unisys Corporation, a computer manufacturer, operated a research-and-development division out of a 78,000-square-foot building on 90 acres in Flanders, N.J.
Last year, however, it left the site, and Benjamin Moore &amp; Co., a leading paint manufacturer, bought it for $3.5 million.
Last month it began altering the building to make it into a state-of-the-art technical and administrative center.
About 120 employees will use the new facility, which will house the company's central laboratories and data processing and engineering departments.
It will also have a model store for sales training and a "paint farm" where paints are tested under actual weather conditions.
The company, based in Newark, anticipates spending $42 million on the changes.


Yeltsin to Seek More Time To Repay Old Soviet Debts
Russia will ask the major industrial nations at their summit meeting in Munich for a two-year moratorium on repayments of principal and interest on the former Soviet debt, President Boris N. Yeltsin said today.
The industrial nations, known as the G-7, for Group of 7, will meet in Munich starting Monday and have already discussed extending an existing nine-month moratorium, though September, on repayments of principal, as well as longer-term debt relief, as long as Russia's economic reforms continue.


Zimbabwe Kills Starving Elephants for Food
Faced with the worst drought in southern Africa this century, the wildlife authorities at a national park here are proceeding with what they call the grim but essential step of killing thousands of elephants and impalas so other animals as well as starving people can survive.
While animal kills are common here and elsewhere as a form of habitat management -- wildlife officials prefer the term "culling" -- rarely if ever has a drought forced the authorities to act on such a scale and with such human urgency as in the program under way at the Gonarezhou National Park.


Wall Street; Ms. Siebert, Still on the Barricades
A quarter of a century ago come December, Muriel F. Siebert became the first woman permitted to buy a seat on the New York Stock Exchange, firmly shoving open a door that she has fought to keep open for a generation of women who followed her.
Last Tuesday, Ms.
Siebert, known to all as Mickie, was honored for her efforts on behalf of Wall Street's women by being named the 1992 Veuve Clicquot Business Woman of the Year, one of 13 women around the world to be so honored.
The international prizes have been underwritten since 1972 by Champagne Veuve Clicquot, which was built by Mme.
Nicole-Barbe Clicquot, the enterprising widow who took over her late husband's young winery back in 1805 and ran it for 60 years.


Chihuly's Glass Spheres Are Worlds Unto Themselves
"There've never been so many finger marks to remove from our front window," said Joan McDonald, a spokeswoman for the American Craft Museum.
The reason?
The exhibition of Dale Chihuly's giant glass spheres, arranged on a bed of broken bottles.
Since early this year, when the Seattle glass artist installed the shimmering scene behind the museum's 20-foot-high window, a steady parade of people have been peering in, their hands and noses pressed against the panes.
The 24 opaque balls -- half of them black, half milk-white -- are among the largest blown-glass bubbles ever made, ranging from a foot to a yard or more in diameter.


Tech Notes; Mac-Created Quality Videos
The advent of multimedia computers means users can combine moving images, sound, text and graphics.
But creating a broadcast-quality video with a personal computer is complicated and costly.
The problem is that computer monitors and televisions involve different technologies, and expensive conversion equipment may be required.
Next month, however, a device will appear in stores that will allow almost anyone with an Apple Macintosh to create high-quality video productions using nothing more than a pair of standard VCR's.
The product, Videovision, from Radius Inc. of San Jose, Calif., is the most powerful device of its kind.
At $2,400, it offers better performance for the price than previous solutions.
It can produce flicker-free video output in true color at up to 30 frames a second, the speed of television broadcasts.
Videovision consists of an add-in digital video interface card with 24-bit graphic display capabilities, slots for video input and output and an external connector panel for video and audio devices.


Diana Marcus, David Muller
Mr. and Mrs.
George Freeman of Natick, Mass., have announced the engagement of her daughter, Diana Beth Marcus, to David Glenn Muller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Muller of Cherry Hill, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Marcus, 32 years old, graduated from Brown University, as did her fiance, and received her M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She was until recently the manager of special exhibitions at the Brooklyn Museum.
She is also the daughter of David Marcus of Sarasota, Fla.
Her stepfather is a vice president and the treasurer of Waban Inc., a home improvement and membership supermarket company in Natick.


Ukraine Visa
To the Editor: Having returned in May from a visit to Russia and Ukraine,we would like to tell of some problems we encountered for readers heading that way.
We entered Ukraine via Odessa, where we were obliged to buy new visas costing $50 each, although we arrived with visas for both Russia and Ukraine obtained from the Russian Consulate in San Francisco.


Don't Bomb Bosnia
To the Editor:
The remarks of Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana on the continuing tragedy in the former states of Yugoslavia quoted by Anthony Lewis in "Weakness and Shame" (column, June 14) are troubling.
To advocate United States military intervention there is at best naive and at worst irresponsible.
Senator Lugar's remark that "The time has come to draw the line" reflects his misperception of the lessons learned from the Persian Gulf conflict.


New Attraction at Florida Park
Visitors to Orlando, Fla., can get a mouse's perspective on the world -- including a cat that is nearly two stories tall -- at a new attraction in the Universal Studios theme park.
"Fievel's Playland," scheduled to open last week, is a half acre strewn with giant props and sets re-created from the Steven Spielberg films "An American Tail" and "An American Tail: Fievel Goes West."


On Welfare in Sumer; No Society Rejoices At Helping Its Poor
IF some members of the Bush Administration had been around 4,000 years ago, they might have denounced Sumer in Mesopotamia as the epitome of the welfare city-state.
Work was a duty, but social security was an entitlement.
It was personified by the Goddess Nanshe, the first real welfare queen immortalized in hymn as a benefactor who "brings the refugee to her lap, finds shelter for the weak."
Later, the New Testament presciently declared: "The poor always ye have with you." But during periodic introspections, society has been ambivalent about the causes of poverty and the possible cures and about who is responsible for both.
That historic vacillation between its role as protector or punisher reverberates with remarkable consistency in 1992 politics.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CAPTIVE WARRIORS A Vietnam POW's Story.
By Sam Johnson and Jan Winebrenner.
Texas A&amp;M University, $24.50.


DEFIANTLY INCORRECT
As a registered nurse, I find that Callahan's so-called tasteless humor can be the best medicine both for patients and health-care workers.
Laughter can help people to cope, even in the worst situations.
KATE O'CONNOR
Valley Stream, L.I.


Four Airlines Agree to Pay To Settle Suit
If you bought an airline ticket from American, Delta, United or USAir for domestic travel after Jan. 1, 1988, and if that flight took you to New York, Dallas, Chicago, Pittsburgh, Atlanta or any other of about 25 other hub cities, you may be eligible to receive money or discount coupons on future flights.
While denying that they conspired to fix prices, the four airlines recently agreed to pay more than $400 million to settle a class-action suit charging them with that violation.
Pitts Carr, a lawyer for the plaintiffs, said that up to 10 million people could be eligible.
But the first step toward determining eligibility is to send a card or letter to Airline Antitrust Litigation, Post Office Box 209, Philadelphia, Pa. 19107.


50 Different Economies; Workers Who Follow the Jobs Are the Keys to Economic Health
IT'S morning in the Midwest and middle South, where the numbers crunchers at the Federal Reserve recently identified satisfying upticks in industrial production.
But the rays have yet to penetrate the recessionary gloom in New England and New York City.
And the night is still a pup in southern California, where cutbacks in defense are just beginning to hit home.
Who changed the rules?
What has happened to transform one economy indivisible into a regional free-for-all?


Quayle Simply Backs Old Spelling Values
To the Editor:
Vice President Dan Quayle has made spelling a hot potato issue by "correcting" a 12-year-old.
Mr.
Quayle's campaign stress on old values is consistent since his "potatoe" spelling appeared in an 1831 edition of Noah Webster's "American Spelling Book," reprinted in 1962 in Teachers College, Columbia University, Classics in Education No. 17 (page 75).


Crime
On the day that Doc Miller gets out of the Jackson pen, after serving seven years for throwing a victory party at which an under-age baseball groupie died of a drug overdose, the former pitcher for the Detroit Tigers goes back to the old block, surveys the empty lot at the end of the street and weeps.
"Not for the houses," Loren D. Estleman assures us in KING OF THE CORNER (Bantam, $20), "and not even for himself or the lost years, but for a neighborhood with so much open space and no baseball team." In this wrenching finale to the author's Detroit crime trilogy, the death of a city comes down to that -- no more pickup games on street corners.
It takes a tough man to admit to such tender sensibilities, so it's no surprise when Doc rounds up what appears to be the last good guys left in his beat-up, worn-out town and tries to get a game going.
But the ex-con soon learns that "life ain't baseball" when he finds work driving a flashy bail bondsman on his missions of mercy to an underworld clientele.
Before Doc can get his dream team together on his field of broken glass, this raffish crowd draws him into the hunt for a black revolutionary wanted by the police for murder.
The black establishment, headed by a "diabolically subtle" politician (pointedly identified here as Detroit's own Mayor Coleman A. Young), has its own reasons for wanting Doc to find this young firebrand.


Q and A
Italian V.A.T. Refunds
Q.
I have heard that V.A.T. charges on hotel rooms and restaurants are refundable.
When we were leaving Italy recently we were told that they were not.
What is the case? -- David Curtis, Milford, Conn.


Gov. Weld's Stature Rises in G.O.P.
Gov.
William F. Weld did something Michael S. Dukakis could not do: balance the Massachusetts budget without raising taxes.
Now he is doing something George Bush will not do: advocate a change in the Republican platform favoring abortion rights.
Through a combination of fiscal conservatism and support for traditionally liberal causes like abortion rights, Massachusetts' 46-year-old freshman Governor has rapidly become a national figure and a potential leader for many Republicans.


Agassi Points McEnroe to the Exit; Ivanisevic Pulls Another Power Trip
The grand old man of grass-court tennis was right where he wanted to be for the duration of his eighth Wimbledon semifinal: glaring across the net at his challenger, a baseline-bound ingenue with saucer eyes and a blithely artificial Harpo-Harlow hairdo.
If tradition counts for anything -- and here it is supposed to account for everything -- John McEnroe, a three-time Wimbledon champion, should have been able to volley Andre Agassi into oblivion or submission, whichever came first.


Upper Manhattan Block Erupts After a Man Is Killed in Struggle With a Policeman
A man carrying a concealed gun was shot to death during a struggle with an undercover police officer in the lobby of a Washington Heights apartment building on Friday night, the police said.
The slaying prompted violent demonstrations on the block yesterday, with angry residents saying the shooting was unjustified.
Fires were set in the street yesterday morning, a car was overturned and debris rained down from buildings, leaving the block of the shooting, West 162d Street off St.
Nicholas Avenue, littered with garbage, shattered bottles, vegetables, crates, slats of wood and even car parts.


Networking; New Lives for Old Machines?
What to do with old PC's?
It's not a trivial question, especially now that corporate buyers who had been holding off on replacing systems are taking advantage of the wave of price cutting to buy new machines.
There is little or no resale value in PC-, XT- or even AT-class computers.
The Boston Computer Exchange, which brokers used equipment, does not even list PC's and XT's in its weekly update of prices for second-hand equipment.
An AT from the International Business Machines Corporation can be had for as little as $250.


Quotation of the Day
"The great fear of senior adults is what will happen if they become frail. The fear is that they will become dependent. A senior adult views independence as some people view life itself. " -- LESTER I. KAPLAN, executive director of the Jewish Community Center of Greater Washington in Rockville, Md.  [ 12:2. ]


A $234.6 Million Mixed-Use Tower For the West Side
AS backhoes clawed the earth last week near Lincoln Center, a development partnership led by Christopher M. Jeffries announced that it had raised the $234.6 million financing needed to build one of the most mixed mixed-use structures that New York City is ever likely to see.
The project, called Lincoln Square, is to have 38 floors of rental and condominium apartments.
Its commercial base, which is already leased or sold, would hold 10 movie theaters, including a 900-seat house and a giant-screen Imax auditorium; a sports center; a post office and book, music, clothing and athletic apparel stores.


JUNE 28-JULY 4: A Baboon Liver; Transplant of Animal Organs Seems Eased by New Drugs
Since 1905, surgeons have tried at least 33 times to transplant an animal organ into a human, but no attempts have succeeded longer than nine months, largely because the drugs the patients received were too weak to overcome the rejection phenomenon.
Last week, armed with a new concoction of four drugs, including a potent experimental one, FK-506, surgeons at the University of Pittsburgh tried again.
They transplanted a baboon liver to a human for the first time.
Routinely overcoming the species barrier on a long-term basis would open new vistas for transplant surgery by alleviating the tremendous shortage of donor human livers, kidneys, hearts and other organs.
Thousands of patients now die each year while waiting for a human organ that fails to come in time.


In American Backyards, The Spirit of Chekhov
MAYBE it is overreaching to say that the Phoenix Theater production of "Morning's at Seven" at Purchase, N.Y., is as lovely as the 1980 New York revival, which won various awards, one of them for ensemble acting.
After all, that was Broadway with a big-time budget, and this is a summer theater bound by three weeks of rehearsal, a three-week run and the need to scrimp.
But then leave it to Ellis Rabb, the director, to assemble, lure or perhaps just bewitch an ideal cast.
And don't forget that Paul Osborn's ordinary comedy about ordinary people, which is how it was perceived after opening in 1939, is really a quite extraordinary comedy drama.
It is as close as a play set in American backyards gets to grasping the ineffable quality that is called Chekhovian.


It's a Small Show, but It Sends a Signal
A
10-MINUTE DELAY AT THE Midtown Tunnel.
Bumper-to-bumper past the airport.
Construction tie-ups on the Long Island Expressway.
That's not just the morning traffic report on the radio.
It's also architectural criticism, a daily dispatch from the urban infrastructure.
And the radio station does more than report on the infrastructure.
It's an integral part of it.
The station's broadcast beams are invisible links in an architecture of communications, a sprawling mega structure of steel transmission towers and airwaves that stretches across Long Island, creating new patterns of urban space.
Those patterns are the subject of "Transmission Towers on the Long Island Expressway," a show on view at the Urban Center in Manhattan through July 10.
It's a modest exhibition, made up of drawings and small, jewel-like scale models, lodged on a stairway landing on the Urban Center's second floor.
But there's nothing modest about the show's sweeping megalopolitan vision.
And the contrast between its large vision and its small physical scale is a clue to its purpose.
Michele Bertomen, the New York architect responsible for the show, has issued a call for architects to think bigger.


Ms. Morales, Mr. Bramhall
Elaine Catherine Morales, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles J. Morales of Milford, Conn., was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Jacques Bramhall 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bramhall 3d of Morristown, N.J.
The Rev.
John Fisher, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel.
Ms.
Morales, who is 24 years old and is keeping her name, is a coordinator in development at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton, she cum laude.
Her father is a systems engineer for Xerox in Hartford.
Her mother, Kathleen A. Morales, is a vice president of the Fleet Bank in Westport, Conn.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
How Do Wrestlers Dine?
JUDY COHEN of Lindenhurst paid $50 to have dinner with a professional wrestler.
But with the exception of a few parents with headlocks on their restless children, nary a wrestler was in sight.
"A few bad guys have arrived," an official of the World Wrestling Federation said.
"But we don't like to bring out the bad guys. People might boo them." The good guys, he said, were still on a plane coming from Florida.


From the Last Row, a Show of Summer
THIS is about spikes.
Not the kind that jazz up cocktails, but flower spikes, the kind that jazz up gardens.
Admiration for spikes started last fall during a catalogue search.
The perennial border needed something tall and stately to give it height as well as some kind of spectacular summer flower display.
The plant choices were many.
But the likely candidates settled down to one, the foxtail lilies (Eremurus).


When Flying Was Indeed Glamorous
HER name is Excambian and she has had more lives than a cat, some good, some bad, but all interesting.
In truth, she should be long gone but somehow she has survived and, piece by piece, rivet by rivet, she is being restored inside a hangar at Sikorsky Memorial Airport in Stratford.
Someday, perhaps in two years, she will be as radiant as she was half a century ago.
The Excambian is a flying boat, a genre of aircraft that enjoyed only a brief time of importance, the mid-1930's to the mid-1940's.
But people who remember that time and were privileged to see a giant flying boat take off say there was nothing quite like it.
The plane was akin to a huge seabird sitting low in the water, churning up huge waves of spray on either side, and then, rising, rising into the sky.
The giant aircraft was not particularly fast but, oh, so beautiful.


Gunman Slays 2 Owners of Beauty Parlor
The owners of a Washington Heights beauty salon were shot to death Friday night as several customers looked on.
Within an hour, the police arrested a suspect and charged him with two counts of murder.
The victims were identified as Luis Loaiza, 42 years old, and his wife, Lourdes Dominguez, 26, who owned Yomarie's Unisex, at 245 Dyckman Street.
Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman, said robbery may have been the motive in the shootings, which took place about 8:20 P.M.
Friday.
The couple lived on Prospect Avenue in the Belmont section of the Bronx, she said.


Holly Johnson, C. S. Bartlett 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles B. Johnson of Hillsborough, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Holly Ann Johnson to Dr.
Craig S. Bartlett 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bartlett Jr. of Montclair, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Johnson, 34 years old, graduated from the University of San Francisco and is a student at Marymount College in New York.
Her father is the president of Franklin Resources Inc., a mutual-fund company in San Mateo, Calif.
Her mother, Dr.
Ann Johnson, is a psychiatrist in San Francisco.


New Companies Bring Research To 'Video Valley'
Japanese and Korean electronics companies are rushing to central New Jersey to establish research and development laboratories poised to enter a new age of computerized television.
The influx has earned the region a new name, Video Valley, after California's Silicon Valley, among the electrical engineers who are preparing to design commercial versions of the new razor-sharp technology known as high-definition television.
But given the research companies' concentration along U.S.
Highway 1 around Princeton, a more descriptive name might be Video Alley.


Christine Paul, O. J. Taffin de Givenchy
Christine Anne Paul, the daughter of Frederick and Christa Paul of Cranford, N.J., was married yesterday to Olivier Jean Taffin de Givenchy, a son of Jean-Claude Taffin de Givenchy of Greenwich, Conn., and Patricia Taffin de Givenchy of St.
Briac-sur-Mer, France.
The Rev.
Francois Legaux performed the Roman Catholic ceremony in Romilly-sur-Aigre, France, in the private chapel of the clothing designer Hubert de Givenchy, an uncle of the bridegroom.
Mrs.
Taffin de Givenchy, 28 years old, is a personal assistant in New York to Ricky Lauren, the wife of the clothing designer Ralph Lauren.
She graduated from Long Island University.
Her father is the owner of Frederic's Jewelers in Clark, N.J.


Urban Ghost Story Explores the Home
PSYCHOLOGISTS have a great deal to say about the metaphorical homes in which we live.
Like a mutant variety of turtles, we carry our shells inside as an invisible barrier to an outside world too full of wild beasts and unfathomable dangers to be permitted into our protective houses.
In "Cantorial," at the Center Stage Theater of Molloy College in Rockville Centre through next Sunday, the drama's playwright, Ira Levin, explores the theme of "home." Who are we?
Where do we belong?
What purpose does our life serve?


Odd Way to Uncloak Racism
Matsuda, the Japanese clothing company, seems to have found a curious way to address racism.
In "Boomerang," a new Paramount film, Eddie Murphy and two other black actors, David Alan Grier and Martin Lawrence, enter Matsuda's store on Fifth Avenue near 20th Street.
Inside, they are treated shabbily by a white salesman who assumes they can't afford any of the clothes.
Even before the movie opened, Matsuda had received calls from people concerned that the company was being portrayed as discriminatory, said Victoria Eng, a spokeswoman.
"They were surprised that Paramount used a real location that showed a real name," she said.
"Second of all, they were surprised that we allowed it to be us."


Excerpts From Perot's Letter to Reagan in 1987
Following are excerpts from a letter sent by Ross Perot to President Ronald Reagan on April 8, 1987, on Mr.
Perot's study of American prisoners of war in Southeast Asia.


Quayle's Moment
A smile of triumph flickers around the mouth of Dan Quayle.
Playfully tugging at the cord of his high-security telephone, the Vice President looks relaxed and not a little pleased with himself as he sits in shirt sleeves in his stateroom aboard Air Force Two, flying home after a momentous trip to California.
The day before, Quayle had burst into the national political spotlight with an attack on the television heroine Murphy Brown's unwed motherhood.
The immediate aftermath had been tense -- with the White House waffling embarrassingly, running for cover in alarm over Quayle's salvos against a program with 38 million viewers.
But Quayle, after checking in with President Bush himself, seems confident that he is, for the moment, off the hook.
He cheerfully reports that the Commander in Chief has ordered him to go full speed ahead with his campaign for "family values."


Distressed Plaid
A new generation is ripping the sleeves off its shirts in search of a style that represents its time.
The conceit of the style is that this is not just any old shirt: it has to be a plaid shirt, and the shoulders should be framed by frayed threads, though the more timid revolutionaries put a hem on the raw edge of this fashion evolution, loosely called the deconstructivist movement.
It began in the 1970's with intricately slashed T-shirts, and moved on to jeans that were patched, torn and frayed to a fare-thee-well, winding up finally with exposed knees.


Getting to Know the Italian Flat Bread Focaccia
TEN years ago, not many Americans knew what focaccia was.
But this Italian flat bread has become increasingly popular, whether it is served with a meal, as a snack, as an hors d'ouvre or even a sandwich.
It is a boon for entertaining on the weekend because the dough can be made ahead of time and frozen.
Focaccia is made with a dough similar to the one used for pizza, but it comes out with a thicker crust.
It is good served hot from the oven, flavored with sage or rosemary, or topped with onions and sun-dried tomatoes.
A thick focaccia makes a great picnic sandwich, sliced in half and filled with all manner of ingredients: grilled eggplant, radicchio, onions or sausage, sauteed mushrooms or the classic summer combination of mozzarella, tomato and basil.


Krabbe Explains Why She Won't Run
KATRIN KRABBE, the world sprint champion in the 100 and 200 meters, said yesterday that her decision to skip the Summer Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain, would remove a possible point of contention among members of the German team.
Krabbe's comments came in a statement made jointly with GRIT BREUER and SILKE MOLLER, two other German sprinters who were first banned and then cleared in the drug-test manipulation allegation.
On Friday, German officials announced the three had decided to skip the Olympics.


On Sunday; Party Loyalists Get a Lesson In Democracy
Hudson County's tough riverfront has produced a long line of convicted statesmen: Mayors Kenny, Whelan, Musto, McCann, to name a few.
Last week, two more, Mayor Nicholas Cicco and Councilman Vincent Tabbachino, of this tiny town (8,260 people) said goodbye.
In 1988 two special police officers about to be promoted to permanent jobs on Guttenberg's force were let go.
The two claimed they'd been dumped because they didn't campaign for the Democratic machine.
They complained to prosecutors, who outfitted them with body wires.


Leslie Balassa, 88, Chemist and Maker of Drugs for Pain
Dr.
Leslie L. Balassa, a scientist and inventor whose 100 patents included painkillers for arthritis and tooth extraction, died Thursday at Pomona Valley Hospital in Pomona, Calif.
He was 88 years old.
A longtime resident of Blooming Grove, N.Y., in Orange County, he had moved to Claremont, Calif., this year.
His family said he died of pneumonia just after returning from a Washington trade fair on recycled paper.


Samantha L. Leff and Bryan E. Dorf
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Leff of Chappaqua, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Samantha Lynn Leff to Bryan Evan Dorf, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry Dorf of Wesley Hills, N.Y.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Leff, 23 years old, is an assistant portfolio manager for 1838 Investment Advisors in Radnor, Pa.
She graduated from Lehigh University, as did her fiance.
Her father retired as the vice chairman of Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., the New York advertising agency.
Her mother, Bonnie Leff, retired as the president of Travel Partners Inc. in Chappaqua.


A Candidate's Core Curriculum
In a film version of H. G. Wells's novel "The Time Machine," the 19th century time traveler takes three books with him on his final return to a distant future where primitive people live without books or knowledge.
The reader is left to guess what those books might be.
Ross Perot is in much the same situation.
A few weeks ago, he announced that he would devote more time to studying issues.
What, one wonders, is his reading list?
What new knowledge will he take into his future?


Spouse as Driver
To the Editor: Letters on Travel (May 10) included a complaint that Alamo Rent-a-Car assesses an additional-driver charge for the spouse of the renter, whereas some other rental companies do not.
Alamo replied to the effect that "The rationale for the fee is the increased exposure and risk to a rental vehicle because of greater use."
This is pure sophistry.


The Doctor Makes a Call, but Mets Split
Bobby Bonilla heard choruses of cheers instead of steady boos.
What a concept.
Dwight Gooden won his sixth game in 13 decisions and continued to rebound from shoulder surgery.
What a comeback.
Jeff Innis notched his first save in more than two years.
What a climax.
It was the first doubleheader of the season for the Mets, and they picked an opportune time to reel off some rare achievements during a 5-3 victory over the Astros in the first game at Shea Stadium last night.
Bonilla crushed homers in each game for his second and third in 40 games at Shea, Gooden won his second game in five weeks and Innis gained his first save since June 29, 1990.


Gay Themes, Universal Themes
To the Editor:
In the article about the made-for-TV film based on David Leavitt's novel "The Lost Language of Cranes"  [ "The Family Drama of Revealing Longtime Secrets," June 21 ] , one remark by Ruth Caleb, the BBC producer credited with initiating and organizing the production, reveals an unconscious bias against art with gay or lesbian themes.


INSIDE
More Sliced From Bosnia
Bosnia and Herzegovina, already battered by Serbian nationalists, is being splintered further by Croats who have declared their own state within its borders.
Page A3.
Free Spending at the Port
Records show an array of costly perquisites for officials of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, with millions a year for entertainment, cars and helicopters.
Page B1.
Air Fares to Rise Tomorrow
Saying they need more revenue to survive, domestic airlines will raise prices to the highest level in months.
Experts expect the increase to average at least 10 percent.
Page D1.
Word Perfect
Five days a week from September to June, 19 immigrants gathered in a Brooklyn classroom with one rule: "Speak English only." It worked; they learned the language.
Page B1.
Dispute on Police Shooting
The police and witnesses gave starkly different versions of a fatal shooting by an officer that led to disturbances in upper Manhattan.
Page B1.
Gay Books Go Mainstream
Books by and about gay men and women have burst out of specialty shops and presses to become a growing segment of publishing.
Page D1.


Say Goodbye, for Now, to Lower Air Fares
With summer vacations in full swing, travelers who have waited until now to buy airline tickets are in for a surprise: beginning tomorrow, air fares are expected to rise to their highest level in months.
And if the carriers have their way, fares will continue to climb.
The exact amount of tomorrow's climb remains a mystery, because at least three different formulas have been loaded into the reservations computers.
But on average, fares are likely to rise at least 10 percent.


President Bush Impedes Democracy
With his veto last week of common-sense legislation designed to make it simple and convenient for all Americans to register to vote, President Bush has demonstrated his opposition to expanded participation in government.
The measure, nicknamed "motor-voter," would have required states to allow citizens to register when they obtain or renew a driver's license.
It also would have required states to offer registration by mail and at welfare, unemployment and other government offices.
These steps, experts say, would boost registration to about 90 percent of all eligible voters -- a big leap from the dismal 60 percent now signed up.


Conditions for Higher Rates Fade
The unwelcome and surprisingly strong rise in market interest rates that came after the Federal Reserve Board sharply cut rates in December is unlikely to recur in the wake of the action taken by the Fed last week, analysts and traders say.
Yields on 30-year Treasury bonds briefly fell to 7 3/8 percent on the last day of 1991, about a week after the Fed cut the discount rate one percentage point and trimmed its target on the overnight Federal funds rate a half point.
But in the next three months, yields on the long bonds rose above 8 percent, and rates on short-term securities also moved higher, though not nearly as much.


One Ethnic War After Another
One Yugoslavia is enough for any continent.
Europeans cannot afford to procrastinate over the ethnic war now raging in Moldova between Romanians and Slavs.
Until recently, few outsiders had heard of Moldova, let alone its rebellious Trans-Dniester region, which borders Ukraine.
But fierce fighting in this former Soviet republic has already cost more than a thousand lives, uprooted more than 20,000 refugees and drawn in elements of the Russian Army.


Congress Capitulates To Railroad Lockout
To the Editor:
Once again, Congress has capitulated to the railroad industry and intervened in the labor dispute between unions and management (front page, June 26).


At Home Abroad; The Price of Violence
One ugly fact plays a significant part in South Africa's current political standoff.
It is that the average black family in a township near Johannesburg lives in fear of unpredictable assault and murder.
In the last two years, gangs running through black commuter trains have killed 240 people and seriously injured 700.
In the same period there have been 49 massacres in the townships, with a total of 1,250 dead.
In the most recent, in Boipatong, a 6-month-old baby was speared and a woman eight months pregnant slashed to death with a machete.


This Week's Auctions Include 7-Year Notes
Financings by the Treasury this week include the regular auction of three- and six-month bills today and an auction of seven-year notes on Wednesday.
By late Thursday, the final day of trading last week, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.22 percent after the Fed had cut the discount rate; a six-month bill was at 3.33 percent.
In when-issued trading, the new seven-year notes were offered at a price to yield 6.51 percent.


On Paper, the Evolution of the United States
Happily, there were no telephones, faxes, telexes or computer printouts during the Revolutionary and Civil War eras.
Otherwise we wouldn't have the handwritten, pen-and-ink documents signed and sometimes sealed by historic figures in American history, documents that give the signatories personality and the modern onlooker a momentary rush of reality.
This is well illustrated by "The Making of America: Highlights from the Gilder Lehrman Collection," an exhibition of 25 rare letters and documents now on view in the rotunda of the Pierpont Morgan Library in Manhattan.


Publications Plan Special Issues for Democratic Delegates
Just say happy days are here again.
So are the delegates, the campaign staffs, the vendors, the camp followers -- and some 15,000 journalists.


Review/Television; For the Unemployed, Some Tips and Empathy
With unemployment still rising, it is not for a television reviewer to discourage anyone in need of a job from finding consolation wherever it is offered, in a bar, a beauty parlor, a bowling alley or in the bromides of "Out of Work." But beware.
This program on PBS tonight (in New York on Channel 13 at 9) is a bin of banalities from introductory psychology and sociology texts.
One section of the hour, which concentrates on white-collar workers, is called "Termination." Losing your job, it reveals, is a blow to self-esteem, which can result in shock, denial and anger, so it is recommended that you "make peace with your anger." Also: "While it seems simplistic to say so, it helps not to take your employer's treatment of you personally." No more simplistic than the rest of the lecture.


Police Report On a Slaying Is Challenged
After a night of violent disturbances in an upper Manhattan neighborhood where a New York City police officer fatally shot a 23-year-old father of two, the police and witnesses offered starkly differing versions of the shooting yesterday.
Relatives of the victim, Jose Garcia of West 168th Street, and witnesses said Mr.
Garcia was unarmed and offering little or no resistance when he was shot twice by a plainclothes police officer from the 34th Precinct Friday night in the lobby of 505 West 162d Street.


No Offense, Mets, but, Uh, There's No Offense
The bad news for the Mets is that the team has just completed another lost homestand.
Even worse news is that the Mets are about to embark on another road trip, journeys that have proved even more fruitless for a team well under .500 when it is away from home.
The good news?
Well, there isn't any these days for the rudderless Mets as they head off to Atlanta, heads bowed in frustration as the losses, and the odds for salvaging 1992, continue to mount.


Gay Revelers Fling an Annual, Dainty Gauntlet
WHEN the Fire Island Clipper pulled into its dock here on July 4, loaded stem to stern with men dressed as women, it was clear to the celebrators in this international gay enclave that the 17th annual "Invasion of the Pines" would be the brassiest to date.
It is, in its own way, a new American tradition, an Independence Day rite that has come of age.
Initiated in 1975 as a protest against discrimination within the world of gay life that was still closed, and largely closeted, it has endured, grown and become more exuberant each year.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Talk Shows Wrangling To Book the Candidates
Jeff Zucker, the executive producer of the NBC News program "Today," heard that Gov.
Bill Clinton was looking for more exposure and immediately told his staff to put in a call to Little Rock.
Paula Zahn personally lobbied the White House to get President Bush on the CBS News program "This Morning." And Sam Donaldson has carried on a lengthy correspondence with Ross Perot, trying -- so far unsuccessfully -- to persuade the Texas billionaire to appear on "Prime Time Live" on ABC.
For several weeks now it has been clear that the 1992 campaign will be played out in some unusual corners of TV Guide.
But if the campaign has shown up on all regions of the dial and at almost all times of the day and night, it is not simply because the candidates want it that way.


Sister Josephine Morgan, Ex-Music School Director, 83
Sister Josephine Morgan, whose work as director of the Pius X School of Liturgical Music at Manhattanville College helped raise the standards of sacred music, died on Friday at Kenwood Convent of the Sacred Heart in Albany.
She was 83 years old.
She died of heart failure, said Sister Mary Lyman, the convent's pastoral care minister.


In Cuba, Baseball Provides Solace to Anxious People
When an American baseball team of college-age players arrived in Cuba the other day for a pre-Olympic warmup against this country's top players, a one-hour wait at Havana's airport for a flight to this provincial town gave a strong hint of the superior attitude the Cubans had brought to the contest.
While the Americans stood waiting, their older Cuban counterparts slouched in chairs, smoking cigarettes and sneering as they eyed the anxious competition across the departure area.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
American General Corp., Houston, is offering $150 million of 7.45 percent notes due in 2002 at 99.78 to yield 7.481 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Duquesne Light Co., Pittsburgh, is offering $100 million of 8 3/8 percent first-collateral trust bonds due in 2024 at 98.613 to yield 8.5 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Callable after five years, the bonds are rated Baa-1 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


4 Gay-History Shows in 1994 To Mark Stonewall Riot
To commemorate the 25th anniversary of the Stonewall riot, four New York cultural institutions are planning coordinated exhibitions about lesbian and gay history for the summer of 1994.
The riot, in which patrons of a gay bar called the Stonewall Inn clashed with the police, is often cited as a turning point in the gay rights movement.
The Stonewall History Project, as the overall effort is called, is to be announced tomorrow by Mayor David N. Dinkins.
The organizers say it will be the first major program on gay and lesbian history in the United States,


Croats Claim Their Own Slice of Bosnia
With nearly two-thirds of this newly independent country already occupied by Serbian nationalists who have proclaimed their own republic, Croatian nationalists have delivered a major blow to the Bosnian Government by declaring their own independent state on the remaining third of the territory.
The move on Friday by this group of Croats, who are Bosnian citizens with strong links to the Government of the neighboring state of Croatia, has come at the worst possible time for the Government of President Alija Izetbegovic.
With Serbian forces surrounding the capital, Sarajevo, Mr.
Izetbegovic has been left in effective control of only the heart of Sarajevo and a few provincial towns, the most important of which is the industrial center Tuzla, also besieged by Serbian forces, about 50 miles north of here.


Sports of The Times; Andre and Goran Grow Up in Public on Center Court
THE kid stiffed Wimbledon.
He jiggled his mane and wiggled his biker-style shorts and stuck his thumb to his nose and said, "Nyah-nyah, you can't make me play Wimbledon."
He liked this feeling of power so much that he did it again the next year, and the third year.
It was so much fun, having all these stuffy adults clearing their throats and saying, "But, Andre-boy, if you're ever going to grow up to be a man, you have got to play Wimbledon."


Words No Longer Escape Them; For This Graduating Class, the Accent Is on Communication
Arriving alone at Kennedy International Airport from Somalia, Hawa Jibril held tightly to her passport and visa, and one other, makeshift document.
It was a sign made by her cousin: "Please help me. I don't speak any international language. I want to follow this address: 1661 Bedford Avenue, Brooklyn, NY, USA."
"All I could say was 'Yes, no and where you come from?' " she recalled.
A police officer, she said, handed her sign to a cabdriver, and he delivered her to her uncle's liquor store.


Books of The Times; A Series of Short Works Shows How a Writer Grew
No Heroics, Please  Uncollected Writings: Raymond Carver  Edited by William L. Stull Illustrated. 239 pages.
Vintage Books.
Paper, $10.


Youth Shot While Playing
A 16-year-old Brooklyn youth was shot in the face and killed while he and some friends were playing with a gun yesterday afternoon, the police said.
It was unclear whether the youth shot himself or was shot by one of his companions.
He was identified as Clifford Celestin of 1212 Flatbush Avenue, in Flatbush.
"It looks like basically an accident," said Officer Andrew Finn of the 70th Precinct, which is investigating the shooting.
Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman, said at least four young people, ranging in age from 10 to 19, had gathered in the apartment at 222 East 17th Street in Flatbush where the shooting occurred.
Two of the youths were brought in for questioning, she said, and the police recovered a .380 automatic handgun at the scene.


Maria Martini and Steven Kessler
Maria Teresa Martini, a daughter of Sharon and Joseph Martini of New Rochelle, N.Y, was married yesterday in Spring Valley, N.Y., to Steven Leigh Kessler, the son of Muriel and Emanuel Kessler of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Jonathan I. Rosenblatt officiated at Singer's of Spring Valley.
Mrs.
Kessler, 23 years old, is a business administrator for the New York law firm of Howard, Darby &amp; Levin.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire.
Her father is head of the foreign-language department of Blessed Sacrament/ St.
Gabriel's High School in New Rochelle.
Mr.
Kessler, 34, is a lawyer in New York.
He graduated from Cornell University, where he also earned a law degree.
His parents are partners in the New York law firm of Kessler &amp; Kessler.
The bridegroom is a member of the board of the Bronx County Bar Association.
His mother and father are past presidents of the organization.





U.S. Says Hussein Is Purging Military
A major purge has begun in the Iraqi military in the wake of reports of a coup attempt against President Saddam Hussein last week, Bush Administration officials said today.
The reports of the purge of Iraq's officer corps have added detail to early, sketchy descriptions of unrest in Baghdad that came last week.
Administration officials said the reports, which have been denied by Baghdad, have caused the United States and its allies to intensify planning to further weaken Mr.
Hussein.


Offtrack Betting Profits Hit Record Low
The Offtrack Betting Corporation, which has been criticized for its spending and management practices, saw its profits sink to a record low this year.
In a report to be released today, the agency said it ended the 1991-92 fiscal year last Tuesday with a profit of $600,000 for the city.
The showing was the poorest since the agency, which was established to generate revenue for the city and to discourage illegal gambling, expanded into a major operation in 1975.


10 Are Slain And 22 Hurt In New York Over Holiday
A Fourth of July family gathering in a Queens park turned deadly early yesterday morning when a dispute ended with knives drawn, one man dead and six people wounded, the police said.
The victims, all related by blood or marriage, were among 10 people slain and 22 people wounded in New York City during an eight-hour period over Saturday night and Sunday morning, as the July 4 holiday became the busiest day of the year for the police.


New Campaigns
*
The Nutrasweet Company is introducing a national Spanish-language television commercial intended to build brand awareness of the sweetener among Hispanic consumers.
The spot, created by Casanova Pendrill Publicidad Inc., Irvine, Calif., carries the theme "Nutrasweet sweetens your life."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  BUSH GOES TO MUNICH, VIA POLAND


Chappaqua Youngsters Aren't Rich and Spoiled
To the Editor:
We are two students at Horace Greeley High School in Chappaqua, N.Y. -- which you describe as "a community of 15,000 residents where the average price of a home is about a half-million dollars" -- and we are very upset and concerned about the way you portray our school in your June 17 article.
The impression of the article is that all kids in Chappaqua receive $50,000 cars for our birthdays, that all our parents are presidents of large corporations and, most important, that we are immune to the troubles in the world around us.


Many on Medicare Illegally Forced To Pay a Deposit to Nursing Homes
Many elderly people on Medicare are being told that they must pay thousands of dollars in cash deposits as a condition of admission to nursing homes despite Federal laws and rules that prohibit the practice.
Federal officials and consumer advocates say they have received complaints about the requests for such deposits from all across the country.
Thousands of people are affected, but the Government cannot calculate the exact number because it has not kept track of the problem.


Fire Threat in West Is the Worst in Years
After the warmest winter on record and one of the driest springs in a century, the West is bracing for a long season of forest fires that could strain the limits of firefighters and force changes in the way public woodlands are managed.
The normally wet Pacific Northwest received only a trace of snow in the mountains this past winter, leaving the heavily forested slopes of the Cascade Mountains bone-dry by early June.
Temperatures above 100 degrees last month have dried out mountain streams and drained moisture from all but the highest of alpine forests.


Reds Get Out the Broom in Pittsburgh
Reds 2, Pirates 1
PITTSBURGH, July 5 (AP) -- The Cincinnati Reds wasted a succession of scoring chances, then got two sacrifice flies off Doug Drabek in the eighth inning today for a 2-1 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates and a four-game sweep.
The Reds held the Pirates to seven runs as they swept four games in Pittsburgh for the second time in three years.
The Reds moved 17 games over .500 for the first time since 1990.


Cellular Phones Fill Gap in Hungary
In this bustling city on the Danube, entrepreneurism is on the rise, with 80,000 small businesses having been formed in the last two years.
But try to cajole customers, plan with partners or yell at recalcitrant suppliers over the telephone, and the chances are 6 out of 10 that the response will be silence.
Hungary's phone system is so creaky that many phones are still hand-crank models from the 1920's, and the network simply cannot handle the volume of calls.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY NO JACKPOT FOR OTB
The Offtrack Betting Corporation, which has been criticized for its spending and management practices, saw its profits sink to a record low this year.
In a report to be released today, the agency said it ended the 1991-92 fiscal year last Tuesday with a profit of $600,000 for the city.
The showing was the poorest since the agency expanded into a major operation in 1975.
B3.
SPIRIT OF '76 AND REALITY OF '92
In 1976, celebrating the nation's Bicentennial and playing host to a Democratic National Convention infused New Yorkers with a euphoria that seemed to purge the depression induced the year before by New York's brush with bankruptcy.
Now the city is again mired in a slump, but it is arguable whether the spirit of '76 will prevail.
Metro Matters, B2.


U.S. Wins. Try Telling Venezuela That It Didn't Too.
There could be only one champion at the Tournament of the Americas, but that doesn't mean only one country had its dream come true.
The so-called Dream Team from the United States is headed to Barcelona, Spain, for the Summer Olympics without so much as a blemish to its massive reputation, though it did take a few nicks in its armor.
Venezuela, today's designated United States thrashee, is also going, though it will occupy a different emotional space, where old-fashioned Olympic dreams still exist.


Bloomingdale's Reports $16,000 Robbery
The Bloomingdale's store in midtown Manhattan was robbed yesterday afternoon by an armed man who made off with more than $16,000 in cash and gift certificates, the police said.
No one was injured in the holdup.
Just after 2 P.M., the man approached the service desk on the seventh floor of the store, on Third Avenue between 59th and 60th Streets, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.
Gift certificates are sold and charge bills are paid at the desk.


Pittsburgh Adds Cole But Subtracts King
The Pittsburgh Pirates, in a surprise move to make room for newly acquired outfielder Alex Cole, sent infielder Jeff King to their Class AAA Buffalo club Saturday.
King has started at five positions -- first, second, short, third and right -- but was batting .187 and had only one hit in his last 23 at-bats.
He has struggled to regain his batting stroke since missing all but 33 games last season because of a back injury.


One Gunman, Two or a Phalanx? Assassination Puzzles Algerians
Almost a week after the attack, Algerians still have not been given a coherent explanation of the assassination of Mohammed Boudiaf, the 73-year-old Algerian leader who was killed while giving a speech.
The authorities have given several versions of what happened, some of them conflicting.
The suspect, described as a 26-year-old second lieutenant in the special paramilitary forces, is said to have acted alone or to have been part of a conspiracy, depending on the source of information.


Starting Climb to the Top at the Bottom Rung
To the Editor:
Your front-page article about the carpentry program at the Youth Build school in Boston (June 8), one of many around the country that try to rehabilitate and prepare young inner-city males for a job market, is in a way edifying.
Manual arts training is a good idea since it's about drills for coordinating mind and hands, which is good therapy; and it has commercial value.


Essay; Digging Deeper in Iraqgate
In angrily insisting to have had no guilty knowledge of Saddam Hussein's abuse of our grain credits to buy destructive technology, George Bush last week showed no understanding of the First Law of Holes: when in one, stop digging.
The President, entertaining tourists in the Rose Garden for "CBS This Morning," was upset by an irreverent question.
It had to do with sworn testimony by Frank Lemay, a Foreign Service officer, that he informed higher-ups on Oct. 13, 1989 -- in a memo kept "out of the system" -- about a rash of investigations into Iraq's ripoff.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  New Car Sale June


Equity Issues Scheduled for This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Alden Press Co., 3.2 million common shares. William Blair.


Quest for Prettiest Prize
As the Olympic Games approach -- the opening ceremonies are 19 days away -- some of the 10,000 competitors may be reflecting upon all the training they have done.
One is NORM BELLINGHAM, a 27-year-old American kayak racer.
"People don't realize how miserable training can become," Bellingham said the other day at Lake Placid, N.Y., where the United States team is training.
"This past year has been so tough. I've been eating and sleeping the paddling. Every day when I come back from training I feel absolutely dead, like I had the flu, the whole body aching. Just as I begin to recover, it's time to do another hard workout."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Democrats Hope to Persuade Voters to Tune In to Tradition
A week before one of the biggest but most predictable events in American politics, Democrats are desperate to convince a skeptical public and the often hostile television networks that their national convention is worth watching.
In their zeal to attract viewers -- or, more accurately, to discourage them from switching channels -- the Democrats seriously considered a "Wake Up America" night, on which the nearly 5,000 delegates would leap from their seats at Madison Square Garden brandishing buzzing alarm clocks.
Dressing Up the Predictable
After rancorous debate at the highest levels of the party and Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign, this inspiration was quashed by the argument that the clocks would be laughed off as a hokey "Gong Show" routine.
There was another fear: that the buzzers would keep going off unexpectedly.


Better by Land Than Sea
Even though he is the strongest oarsman in the world, on the ergometer (an instrument used to measure the work done by a muscle), MATTHIAS SIEJKOWSKI of Germany won't be rowing at the Olympics.
He has been unable to transfer his remarkable power from the Concept II, the ergometric on-land rowing simulator, to a waterborne shell.
Siejkowski has lowered his world record time for the simulated 2,500-meters race on the ergometer to 7 minutes 10.7 seconds, a full 12 seconds better than the next-best time achieved by PERTII KAARPINNEN of Finland, a multiple Olympic medalist in single sculling.


Quotation of the Day
"They're irrelevant. Nothing of significance happens at them. Almost every decision of any importance happens out of sight. I don't think we should try to pretend that conventions are what they used to be." -- ROONE ARLEDGE, president of ABC News.  [ A10:1. ]


Prison Escapee Is Caught After 2-Month Manhunt
Danny Ray Horning, the bank robber who had eluded searchers and kidnapped tourists in the Grand Canyon National Park, was captured early today, nearly two months after escaping from a state prison.
As he was led to Coconino County Jail here, Mr.
Horning mugged for reporters and said, "I would have liked to have prolonged it."


On the Edge of Survival: Single Mothers on Welfare
The jingling of "Pop Goes the Weasel" drifted through the tenement's open windows as the ice cream truck made its summertime rounds of the ghetto.
"I want some, Mommy," pouted 6-year-old Maggie.
But Geraldine Williams shook her head no, murmuring, "It's $1.25 and extra for sprinkles."
For 19 years, Ms.
Williams has supported her nine children on welfare.
The family has wanted for many things.
During one frigid winter, they went without heat so they could pay for their subsidized apartment.
Always, the children wear hand-me-downs, waiting months until it is their turn for new sneakers.


Putting Young Farmers Back on the Land for Everyone's Good
To the Editor:
"A Quiet Exodus by the Young Leaves the Future of Family Farms in Doubt" (news article, June 9) focuses needed attention on the urgent problem of the shrinking family farm base.
However, your tone of inevitability, reflecting a sadly routine analysis of agriculture, is shortsighted.


British Ads Inform Viewers Without Patronizing Them
GEORGE BERNARD SHAW said that America and Britain are divided by a common language.
He must have been thinking about the two nations' advertising.
Based on observations during a recent visit, the most noteworthy difference in British advertising seems to be an underlying attitude best described by paraphrasing the adman David Ogilvy and the cartoon character Pogo: We have met the consumer and the consumer is not an idiot.
He or she is us.


I.M.F. and Russia Reach Accord On Loan Aid and Spending Limits
The Russian Government and the International Monetary Fund announced today that they had reached a lending agreement that gives President Boris N. Yeltsin the endorsement he had sought from the West for his economic policies, but also commits him to cut back on Government spending just when the deficit is rising sharply.
The I.M.F. had been under pressure for weeks from the Bush Administration to soften its usual requirements so that an agreement with the Yeltsin Government could be announced before a meeting of leaders of the seven industrial powers that begins in Munich on Monday.
Mr.
Yeltsin is to join President Bush and the other leaders in Munich on Wednesday.


Iroquois Recognized
The Iroquois Nation is regarded as just that, a separate nation, by world lacrosse authorities in recognition of the American Indian founders of this sport.
The Iroquois team, from upstate New York, will compete with Australia, Canada, Britain, Japan and the United States at the under-19 world championships on Long Island, July 31-Aug. 8.
The round-robin tournament of 17 games will be played in the Hofstra Stadium at Hemsptead, L.I.


Welfare in the New York Area
States in the New York region have historically paid higher benefits than other parts of the country, but the value of Aid to Families with Dependent Children benefits plus food stamps has declined faster in New York and New Jersey over the past 20 years than in the rest of the nation because these states did less to counter inflation.
Benefits in New York City -- $9,672 a year for a mother with two children as of January -- buy one-third less than in 1972, as against one-fourth less for the nation as a whole.


Market Place; Electronics Chain On Roller Coaster
THE stock of the Good Guys Inc., the West Coast consumer electronics chain, has not lived up to its name of late.
After rising to $29.75 a share last September, the stock took a wrenching roller coaster ride to $13.625 in January, back up to $22.50 in March, then down to its 52-week low of $9.75 in mid-June.
It ended last week at $10.25.
What is behind the fall and rise and fall of Good Guys' stock?
In broad terms, the problem lies in doubts about future performance, a concern rarely mentioned in the same breath as the company's name in recent years.


Unable to Beat Them, I.B.M. Now Joins Them
Seven years ago Nobuo Mii, I.B.M.'s general manager in Japan, had a chance encounter with a Toshiba executive, Tsuyoshi Kawanishi, at a Tokyo cocktail party.
The two men immediately realized that by sharing I.B.M. technology and Toshiba manufacturing expertise they could get a significant jump in bringing sophisticated color computer screens to a market where a six-month advantage can make a company unbeatable.


Yankees Leave Texas Proudly for a Change
There are probably tougher places to win a ball game.
Fenway Park.
The Metrodome in Minneapolis.
The Oakland Coliseum.
But historically, the Yankees have never quite known a park like Arlington Stadium.
Tonight, though, there was a reversal of fortune.
After losing 18 of their previous 21 games here and not having won a series since July 1988, the Yankees finally enjoyed good times.


Free Spending Survives Port Authority's Attempts at Restraint
On a humid morning last August, an aviation manager of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and an associate stood outside the agency's offices at Kennedy International Airport waiting for a lift.
Promptly at 9 A.M., a Sikorsky helicopter clattered from the skies and plucked the two men from the tarmac for a swift flight over bumper-to-bumper traffic clogging the roads to Manhattan.
Minutes later they were deposited at the downtown heliport in time for a meeting at the Port Authority's World Trade Center.
The subject: "New snow and ice products."


Agassi Finds The Heart To Beat All Those Aces
For Andre Agassi, life is a cabaret, hair is an accessory that's got all the permutations of a mood ring, sports cars are as collectible as Van Goghs and hamburgers are fine food, not fast food, "because they contain your four major food groups."
And Las Vegas, Nev., that unique desert metropolis where this 22-year-old tennis collectible was born and raised, is "almost heaven," a spot he loves so much that last year he suggested it as a logical relocation spot for the often rain-delayed Wimbledon.


Tornado Strikes in Upstate New York


Review/Dance; Life's Ascents, Yaws and Plunges
A huge, stylized seesaw dominates the action in "El Cielo Esta Enladrillado" ("The Sky Is Paved With Bricks"), with which Danat Danza, an experimental dance troupe from Barcelona, Spain, is making its United States debut.
For the audience sitting in the Studio Theater at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival here on Saturday, the long board's violent swings came as a surprise.
Initially, the seesaw had masqueraded as a raised platform when the company's six dancers and a violinist had first emerged into a dimly lighted performance space below.
The board's curved fulcrum, resting on poles, was concealed by hanging curtains.


U.S. Is Said to Withhold Evidence of War Crimes Committed by Iraq
A report by the United States Army documenting the Administration's case that President Saddam Hussein committed war crimes has been stuck in the Pentagon bureaucracy for five months, reflecting the Administration's reluctance to pursue the issue, according to Pentagon officials who want the evidence made public.
The crimes are said to have been committed during Iraq's invasion and occupation of Kuwait in 1990-91.
The document is based on intelligence and operational reports, interviews and debriefings of hostages and prisoners of war, according to officials who described it.
Compiled by two teams of Army lawyers working from Washington and Saudi Arabia during and after the Persian Gulf crisis, it concludes that Iraqi war crimes were "widespread and premeditated" during the invasion in August 1990 and the ensuing occupation.


Stewards Hand Dwyer To a Jostled Agincourt
Furiously, undefeated and untouched, was back in the barn when they ran the Dwyer Stakes for the 75th time at Belmont Park yesterday, and it was probably good that he was.
The race, one of the landmarks for 3-year-old colts, turned into a jostling, bumping, crowding match between two jockeys down the homestretch and ended in a photo finish.
And after reviewing the fight films for 10 minutes, the stewards decided that Chris Antley was the aggressor and Jorge Chavez the victim.
So, in a rare judgment for a major race, they reversed the order of finish and declared Agincourt the winner over the favored Three Peat.


Santiago Journal; Scrubbing The Skies Over Chile
On a clear day during the Southern Hemisphere winter, the towering Andes mountains glisten with a blanket of snow.
But from here they are for the most part invisible, hidden behind a thick brown layer of smog that fills this city of more than four million people, making Santiago among the most polluted cities in the world.
This is the time of year when most Chileans would like to avoid the capital.
Eyes sting.
Bronchial illness surges.
And, according to doctors, the march of cancer in the population increases.


Katherine Champion, Brian Murphy
Katherine Marie Champion, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hale Champion of Cambridge, Mass, was married yesterday to Brian Patrick Murphy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph G. Murphy of Roslindale, Mass.
The Rev.
Thomas Scirghi performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Harvard Memorial Church in Cambridge.
Mrs.
Murphy, 28, graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father, who is retired, was the financial vice president of Harvard University.
Her mother, Marie Champion, retired as an admissions officer at Harvard.
Mr.
Murphy, 28, graduated from Harvard.
He is the chief of staff for State Senator Lois Pines of Newton, Mass.
He is to attend law school at the University of Chicago this fall.
His mother, Mary Murphy, is the manager of a dental office in Brookline, Mass.
His father retired as a lawyer for the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority in Boston.


Sarah Lin Fendrick, Robin Shifrin
Sarah Lin Fendrick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Fendrick of White Plains, was married yesterday to Robin Michael Shifrin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Isidore Shifrin of Cape Town.
Rabbi Avremi Gourarie performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Fendrick-Shifrin, 31 years old, graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in history and education from Columbia University.
Her father is an executive vice president of Grey Advertising in New York.


Stephen Elliot, 74; Produced Commercials
Stephen Elliot, who started making commercials when television was in its infancy, died on Friday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 74 years old and lived in Manhattan.
His family said he died after a long fight with cancer.


For a Brighter Brighton Beach
In the mid-1980's, a New York developer announced plans to raze a deteriorated beach club he owned and build new housing.
Seven years later, the beach club is still there, the housing isn't and the developer -- Alexander Muss &amp; Sons -- is again trying to win city approval of Brighton by the Sea.
What thwarted his proposal last time, and might again, is not the idea of replacing the old Brighton Beach Baths with housing.
It's opposition to the scale of the housing.
Despite multiple modifications, the proposal is still too big.
Further delay would hurt everyone.
The city needs what would be the first privately financed housing built in Brooklyn since World War II, and it needs the jobs and taxes that come with development.
The Muss firm wants to make more from its property.
That argues for the developer to agree to further revisions.


Lenox Hill Hospital Cutting Tie With New York-Cornell
After three years of a rancorous affiliation arrangement, Lenox Hill Hospital said that it is severing its association with the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center and will affiliate with the New York University Medical Center.
The development represents the denouement of a drawn-out and emotional controversy that has hung over Lenox Hill and New York Hospital-Cornell and that some doctors and officials said was connected to the treatment of Libby Zion at New York Hospital.
The 18-year-old Ms.
Zion died mysteriously in 1984 less than eight hours after being admitted to New York Hospital with a high fever.


Company Says Pullout Is a Possibility
Canon U.S.A., the Japanese-owned camera and electronics company, is considering its options, including leaving Long Island and taking its 1,800 employees elsewhere, because its plans to build a new corporate headquarters here are in jeopardy of being rejected by this exclusive North Shore village.
Many of the village's 3,700 residents fear an increase in traffic and further commercialization of an area that is already home to the New York Institute of Technology and the C.W.
Post Campus of Long Island University.


Martin Taps Chief of Mercedes Account
The Martin Agency in Richmond, a unit of WPP Group P.L.C., has named Ken Waldron to the new post of senior vice president and management supervisor on its portion of the account of Daimler-Benz A.G.'s Mercedes-Benz of North America unit.
Mr.
Waldron, 36 years old, will head the nationwide roll-out of Mercedes-Benz's regional marketing program and supervise executives working on the account at Martin's headquarters and in six regional offices.
He worked on automotive accounts at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Los Angeles (Mazda); Chiat/Day/Mojo, Venice, Calif. (Nissan), and the Los Angeles-based Lintas Campbell-Ewald unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies (Chevrolet).


Times Fills Technology Post
Richard H. Gilman has been named vice president for systems and technology at The New York Times, the president and general manager of The Times, Lance R. Primis, has announced.
He succeeds Elise J. Ross, who was named vice president in charge of information systems and technology at the New York Times Company last month.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Crenshaw Extends Norman's Frustration  Ben Crenshaw broke one two-year streak and extended another one with his victory over Greg Norman in the Western Open yesterday in Lemont, Ill.
Crenshaw used a late, two-stroke swing to leap-frog over Norman and claim his first victory since 1990.
Norman's two-year non-winning string was extended with a second consecutive galling, frustrating runner-up finish in this event.
Crenshaw came to the final hole needing a par to stay in front of the grim-faced Norman, and he sank a 5-foot second putt to do so.
Norman, playing behind him, then needed a birdie on the 18th to force a tie.
He got his approach about 20 feet below the hole.
His birdie putt stopped inches short, and the non-winning string kept running.
Crenshaw finished with a 69 and a 276 total, 12-under par on the Dubsdread course at the Cog Hill complex.
The victory was worth $198,000. (AP) Sheehan Wins 2d Straight Tournament: Patty Sheehan won the Jamie Farr Toledo Classic by a stroke to take her second title in a week and become the only two-time winner this season on the L.P.G.A.
Tour.
Sheehan shot a five-under-par 66 to finish with a four-under 209 over the 6,270-yard, par-71 Highland Meadows Golf Club in suburban Toledo, Ohio.
Tied for second were Brandie Burton, Heather Drew, Tammie Green and the second-round leader, Deb Richard.
Sheehan shot a 3-under 31 on the front nine and followed that up with a 2-under 35 on the back nine.
Richard started with a triple-bogey 7 on the first hole and never recovered.
She finished with a 73.
Drew was the leader at 5-under after six holes of the final round but had three bogies and one birdie the rest of the way.
Sheehan earned $60,000 of the $400,000 purse.
She also earned $60,000 last week for winning the Rochester International. (AP) Gilbert Holds Off Snead: Gibby Gilbert out-dueled J. C. Snead in a twilight playoff to win the $600,000 Kroger Senior Classic in Mason, Ohio.
With darkness closing in after a 1-hour, 40-minute rain delay, Gilbert sank a five-foot birdie putt on the second playoff hole, the 546-yard, par-5 No. 18, to win his second straight Senior PGA Tour championship.
Gilbert had a final-round 68 and Snead a 67 to finish the 54 holes at 15-under 198.
Gilbert won the Southwestern Bell Classic last week with a 17-under score.
Lee Trevino, who had a hole-in-one after the rain delay, shot 66 to finish third, three strokes back.
Thirty-five players beat par for the 54-hole tournament. (AP) AUTO RACING  Mansell Drives to Grand Prix Victory  Nigel Mansell of Britain won the rain-interrupted French Grand Prix yesterday, his sixth victory in eight races this season.
Mansell finished in 1 hour 38 minutes 8.459 seconds, beating his Williams-Renault teammate Riccardo Patrese of Italy by 46.447 seconds.
They were well ahead of the field as rain plagued the race over the last 30 laps.
Martin Brundle of Britain finished third overall in a Benetton-Ford.
Rain stopped the race for about 20 minutes during the 20th lap.
The cars restarted at the positions they held after 18 laps, with Patrese holding a lead of .935 seconds over Mansell.
The restart reduced the race from 72 laps to 69.
At the end of the first lap of the restart, Patrese waved his Williams teammate past him, giving Mansell the overall lead at lap 21. (AP) SOCCER  Croatia Loses in International Debut  Defender Andrew Marth scored in the 65th minute yesterday as Croatia lost to Australia, 1-0, in its first international soccer game, in Melbourne, Australia.
Croat fans clashed briefly with Serbian protesters before the match.
Serbs gathered in downtown Melbourne to protest the Croatian team's presence in Australia.
Objects were thrown and scuffles broke out, but no arrests were made, and the police reported no serious injuries.
The 12,000 spectators were searched before entering the grounds. (AP) BASKETBALL  German Team Gains Olympic Berth  Germany defeated Czechoslovakia, 90-74, yesterday in Zaragoza, Spain, to join Lithuania, Croatia and the Commonwealth of Independent States as Europe's representatives in the basketball tournament in the Barcelona Olympics.
Amazingly, none of the four teams existed in their present form two years ago, if they existed at all.
Croatia will be making its Olympic debut, and Lithuania has never competed in the Olympic basketball tournament.
The C.I.S. -- the name of what remains of the former Soviet Union -- is technically the defending Olympic champion.
Indiana Pacers forward Detlef Schrempf scored 23 points to lead the Germans in the opening game at the Prince Felipe Pavillion, but the team needed to wait out the C.I.S.'s 84-82 victory over Slovenia before knowing it had qualified for the first time in its history.
Germany automatically took part in 1936 and 1972 Olympics as the host nation and was added in 1984 in Los Angeles to fill out the field following the Soviet-led boycott. (AP)


No.1 on Agenda: The Limits to Promoting Growth
With the world economy mired in its worst slump in a decade and a united response to the slowdown seemingly impossible, a new menace hangs over leaders of the world's major industrial countries: a gradual drift toward increasingly protectionist trading blocs.
While leaders of the seven most powerful industrial democracies, meeting here on Monday, will seek to revive their flagging domestic fortunes and revive business confidence through fudged statements full of good intentions, they appear increasingly unable to act cohesively on the issues delaying a recovery.


Manhattan Displays Urban Mix at Work
To the Editor:
In "How to Rebuild Los Angeles" (Op-Ed, June 6), Witold Rybczynski suggests guidelines of "a five-minute walk, the traditional measure of neighborhoods," "a blend of shops, offices and apartments," "a rich mixture of uses, lots of people and pleasant places to walk," "the neighborhood a place for us and them, not just for us against them."


The Curative Power of Celebrations
THE summer of 1976 was a Prozac moment in the emotional life of New York City.
Celebrating the nation's Bicentennial and playing host to a Democratic national convention for the first time in 52 years infused New Yorkers with a euphoria that seemed to purge the depression induced the year before by New York's brush with bankruptcy and, earlier, by Watergate and the Vietnam War.


Astor Piazzolla, 71, Tango's Modern Master, Dies
Astor Piazzolla, the world's foremost composer of tango music, died early yesterday in Buenos Aires.
He was 71 years old.
A prolific composer who wrote some 750 works, including concertos, operas and film and theatrical scores, Mr.
Piazzolla was also an arranger, a band leader and a virtuoso of the bandoneon, a button-operated instrument that is a hybrid of the accordion and the concertina and the principal instrument of tango music.
Mr.
Piazzolla's death came nearly two years after he suffered a stroke from which he never recovered.


Soviet Collapse Lessens Cuba's Threat
To the Editor:
"Making Poor Cubans Suffer More" (editorial, June 15) faults the proposed Cuban Democracy Act.
The bill raises problems even for those like myself who consider that the United States embargo has been effective against Fidel Castro.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democratic Ticket; Contender for Running Mate Approves of Abortion Ruling
One of the politicians whom Gov.
Bill Clinton is considering as a running mate, Representative Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, said today that he approved of last week's Supreme Court ruling on abortion and that he thought governments should put restraints on women seeking abortions.
Saying the Court's decision "backs away from" and "lowers" the constitutional right to abortion, Mr.
Hamilton pronounced himself "comfortable" with the ruling, which Mr.
Clinton has termed "very disturbing."


San Sebastian Has Put The Wheels in Motion
The Sanchez furniture store in the Plaza de Zaragoza in San Sebastian has a front window packed with bicycle jerseys, caps and posters, including a giant one of Miguel Indurain on the victory podium in Paris last year after he won the Tour de France.
The Kasvi barber shop on the Alameda del Boulevard has in its window one of the leader's yellow jerseys that Indurain wore on his way to Paris.


BANK CRISIS STIRS POLITICAL FALLOUT
For 539 days, in cold weather and warm, Connie and Daniel Thornton marched here, outside the closed credit union where their dreams had been on deposit.
But their picketing ended this week, when they joined 38,000 depositors who reclaimed 90 percent of their money in a state-financed bailout.
These depositors were the last to be repaid.


Rahal Leaves Everyone Caught in a Traffic Jam
Bobby Rahal had an easier time than other drivers with the bane of every holiday traveler -- traffic.
And in the end today, it helped him beat Michael Andretti for the victory in the inaugural New England 200 Indy-car race here.
Rahal, in his Lola-Chevy A, finished more than a lap ahead of the second-place Andretti in his Lola-Ford.
Andretti, who started alongside Rahal on the front row, was able to stay within eight seconds of Rahal most of the day, and even led 64 of the 200 laps, with Rahal leading the rest.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
No appearances scheduled.  Gov. Bill Clinton
TOMORROW: 10-11 P.M., PBS, interview with Bill Moyers. (Channel 13 in New York.)  Ross Perot
No appearances scheduled.  Vice President Quayle
No appearances scheduled.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stocks were lower in Tokyo today, on light volume.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 60.71 points, or 0.36 percent, to 16,717.78.
On Friday, the Nikkei lost 40.15 points.


Review/Ballet; Presenting 2 Guest Artists As the Kirov's Season Ends
The Kirov Ballet ended its season on Friday night at the Metropolitan Opera House with a "Swan Lake" led by two guest artists, Nina Ananiashvili and Massimiliano Guerra.
Stylistically, this casting made for a marked lack of homogeneity.
Miss Ananiashvili, a Bolshoi Ballet ballerina, triumphed on her own terms as Odette-Odile with the bold Bolshoi-style projection that the Kirov deliberately avoids but that this season it had not countered with its traditional purity.


Big Publishers Profit as Gay Literature Thrives
The major league shortstop scoops up a ground ball, pivots to start a double play and suddenly finds himself smiling giddily.
He's in love -- with his second baseman.
This may sound like the plot of a paperback by an unknown gay author published by a small press and selling at a gay bookstore.
But it is actually "The Dreyfus Affair: A Love Story," a novel by Peter Lefcourt, an acclaimed author and Emmy-winning television writer and producer who is heterosexual.
What is more, it is published by Random House and selling in independent and chain bookstores across the country.


Review/Music; Piano Concerto Played Like War
For an introspective history buff with an interest in symphonic music, Waterloo Village, a restored canal town here, should have been an ideal place to spend Independence Day.
The village itself is a collection of public buildings and houses built and used between the mid-18th century, when the town's main industry was a forge, through the late 19th century, when it thrived as a stop on the route of the Morris Canal.
And since the holiday fell on a Saturday this year, it coincided with the opening of the Waterloo Music Festival's orchestral series.
A glance around the half-full concert tent tonight suggested that Waterloo's charms were no match for such spectacles as tall ships and fireworks.
But those who attended the opening concert, though, saw fireworks of a musical kind in Alexander Toradze's incendiary account of the Rachmaninoff Third Piano Concerto, to which the second half of the program was devoted.


Investors Face More Risk in Quest for High Yields
Stubbornly conservative investors found that their scant returns from money market funds and C.D.'s shrank some more last week after the Federal Reserve cut two key interest rates.
Financial strategists are telling them that they will simply have to take more risks to get higher returns.
But with the economy wheezing and many securities already high priced, these advisers say, Janus-like, to take risks cautiously.
Buy bonds with longer maturities, but not too long, they say; invest some money abroad -- but not too much; buy some stocks -- but not the risky or overheated kind.


Moldovan Conflict Worries Romania
The willingness of Romanians in Romania to befriend and support ethnic Romanians in Moldova in the face of attacks from Russian and Ukrainian separatists grows with each news account of sniper fire.
But Government officials are taking pains to insist that they do want speedy reunification of the two countries, which together formed a single Romanian state before World War II.


Bridge
A bridge player in the middle of a chain of cars progressing at 65 m.p.h in a 55 m.p.h. zone was pulled over and given a speeding ticket.
He asked "Why me?" and received the reply: "Buddy, today was your day."
Players often develop the feeling that today is their day, either negatively or positively.
If everything is going wrong, they have a gloomy suspicion that there is more to come.
And when they seem to have a magic touch, they look forward to more good things.


Hardball for the Ages
STEVE SIGLER insisted that he was not surprised at what happened because he had always suspected the demand was there.
Six years ago he was fed up with what he described as "fat man's softball." He yearned for the kind of baseball he had played 20 years before: hardball.


CHRONICLE
Comings and Goings: KATE RAND LLOYD, a former editor in chief of Working Woman magazine who has served as editor at large since 1983, has retired after 15 years there.
"It's not that I had had it, but that I had done it," she said the other day about her voluntary departure, explaining, "I think I have done absolutely everything I could."


Anne Morgan, Michael Spalter
Anne Hillary Morgan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dane D. Morgan Jr. of Brookline, Mass., was married yesterday in Readsboro, Vt., to Michael H. Spalter, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold F. Spalter of New York.
Rabbi Barry Krieger performed the ceremony at the North Hill garden.
Mrs.
Spalter, 27 years old, graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in painting from the Rhode Island School of Design.
Her father heads the science department at the Commonwealth School in Boston.
Her mother, Alice B. Morgan, is a vice president at the Cambridge Strategic Management Group in Cambridge, Mass.


Purge Is Reported In Baghdad Military
Reports of a coup plot in Iraq last week have been fleshed out with news of a purge of Iraq's officer corps.
Administration officials said the reports had caused the United States and its allies to intensify planning to further weaken President Saddam Hussein.


Karen Benchetrit, David J. Naggar
Karen Benchetrit, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Benchetrit of Paris, was married yesterday to David Jacques Naggar, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Serge Naggar of New York.
Rabbi Roger Touitou performed the ceremony at the Rue des Tournelles Synagogue in Paris.
Mrs.
Naggar, 27 years old, is a credit analyst in New York for Societe Generale, the French bank.
She graduated from the Universite de Paris and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from New York University.
Her father is a real-estate investor and manager in Paris.
Her mother, Simone Benchetrit, is an assistant to a notary public in Paris.
Mr.
Naggar, 27, is the special assistant to the chief executive of the Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group in New York.
He graduated from Cornell University.
His mother, Jean V. Naggar, is the president of the literary agency bearing her name in New York.
His father is the founder and head of Naggar Consulting, a management consulting firm in New York.


NUCLEAR ACCORDS BRING NEW FEARS ON ARMS DISPOSAL
Federal and private experts say the recent East-West breakthroughs in nuclear arms reduction are replacing one danger with a wide range of new risks as the world's two nuclear superpowers prepare to retire nearly 40,000 warheads.
Mutual annihilation is no longer a threat.
The new risks are emerging because arms reductions call for weapons systems to be disabled -- by demolishing missile silos, for instance -- and do not, as is often supposed, require nuclear warheads to be destroyed.


New Center to Address Jewish-Catholic Issues
Prominent Roman Catholic and Jewish leaders have established a new center to take up theological issues that they say are being skirted in current talks between Christians and Jews.
Among issues that will probably be addressed by the new Center for Christian-Jewish Understanding are the roles that Jews and Christians see the other faith as playing in God's plan for salvation, the way each group understands the land of Israel and the concept of a "chosen people" and the meaning of the Holocaust for believers in God's providence.


After Controversies and Injuries, Bruce Smith Fits the Bill Again
Finding inner peace, strengthening his left knee and recapturing his stature as one of pro football's most dominating defensive players are not easy for Bruce Smith after the season he endured last year.
But Smith has found a perfect way to start.
Each morning and on most afternoons he hops onto his Waverunner, a motorcycle on water, and from the dock behind his sprawling home here he zooms down the bay and out of sight, leaving the pressures and doubts about his career and those of the Buffalo Bills behind for a few moments.


Philippine Democracy
To the Editor:
Re "Democracy Hasn't Won in the Philippines" (letter, June 15) by Peter J. Tarr: That Filipinos have elected a President, Vice President, members of Congress and provincial, city and town officials by democratic process is an undeniable fact.
Democracy won in the Philippines.


U.S.-Trained Conservative Is Elected Ecuador President
An American-trained advocate of free market economic change was elected President of this oil-producing nation today, projections from two unofficial counts of the vote indicated.
With 97 percent of the ballots counted unofficially, Sixto Duran Bellen had a 13 percentage-point margin, according to tallies by local news organizations.
"It's a harvest of a whole life, of 40 years of public service," the winning candidate, a courtly 70-year-old architect, said minutes after learning that exit polls earlier indicated that he had swept 19 of Ecuador's 21 provinces in his quest to become the new leader of Ecuador, South America's largest oil exporter after Venezuela.


The World's Stock Markets Did an About-Face in the Second Quarter
The second quarter was topsy-turvy for world stock markets.
What was up in the first quarter was down in the last three months -- and vice versa.
High interest rates in Europe, worries about the American economic recovery, and political and economic uncertainties in Japan all helped erase much of any gains made early in the second quarter.
European markets also got an extra jolt from Denmark's surprising vote in June: The Danes rejected by a narrow margin the plan to unify Europe economically by the end of the century.


Twins Find an Opening As Closer Stumbles Again
Twins 2, Orioles 1
MINNEAPOLIS, July 5 (AP) -- Kent Hrbek grounded a two-out, bases-loaded single in the ninth inning off Gregg Olson, who blew a late lead for the second straight game, as Minnesota rallied for a 2-1 victory over the Baltimore Orioles today.
The Twins, who beat Baltimore, 3-2, Saturday on Chili Davis's two-out, two-run single off Olson in the 15th inning, won for the first time in 26 tries when trailing after eight innings.
The Twins have won eight of their last nine games and 15 of 18.
Rick Sutcliffe (10-7) began the ninth with a 1-0 lead but gave up Randy Bush's one-out infield single and Donnie Hill's pinch-hit double.
Pinch-hitter Gene Larkin was intentionally walked to load the bases, and Olson relieved.
Olson has blown three of his last five save opportunities.
He blew his first chance of the season, then converted 19 straight saves before running into a recent slump.
Kevin Tapani (9-5) allowed six hits in his third straight complete game.
In the sixth inning, Davis became the first player ever to hit a Metrodome speaker in fair territory.
The ball was headed for deep right field but wound up being caught in shallow right by second baseman Mark McLemore for the out.
White Sox 4, Red Sox 2
CHICAGO (AP) -- George Bell hit his ninth career grand slam and Chicago beat Boston for its 12th victory in 15 games.
Greg Hibbard (7-4) allowed two runs on three singles and five walks in seven innings.
He won for only the second time since May 23 and ended a string of four straight no-decisions.
Scott Radinsky struck out Phil Plantier with runners on second and third to end the eighth, then pitched the ninth for his fourth save.
Mike Gardiner (3-9) lost his eighth straight decision.
Bell's second grand slam of the season came with two out in the fifth inning and put Chicago ahead by 4-2.
He has hit seven home runs and driven in 26 runs in his last 13 games.
After the game, the Red Sox said Roger Clemens would miss at least one turn because of swelling on the bottom of his right foot.
Brewers 2, Royals 1 Brewers 9, Royals 7
KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) -- Greg Vaughn's three-run homer staked Milwaukee to a big early lead and the Brewers held on for the victory over Kansas City and their first doubleheader sweep since 1986.
In the opener, Pat Listach scored when Royals shortstop Curtis Wilkerson could not get the ball out of his glove on Kevin Seitzer's grounder in the 12th inning.
George Brett had his 50th four-hit game in the first game, tying a Royals record with three doubles.
He tripled and scored in the sixth inning of the nightcap.
The Royals' Gregg Jefferies saw his 16-game hitting streak end in the nightcap when he went 0 for 5.
Tigers 8, Mariners 5
DETROIT (AP) -- Cecil Fielder's two-run single capped a five-run first inning as Detroit beat Seattle.
Mariners starter Rich DeLucia (3-5) failed to retire any of the six batters he faced, allowing five runs on four singles and two walks.
Seattle used all 14 position players it had available and six pitchers.
Tigers Manager Sparky Anderson lifted Dave Bergman for a pinch-hitter in the first inning with the score 3-2 and none out.
"I've probably only done that five times in my career," Anderson said.
"I did it to John Vukovich, and he broke all the light bulbs out of the runway." Blue Jays 6, Angels 2
TORONTO (AP) -- Joe Carter, Candy Maldonado and Devon White hit home runs as Toronto won its fourth in a row and sent California to its seventh straight loss.
David Wells (4-3) and Mike Timlin combined on a three-hitter.
Julio Valera (4-8) allowed six runs on seven hits in seven innings.
Wells, who lasted only two and two-third innings in his last start, allowed one earned run on three hits in seven innings.
He struck out four and walked one.
Athletics 5, Indians 2
CLEVELAND (AP) -- Harold Baines homered, doubled and singled, driving in four runs, and Bob Welch survived 10 hits and two home runs as Oakland beat Cleveland.
The victory ended the A's curious string of six losses to last-place Cleveland and kept them within one game of first-place Minnesota in the American League West.
Oakland has led its division most of the year and has never been more than one game from the lead.


Effort Aims to Protect Water Supply From Zebra Mussel Infiltration
Alarmed by the arrival of zebra mussels at the doorstep of New York's reservoirs, the city is acting to prevent the mollusks from infiltrating its drinking water.
Zebra mussels -- so named because of their dark brown stripes on a light tan shell -- do not pose a health threat, although they reproduce rapidly in fresh water, officials say.
But masses of the one- to two-inch mussels could clog intake pipes and prevent an adequate flow of water to the nine million people served by the city's water system.


On the Grass at Wimbledon, Agassi Finally Hits Pay Dirt
Just when everybody least expected it, Andre Agassi, the picaresque 22-year-old Las Vegan with a penchant for self-destructing in Grand Slam finals and just a nodding acquaintance with the etiquette of grass-court tennis, reversed some mighty professional misfortunes this afternoon in his first Wimbledon final.
In the local fashion, Agassi kept a stiff upper lip despite losing the first set.
Overcoming a tendency to become flummoxed by adversity, he refused to be intimidated by Goran Ivanisevic's 37 aces and captured their five-set showdown beneath the clouds that dimmed Center Court.


Stoking French Travelers' Misery, Farmers Block Trains to Riviera
With French truckers now in the seventh day of a protest movement that has paralyzed traffic on more than 120 major highways, farmers today brought more chaos to the start of the vacation season by disrupting rail travel between Lyons and the French Riviera.
At numerous points along the Rhone Valley, farmers blocked the railroad tracks by burning tires or building barricades of boxes and small containers.
About 10,000 passengers were trapped for hours in parked trains, and many others were forced to camp out at stations.


Back to School: Gitano, Sasson
Two New York-based manufacturers of casual apparel are gearing up for the back-to-school selling season with new television and print advertising campaigns.
In an effort to make a statement about women's values and attitudes for the 1990's and, of course, to sell jeans, the Gitano Group Inc. is introducing a campaign featuring Shannen Doherty, a member of the cast of the television series "Beverly Hills 90210"; the singer Marie Osmond, and Vanessa Williams, the singer, actress and former Miss America.


Accounts
*
The Philadelphia Inquirer to Wieden &amp; Kennedy, Philadelphia, for the Knight-Ridder newspaper's advertising account, previously handled in-house.
The agency was awarded the account in a review that also included Earle Palmer Brown and Weightman Adertising, both in Philadelphia.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $4 million. *
Carter Hawley Hale Inc., Los Angeles, to Time Buying Services Inc., New York, for its Emporium and Weinstock department stores' broadcast media-buying accounts.
Time Buying already handles media assignments for other Carter Hawley stores.
Billings were not disclosed.


World Economies


CHRONICLE
DR.
ALLAN F. HERSHFIELD , an academic administrator and professor with 26 years of experience at various colleges and universities, will asssume the presidency of the Fashion Institute of Technology, it was announced last week.
He will succeed MARVIN FELDMAN, who has been president of F.I.T., the State University of New York college that educates students for careers in such fields as fashion, interior design, advertising, communications, marketing and business administration, since 1971.


Susan Weinstein, Theodore Kantor
Susan Elizabeth Weinstein, a daughter of Sherwin B. Weinstein of Rochester and Virginia Y. Weinstein of Pittsford, N.Y., was married yesterday to Theodore Ross Kantor, a son of Dr.
Fred and Linda Kantor of Orange, Conn.
Rabbi Shami Kanter performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Rochester.
Mrs.
Kantor, 28 years old, was until recently a senior financial analyst at the enterprise systems division of the I.B.M.
Corporation in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
She is a cum laude graduate of Smith College and received her M.B.A. degree from Cornell University.
Her father is a lawyer in Pittsford.
Her mother is a reading remediation specialist at the Martha Brown Middle School in Fairport, N.Y.
Her stepmother is Linda Cornell Weinstein of Rochester.


Premiere, Growing Film Magazine, Looks Abroad
Premiere magazine, which immigrated to the United States from France five years ago, is returning to Europe.
K-III Magazines, which publishes the monthly film magazine, has reached an agreement with a London publisher, EMAP Metro, to start a British edition in October.


Miss Goodstein, Robert Rosenblatt
Barbara Helene Goodstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Goodstein of Sands Point, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert Bernard Rosenblatt, a son of Joan Rosenblatt of Jamaica, Queens, and the late Stanley Rosenblatt.
Rabbi Ephraim Buchwald performed the ceremony at Temple Shaare Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Rosenblatt, 31 years old, is a vice president of Bankers Trust in New York.
She graduated from Brown University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Goodstein Securities, a government-bond dealer in Sands Point.


Idealism Vies With Failures In an Experiment in Teaching
It is the season of reckoning for Teach for America, the program that two years ago dispatched nearly 500 top college graduates to teach in the most troubled schools in America.
The first group's two-year commitment is up, and the program now faces expectations raised by its sudden fame: can a small corps of bright and idealistic people with little training help change American education?


WARSAW WELCOMES BUSH AS HE STOPS ON WAY TO SUMMIT
Flying thousands of miles to get a balm for his domestic political pains, President Bush arrived in Munich today for a seven-nation economic conference after receiving a thunderous ovation in a Warsaw square where he promised that "America wants Poland to succeed and to prosper."
"Hello Warsaw! Hello Poland!" Mr.
Bush shouted cheerfully from a stage erected in Castle Square.
He appeared with President Lech Walesa after a mass said for the re-internment of the remains of Ignace Jan Paderewski, the Polish musician and statesman whose dying wish in New York 51 years ago was to be buried in a free Poland.


Ellen Eskenazi, Andrew Shuster
Ellen Sue Eskenazi, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Eskenazi of Roslyn, L.I., was married last night in New York to Andrew Eric Shuster, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold M. Shuster of Royal Palm Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Myron M. Fenster performed the ceremony at the Marriott Financial Center Hotel.
Mrs.
Shuster, 26 years old, is the catering manager at the hotel.
She and her husband graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is a sports reporter for The New York Times.
Her mother, Rosalind Eskenazi, directs programs for gifted children at public schools in Queens.


CYCLING: Biking in the U.S.A. -- Day 27; This Way to Main Street
Solar rays and tailwinds do wonders for a cyclist's psyche.
Together, they turned murky Minnesota into marvelous Minnesota, as the Coast to Coast Bicycle Classic finally saw this state's farms and families in decent weather these last two days.
Here, as elsewhere, the passage of this bicycle group is an event in the lives of rural and small-town people.
They welcome us in unique ways.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Central Vt Pub Svc PS Group Inc


Papers Finding New Ways To Make Faxes a Business
IN the last three years, the business of delivering news and information via fax has boomed and slumped, and is now showing signs of rebirth in ways that promise, in some cases, serious profits.
For newspapers, which were among the quickest to experiment with publishing through facsimile machine, the hard-learned lessons of trial-and-error have produced two fundamental insights to build upon.


Super Bowl in a Package
Would you pay $3,500 for two tickets to the next Super Bowl game at the Rose Bowl on Jan. 31, 1993?
Would your company fork over $100,000 for a mini-sponsorship, which includes 10 seats?
Such opportunities exist through a marketing plan of the Host Committee in Pasadena, Calif.


Music Notes; Complex Production, Even for Opera
Opera performances often have elements of a high-wire act about them, but even so, Andrea Andermann, an Italian television producer, has found a way to raise the stakes.
This weekend, Mr.
Andermann and a team that includes Giuseppe Patroni Griffi, the director, and Vittorio Storaro, the cinematographer, are staging a perilous production of Puccini's "Tosca" that is to be televised live to much of the world, though not to the United States.
For American opera fans, there is talk of a PBS broadcast in the fall, and Teldec is planning to release the performance on laser disk and video tape, possibly in 1993.


For U.S. Nazi Hunters, a Mixed Year
In the years after World War II, American officials were so consumed by the threat of the Soviet Union that they welcomed as refugees all those who fought Communism, even if they had been Nazi collaborators.
That changed only in 1979 with the establishment of the Justice Department's Office of Special Investigation, which was set up to find Nazi criminals in this country and evict them.
But the fall of Communism over the last few years has been a mixed blessing for the office.
On one hand, the unit has won access to reams of World War II documents from Eastern Europe.


For Health Insurers, a Level Field; Vote in Albany Spreads Costs and Risks Among Companies
For years, commercial insurers in New York State have been allowed to divide their small-group customers into two categories: those who are healthy and those who are ill or at risk of illness.
For the healthy, the commercial insurers have offered good policies at relatively low rates.
But for the old, the sick or those in high-risk jobs, they have charged higher rates or even denied coverage altogether.


Agassi Claims His First Grand Slam Title


Russian Rapprochement on the Cyclone
Former adversaries and former countrymen, Russian emigres and visiting Russian sailors spent yesterday afternoon together in Brighton Beach and Coney Island in Brooklyn, sharing blinis and Budweisers, soberly discussing their native land's problems and screaming aboard the Cyclone roller coaster.
"For me, America is very nice," said Alexander Ovcharenko, a 20-year-old sailor from Murmansk, although he and his comrades seemed more taken with the video games they were avidly playing in the Brighton Beach Bath and Racquet Club than the lunchtime declarations by assorted officials of a new day for Russo-American friendship.


Georgia Brown, An Actress, 57; Was in 'Oliver!'
Georgia Brown, a gravelly voiced singer and an earthy actress who originated the role of Nancy in the musical "Oliver!," died yesterday in London.
She was 57 years old and lived in Hollywood.
She died at Charing Cross Hospital, The Associated Press reported, saying her death was after a brief illness.
She was in London to appear in a tribute to Sammy Davis Jr. at the Drury Lane Theater.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
President Bush arrived in Munich, seeking balm for his political pains at a three-day economic conference of the leaders of the seven biggest industrial democracies.
Earlier, he received a thunderous ovation in a Warsaw square where he promised that "America wants Poland to succeed and to prosper."  [ Page A1. ]
The Russian Government and the I.M.F. announced a lending agreement that gives President Boris Yeltsin the West's endorsement for his economic policies but also commits him to cut back on Government spending even as the deficit is rising sharply.  [ A1. ]


Global Income Plus Fund Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Glassboro State to Receive A $100 Million Donation
A New Jersey businessman who says he wants to repay the state where he built his fortune announced a $100 million gift today to Glassboro State College.
It is the largest individual gift ever to a public college or university and second only to a $105 million gift given in 1979 to Emory University, a private school in Atlanta.
In recognition of the gift by Henry M. Rowan and his wife, Betty, officials said they would rename the school in honor of Mr.
Rowan, who is chairman and chief executive officer of Inductotherm Industries Inc., one of the world's biggest manufacturers of industrial furnaces.


Summaries In Au Pair's Arson Trial
In her last remarks to the jury at the arson murder trial of a Swiss au pair, the defense lawyer likened the case against her client to the story of "The Emperor's New Clothes." She urged the jurors to have the courage of the boy in the story who said there were no clothes -- just as there was, she said, no believable prosecution case.
The prosecutor, in his summation hours later, had his own literary reference.
Sherlock Holmes to Watson: "When you have eliminated the impossible," the prosecutor said, "whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth." The evidence, he said, could mean only one thing: The 20-year-old defendant set 3-month-old Kristie Fischer on fire last Dec. 2 and burned her to death.


Five-Alarm Fire Destroys Half-Block of Bronx Businesses
A raging five-alarm fire of suspicious origin destroyed half a block of small businesses on a busy thoroughfare in the Bronx yesterday afternoon, and while no one was killed or seriously injured, the loss was a heavy blow to a struggling, working-class community.
Eighteen firefighters suffered cuts, bruises, heat exhaustion and other minor injuries in the blaze, which broke out in a loft and spread rapidly.
It burned out of control for nearly three hours and gutted much of the south side of East Tremont Avenue between Webster and Park Avenues in the Tremont section.


This Road to New Rochelle Begins in the Hills of Mexico
It is 2,800 miles from the peasant mountain communities of Cotija, Quitupan and Jiquilpan in Mexico to the cracked sidewalks of Union Avenue here, but hundreds of Mexicans have found a direct route.
Their way is paved by Antonio Valencia, a housekeeper known affectionately as el padrino, the godfather, for his role in finding jobs, housing and a new life for immigrants who have followed him from Mexico.


Review/Fashion; Nothing Alarming Under the Sun
The heavy hitters of European fashion brought their cruise and resort collections to New York late last month to show to American buyers.
The styles were reassuring to those not seeking mind-boggling changes.
From now until the beginning of 1993, fashion is not going to assault the senses.
Here is what some world-class designers are showing:


Huck Finn's Roots


On Munich Streets, Police Cordons vs. Protesters
As world leaders opened their annual Group of Seven summit meeting today at the stately palace of Bavaria's former royal family, police sirens wailed ceaselessly outside and more than 400 protesters were arrested in scores of separate incidents.
Security measures were as tight as any seen in Germany since World War II, and many Munich residents complained that they were excessive.
More than 9,000 police officers are on duty here, including units sent from every German state.


COMPANY NEWS: Odorization Pros Convene; It's Not Just the Politicians Who Sit in Conventions
Just about everybody has a convention.
This summer, after the Democrats in New York and the Republicans in Houston, it will be the odorization experts, in Chicago.
According to the organizers, the Institute of Gas Technology, the meeting "provides the opportunity to dip into the largest pool of odorization talent that ever assembles in one place to get your odorization questions and problems answered and solved."


Tour Does a Pirouette Around the Pyrenees
The Tour de France bid farewell today to Spain, land of fiesta and siesta, and returned to its homeland in a peculiar fashion.
For the first time since 1910, the bicycle race skirted the Pyrenees.
That was a blessing for Greg LeMond, who struggled badly over the sole real climb of the day and lost 18 seconds at the finish to his main rivals.


Q&amp;A
Skyscrapers
Q.  How long will skyscrapers last?
A.
"If they are properly maintained, they will last forever," said C. R. (Chuck) Pennoni, president of the American Society of Civil Engineers.


4 Teams to Change Divisions As Baseball's Map Is Redrawn
Recent world developments have forced mapmakers to work overtime, and now Commissioner Fay Vincent has changed baseball's map.
Vincent yesterday ordered the National League to realign beginning next season, moving the Chicago Cubs and the St.
Louis Cardinals to the Western Division and the Atlanta Braves and the Cincinnati Reds to the Eastern Division.
The commissioner's decision, which was expected, nevertheless prompted criticism from Bill White, the National League president.
It may also trigger a lawsuit by the Cubs, in which the Los Angeles Dodgers could join, even though the Major League Agreement bars clubs from suing the commissioner.
At the very least, the decision is certain to produce considerable debate among fans from coast to coast.


Hartford Restricts Guns for Youths, but Not Overall Availability
After days of prolonged debate, the Connecticut legislature tonight approved a package of gun-control measures that stiffens penalties for providing guns to young people but includes no new restrictions on the availability of firearms in the state.
The vote came at virtually the 11th hour of a special session of the legislature, called by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. to consider gun control after a New Haven kindergartner was shot in the head last month when his school bus was caught in a gunfight between warring street gangs.


Rhino Near Last Stand In the African Wild, Animal Experts Warn
EXTENSIVE poaching among the largest remaining population of black rhinoceros in Africa has pushed the species close to extinction in the wild, biologists and game wardens here say.
More than half the remaining black rhinoceroses in Africa, members of one of the continent's most endangered species, are in large sanctuaries, protected by fences and guards.
Those that are left in the wilderness, mostly here in the dense scrub along the Zambesi Valley, may not last another two years, a wildlife expert said here.


Mrs. Mitterrand Is Spared in Iraq
The wife of President Francois Mitterrand narrowly escaped death on a visit to the Kurdish region of Iraq today when a car laden with explosives blew up just after her convoy had passed.
Four people were killed and 19 wounded, three critically.
Danielle Mitterrand, who has long been involved with humanitarian relief programs involving the Kurds, was on the third day of a four-day visit to the Kurdish region of northern Iraq.
The bombing took place in Halabja, the town where thousands of Kurds were killed in 1988 in a poison-gas attack by Iraqi Government forces.


A Neighborhood Bonded by Turmoil
Usually on warm summer nights in Washington Heights, the prevailing sound is merengue music blasting from bodegas, record stores and cars rolling along Broadway, rather than the crash of bursting bottles and the bang of exploding tires that echoed among the four- and five-story apartment houses there last night.
Long an enclave of immigrants, the section went from largely Irish and Jewish in the early decades of the century to predominantly Hispanic today.
Many of the newer residents of Washington Heights are arrivals from the Dominican Republic, for whom baseball is a religion and hard work a fact of life.
Many have left families behind in the Dominican Republic, working in New Jersey factories to send money back home.


Chronicle
Dr.
ROBERT CONQUEST, a historian and writer known for his works on the Soviet Union, will receive the Alexis de Tocqueville Memorial Award from the Independent Institute tonight at a dinner in the Fairmont Hotel in San Francisco.
He is author of 16 books, including "The Great Terror" and "The Harvest of Sorrow" (Oxford University Press) which, despite secrecy and censorship, documented the nature of state terror under the Stalin regime.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK  Namibia's Fredericks Outsprints Mitchell  Frankie Fredericks of Namibia pulled off a double sprint victory, taking the 100- and 200-meter races at the BNP Grand Prix track meet in Villeneuve D'Ascq, France, yesterday.
Fredericks won the 100 in a wind-aided time of 9.91 seconds, beating the United States Olympic trial winner Dennis Mitchell, who finished in 9.94.
Later during the cool, damp evening, Fredericks won the 200 in 19.99, again assisted by a wind over the allowable limit.
The meet also marked the return to France of the South African distance-runner Zola Budd-Pieterse.
Ludmilla Rogachova of the Commonwealth of Independent States team won the women's 1,500 in 4:06.23, while Budd-Pieterse ran a 4:09.72 to finish eighth.
The world champion, Hassiba Boulmerka of Algeria, fell in the final straightaway and injured an ankle. (AP) TENNIS  Cherkasov Advances in Swiss Open  Andrei Cherkasov of Russia and Carl-Uwe Steeb of Germany played through three rain delays and for almost five hours yesterday before Cherkasov emerged with a first-round victory in the $330,000 Swiss Open at Gstaad.
Taking advantage of Steeb's failure to convert three set points in the first set, Cherkasov went on to a 7-6 (7-5), 3-6, 6-3 victory.
No seeded players were in action in the clay-court tournament yesterday.
Fourth-ranked Goran Ivanisevic of Croatia, who lost to Andre Agassi in the Wimbledon finals on Sunday, is among those scheduled to play today. (AP) Engqvist Gains in Sweden: Thomas Engqvist of Sweden upset eighth-seeded Renzo Furlan of Italy, 7-5, 6-2, in the first round of the $200,000 Swedish Open at Bastad.
Only two other seeded players were in action, and both advanced.
Third-seeded Magnus Larsson of Sweden beat countryman David Engel, 2-6, 7-6, 6-4, and fifth-seeded Christian Bergstrom, also of Sweden, beat Luiz Mattar of Brazil, 7-5, 6-4.(AP)


Arnold J. Bai, 61, a Bridgeport Lawyer
Arnold J. Bai, a founding member and senior partner of the Bridgeport law firm of Bai Pollock &amp; Dunnigan, died on Friday while on vacation in Manchester, Vt.
He was 61 years old and lived in Trumbull, Conn.
Mr. Bai died of a heart attack, said his son Matthew.


Chronicle
BEN VEREEN, who suffered serious injuries when he was struck by a utility vehicle on a highway near his home in Malibu, Calif., on June 9, is improving and is no longer in intensive care at U.C.L.A.
Medical Center.
His condition has been upgraded to fair, Richard Elbaum, a spokesman for the hospital, told the Associated Press yesterday.


Norsemen In America Flourished Then Faded
FIVE centuries before Columbus, the Norse sailed west across the North Atlantic in search of new lands that were, in the words of their sagas, "habitable and trespassable." They established a colony in Greenland, then moved on to the coast of North America, where they became a long disputed footnote to the history of discovery.
By now, five centuries after the first Columbus voyage of 1492, scholars agree that the Norse got to the New World much earlier and achieved a substantial foothold.
Archeologists believe they have firm evidence for at least one settlement in Newfoundland around the time of Leif Eriksson, in the early 11th century.
The mystery now is why the Norse failed to sustain their American enterprise.


Georgia-Pacific Debentures Set
The Georgia-Pacific Corporation, the Atlanta-based building and paper products company, yesterday priced $250 million in 9 1/8 percent debentures through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.
The debentures, due in 2022, were priced at 98 to yield 9.32 percent, or about 169 basis points more than a comparable Treasury security.


Get the Lingo Straight, and the Earlier the Better
A friend called during NBC's coverage of the John McEnroe-Andre Agassi Wimbledon semifinal match on Saturday to ask, "Is this live or what?"
The answer: "Or what," a.k.a. taped.


Shearson Offering Increased in Size
Shearson Lehman Holdings Inc., a unit of the American Express Company, is offering $200 million in 7 5/8 percent notes through a group of underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
The notes, which mature on July 15, 1999, are priced at 99.733 to yield 7.675 percent, or about 120 basis points more than Treasury securities with a comparable maturity.


Charles E. Ziff, 42, Arts Promoter, Dies
Charles E. Ziff, the founder of Ziff Marketing, an agency specializing in the promotion of performing-arts organizations, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 42 years old.
He died of AIDS, said Tim Watson, the president of the agency.


Comebacks? Sure. But 3 Times in 1 Game Is Pushing It.
The Yankees encountered a two-run deficit in the first inning, but they crawled back to snare the lead.
They slipped behind by a run in the second, but rebounded to go ahead.
They fell behind by three runs in the third and never rose again last night at Yankee Stadium.
This sort of back-and-forth action does not work well against the first-place Minnesota Twins and it rarely works when Tim Leary is on the mound for the Yankees.
Pitching as if a lead was a disease, Leary handed away each margin he was provided.
The result was a 10-5 victory by Minnesota and a depressing effort by Yankee pitchers.


On My Mind; China's Black Book
Long before the extermination camps, the world knew that Hitler's basic instruments of power were torture and murder.
Only shortly after the Germans elevated him to office, "black books" were published in the West -- detailed reports of the flogging, genital tortures, deaths by suffocation carried out routinely in Gestapo prisons.


Cheney Friend to Be Next Navy Secretary, Bush Officials Say
Sean O'Keefe, the Pentagon comptroller and a close confidant of Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, is expected to be named Secretary of the Navy on Tuesday, senior Administration officials said today.
Mr.
O'Keefe, a 36-year-old former staff director for a Senate military subcommittee, will assume control of a Navy Department struggling to rebound from a scandal involving the assault of 26 women at a convention of naval aviators last year.


Shakespeare Festival Carries On Park Season as Tribute to Papp
It seemed like the kickoff to every other summer of Shakespeare in Central Park.
The sun was blasting the Delacorte Theater stage unmercifully, just as it has during rehearsals each year since 1962.
The humidity was unbearable.
The actors were parched.
And as always the director was barking out marching orders to a sweating cast whose enthusiasm had somehow managed to triumph over the heat.
But there is a crucial difference this summer, the 30th-anniversary season at the flag-festooned Delacorte.
It is the first July that the Shakespeare Festival has mounted a summer season without Joseph Papp, who died on Oct. 31.
The theater's founder, nurturer and Jeremiah, he once staked his theatrical reputation on the battle for free Shakespeare in the park.
Joe -- as he is ubiquitously called at the Delacorte -- is still very much on everyone's minds.


AFN Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


No Change in Gate Receipts
Even though he ordered National League realignment yesterday, Commissioner Fay Vincent did not order a change in the way teams share gate receipts in the league.
Some owners of N.L. clubs had asked Vincent to change the league's sharing plan to the American League's, but Vincent said he preferred to leave the matter, at least for now, in the hands of a committee looking into the problems of small-market clubs versus big-market clubs.


Inmate Is Stabbed to Death In Uprising at Leavenworth
One inmate was stabbed to death Sunday night during an uprising by 300 prisoners at the maximum-security Federal prison here.
The Leavenworth penitentiary was in lockdown today, and 19 inmates, none of whom were involved in the disturbance, were moved to another prison, said Chuck Strickland, a prison spokesman.
He did not say why the 19 were chosen.
The dead inmate was identified as Winford Brown, 23 years old, of Mulberry Grove, Ill.
He was serving an eight-year sentence for armed robbery.


ALGERIA SIGNS OIL-GAS COOPERATION PACT WITH B.P.
Algeria's energy giant Sonatrach signed an agreement with Britain's BP Exploration to investigate ways to cooperate in oil and gas exploration and production.
The north African company, seeking foreign partners to increase oil and gas output, said the two had also agreed to look into cooperating in selling and transporting natural gas in Europe.


Yeltsin Plans Peacekeepers for Moldova
President Boris N. Yeltsin said today that Russia and Ukraine might join Romania and Bulgaria in a peacekeeping force to end the civil war in Moldova.
Mr.
Yeltsin made the announcement at the end of a meeting of the leaders of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
He also said the other Commonwealth countries had agreed that he would speak for them all when he asks the Group of Seven summit meeting of major industrialized nations in Munich to postpone repayment of old Soviet foreign debts for at least two years.


SK Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Benefits of an Unwelcome Trend; Growing Prison Population Lifts Economy for Some Towns
The business of imprisonment is so recession-proof that the New York State Corrections Commissioner, Thomas A. Coughlin 3d, has a dozen upstate communities eagerly requesting some instant economy from a man who, after 13 years of tenure, expects to see the state prison population triple.
Applicant townships wanting in on one of the state's more redoubtable growth industries say one of Mr.
Coughlin's trademark 750-bed medium-security prisons will do, its construction now perfected into a 10-month state-of-the-art package, or perhaps his 500-cell maximum security prototype, easily adapted to the cow pastures of upstate New York.
"It's a type of industry offering 400 to 500 new jobs, no pollution, and not here today, gone tomorrow," said the Portland Town Supervisor, Harold H. Smith, one of Mr.
Coughlin's prison suitors.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Perot to Begin Forming a National Advisory Panel
Ross Perot and his wife, Margot, will sit down on Tuesday with 100 leaders from business and the professions for an event that will be much more than a luncheon of mesquite-grilled chicken and black-bean-and-corn relish.
At one seating, the meeting at the Loews Anatole Hotel in Dallas will demonstrate the power of Mr.
Perot's political appeal and what the style of a Perot campaign and Presidency may be.
The purpose of the luncheon will be to begin forming a national advisory committee to help the undeclared candidate with positions on issues.
In keeping with Mr.
Perot's purported penchant for secrecy, the list of who will be on the committee has not been announced.


CUNY's Crossroads -- A special report.; Leader Presses Changes at CUNY, But Some See Threat to Its Mission
Two years into her tenure as chancellor of the City University of New York, Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds has set off on an ambitious remaking of the nation's largest urban university, raising questions that go to the heart of CUNY's mission to make a high-quality education accessible even to poor and minority students.
Grappling with budgetary problems and an anemic graduation rate, Dr.
Reynolds has said she intends to tighten CUNY's academic standards, restructure the system by eliminating and consolidating departments and programs, build up its science and research areas and develop a broad partnership with the public school system to improve teacher training and student preparation.
She described the plans in interviews, though many details have not yet been shared with the university at large. 'More Scholarly'


MICROSOFT SHOWS WINDOWS NT OPERATING SYSTEM
An overflow crowd of over 4,000 independent software developers gathered at the Moscone Center in San Francisco as the Microsoft Corporation displayed its Windows NT operating system.
The developers' version of Windows NT is available immediately for $69 in compact disk form, or $399 with printed documentation.
The finished product is scheduled for release by the end of the year.


Market Place; Attraction of Muni Funds: A Case of Supply and Shelter
FOR most investors, the allure of municipal bond funds lies in the taxes they do not have to pay.
Over the last three months, however, municipal bond funds have outperformed taxable bond funds, even before computing the tax savings.
Municipal funds rose an average 3.91 percent in the second quarter, while taxable domestic fixed-income funds gained 3.52 percent, according to figures released yesterday by Lipper Analytical Services.
The gains represent a combination of yields and asset values.


Observer; The Misery's Fine
Sometimes I infuriate myself.
Just the other day, for instance.
On television selling a book I was, but too much the gentleman, too much the eleventh-rate salesman, alas, to look the camera dead in the eye and say:
"My book will not only make you smell better, relieve your headache, transform dingy yellow teeth to gleaming white and add five miles per gallon to your gas mileage, it will also make you live twice as long while enjoying twice as much happiness and getting twice as young every year."


American Bank of Connecticut reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


On Both Sides of Abortion, Protesters Gird for the Convention
Everybody is preparing for the Democratic National Convention in his own way.
The other night in Brooklyn, 150 men and women were learning how to body-block, ignore shouting and dress for protests -- learning, that is, how to "defend" abortion clinics against anti-abortion protesters.
For months now, anti-abortion advocates led by Operation Rescue have planned to bring their high-profile protests to New York City during the Democratic convention, hoping to shut down clinics and draw maximum attention to their cause.
For as many months, abortion-rights groups have been planning to repel them.


Executive Changes
CELINE U.S.A., New York, a unit of Celine Inc., an apparel and accessories retailer, appointed James Schneider executive vice president.
BIODYNAMICS INTERNATIONAL INC., Tampa, Fla., a medical products supplier, named Thomas A. Martin vice president of finance and chief financial officer.


Smart &amp; Financial Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 14


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
COMMISSIONERS OFFICE -- Announced the realignment of the National League, effective next season, shifting the Atlanta Braves and Cincinnati Reds to the Eastern Division and the Chicago Cubs and St.
Louis Cardinals to the Western Division.
American League


Bridge
Some hands appear impossible to make, but careful thought reveals a way.
An example is the classic deal shown in the diagram, which has a long history.
Keep an eye on the club nine, which has a key role to play.
South lands in five spades after a competitive auction that shows diamond length on his left and heart length on his right.
The vulnerability tempted him to continue, instead of doubling five hearts and collecting a big penalty.


Funeral Service Is Held for Rabbi Tanenbaum


Chronicle
Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS reaches a milestone birthday on Friday, his 65th, but with the Democratic National Convention coming to town over the weekend, there'll be nary a moment to celebrate it on the day.
So instead of meeting on the natal day, some 250 of the Dinkins faithful will congregate tonight at the St.
Regis Roof to raise a toast -- and funds -- at a party given by the Finance Council of the Committee for David Dinkins.
Although the Mayor has not yet announced an intention to seek re-election next year, the funds could be used for a campaign.
And tomorrow morning, he will cross the street from City Hall to Ellen's Cafe, at 270 Broadway, to blow out the candles on a cake that will depict Mr.
Dinkins entering the convention hall with a donkey.
He will also inspect the 66 pies that Ellen Hart, the owner of the restaurant, will donate to the Momentum Project, a program that helps people with AIDS.


U.S. Talks of Using Military To Get Food Past the Serbs
As leaders of the Group of Seven met to consider the crisis in the Balkans, the United States said tonight that it would support the use of air and naval power to get humanitarian aid into Bosnia and Herzegovina by sea or by land if Serbian forces blocked the United Nations-supported airlift to Sarajevo.
In remarks clearly aimed at stepping up pressure on European leaders and paving the way for further action by the United Nations if necessary, President Bush's national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, said American air power could be used to cover ground operations if a new United Nations Security Council resolution authorized countries to get the aid through.


CREDIT MARKETS;
The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, priced $500 million of 10-year debentures yesterday through various securities dealers.
Fannie Mae, a federally chartered corporation and shareholder-owned company that is the country's largest investor in home mortgages, gave the issue a 7.3 percent coupon.


Valenzuela Is Home But Not Settled
Finally, fans began to leave, stepping over the buckets of empty beer bottles that clogged the aisles and disappearing into the traffic just outside the corrugated tin walls of the stadium.
Having managed two outs in the bottom of the eighth inning, the visiting Charros of Jalisco state were praying for a few last strikes.
Their pitcher, Fernando Valenzuela, was losing, 9-1.


A Blanket of Surprises Is Spread Out on the Grass
Bring on the grunters, the gamesmanship, the sexual politics, the politics of civil war, the raised fist of two semifinalists from the geriatric generation and a wave goodbye from another.
Bring on the conversion of a nonconformist nobody imagined would ever reign here, the rejuvenation of a lady champion, the dashed hopes of two players whose hitherto flawless pursuit of the Grand Slam for 1992 met the rudest of endings here.
And bring on a shower-soaked conga line, the likes of which had never been seen at this hallowed and usually staid tennis ground.


135 Iraqis Purged, the Pentagon Says
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq has purged 135 officers in the wake of a reported military coup attempt in Baghdad last week, a senior Pentagon official said today.
Many of those purged are mid-level officers from a Republican Guard unit that was said to have been implicated in the revolt, according to intelligence reports received by the Pentagon.


It's Long Enough, It's Goodbye: Leahy Exits After 18 Years
After 18 years, Pat Leahy will no longer be around to kick for the Jets.
The 41-year-old Leahy, the oldest player in the National Football League, announced yesterday that he was retiring, primarily because of a recurring sciatic nerve condition in his right leg.
The sciatica, which is in his kicking leg, bothered Leahy a great deal last season, when he also suffered from a strained hamstring in the same leg.
Still, he played in 15 of the Jets' 16 regular-season games and made 26 of 37 field-goal attempts, as well as going 30 for 30 on extra-point attempts.
His total of 108 points marked the sixth time in his career he exceeded 100 points in a season.


Quotation of the Day
"I wouldn't want to mislead you into believing this is a habit." -- HENRY M. ROWAN, giving $100 million to Glassboro State College in New Jersey.  [ A1:1. ]


Cuomo Will Discuss Long Island Bailouts
Aiming to restart negotiations that collapsed at the end of the legislative session last Friday, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that his aides would meet with Senate Republicans on Tuesday to discuss a proposed bailout plan that would allow Suffolk and Nassau Counties to borrow money and raise taxes.
But Mr.
Cuomo made it known that he wanted to discuss other measures -- including his $800 million bond act -- that also failed when the session fizzled to a close amid a shouting match between the legislative leaders, Ralph J. Marino, the Senate majority leader, and Saul Weprin, the Assembly Speaker.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  HOPE FOR WORLD TRADE PACT
Leaders of the world's seven major industrial democracies have made progress on resolving a dispute over agricultural subsidies in Europe.
But American officials cautioned against expectations for a breakthrough on an issue that has been the main stumbling block to concluding a world trade agreement.
A1  The German police arrest more than 400 protesters in Munich.
A6  JAPAN ADMITS WARTIME BROTHELS
Japan reversed itself and admitted that its military had recruited and organized tens of thousands of women in a vast network of Government-run brothels for Japanese soldiers during World War II.
A8  U.N.
AND IRAQ CLASH AGAIN
The Security Council accused Iraq of violating the Persian Gulf war cease-fire agreement by refusing to admit U.N. inspectors into the Agricultural Ministry in Baghdad.
The Council demanded that they be immediately allowed to enter it.
A3  135 IRAQIS REPORTED PURGED
President Hussein of Iraq has purged 135 officers in the wake of a reported military coup attempt in Baghdad last week, a senior Pentagon official said.
A3  RIGHTS GROUP BACKS PALESTINIANS
Yitzhak Rabin, the Prime Minister-designate, was urged by an Israeli human rights group to end harsh measures against Palestinians that he put into effect in the occupied territories as Defense Minister.
A3  POLISH TENSION OVER AIDS HOME
Plans to open two homes for children infected with the AIDS virus have stirred protests and vows of defiance in a town near Warsaw.
A4  U.S.
ADDS BACKING FOR RELIEF
The United States said it would support the use of air and naval power to get humanitarian aid into Bosnia and Herzegovina by sea or by land if Serbian forces blocked the U.N.-supported airlift to Sarajevo.
A6  YUGOSLAV LEADER ASKS DELAY
The Yugoslav Prime Minister-designate asked the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe to wait 100 days before deciding on expelling or suspending Belgrade for its support for the Serbian offensive in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A7  WEIGHING TROOPS FOR MOLDOVA
President Yeltsin said Russia and Ukraine might join Romania and Bulgaria in a peacekeeping force to end the civil war in Moldova.
A8  PANEL CLEARS PRETORIA OFFICIALS
An interracial, Government-appointed commission said it had found no evidence of involvement by senior Government officials in factional fighting among black groups.
A9  National A10-16  CUOMO TO SPEAK FOR CLINTON
Governor Cuomo agreed to give the nominating speech for Governor Clinton at the Democratic Convention next week.
The decision signaled a rapprochement between the two men and raised the question of whether Mr.
Cuomo might entertain an offer to join the ticket.
A1  ABORTION AND THE DEMOCRATS
The abortion issue has become superheated just as Governor Clinton nears a choice for his running mate.
To what extent he uses abortion as a litmus test will reveal much about him and his party.
A12  WHO PEROT ASKS FOR ADVICE
Ross Perot has begun forming a national advisory committee to help him develop positions on issues.
Despite his penchant for secrecy, a few of the names have trickled out.A13  NEW CHIEF FOR TROUBLED NAVY
Sean O'Keefe, the Pentagon comptroller, is expected to be named Secretary of the Navy, senior Administration officials said.
A confidant of Defense Secretary Cheney, Mr.
O'Keefe would assume control when the Navy is mired in a sexual-assault scandal.
A11  WELFARE IN A SMALL, WHITE TOWN
Most recipients of welfare live not in the inner cities but in suburbs or small towns like Marshalltown, Iowa.
The town displays powerful forces that make welfare and poverty hard to escape anywhere: the nation's proliferation of low-wage jobs and two decades of falling wages.
A1  BLACK ROOTS FOR HUCK FINN?
A Mark Twain scholar is asserting that the voice of Huckleberry Finn belongs in part to a black boy Twain interviewed.
Uncovering the African-American roots of Twain's art could lead to a reconsideration of the author, his book and the debate over multiculturalism.
A16  GAMBLING WITH A CITY'S FUTURE
Nothing in years has seemed so tantalizing and so horrific to Louisianans as a plan rammed through the Legislature last month to make New Orleans the nation's third large city to offer casino gambling.
A10  IN CAR HEAVEN, A BUS CULTURE
Los Angeles journal: "Nobody rides the bus" is almost a mantra here, but on the No. 4 the other day, all the seats were filled.
A10  Metropolitan Digest, B1
A New Jersey businessman who says he wants to repay the state where he built his fortune announced a $100 million gift today to Glassboro State College.
A1  CUNY BID RAISES QUESTIONS
An ambitious remaking of CUNY raises questions that go to the heart of its mission to make a high-quality education accessible even to poor and minority students.
A1  A NEIGHBORHOOD OF ANGER
A neighborhood's simmering anger over the fatal shooting of a Washington Heights man by a police officer boiled over as scores of people rampaged through a 40-square-block area, overturning cars, setting fires to at least half a dozen cars and an abandoned building and throwing bottles from windows at people in the street.
A1  Business Digest, D1 Science Times C1-10  Before Columbus, Norsemen flourished then faded in America.
C1  Physicists struggle to save supercollider from the budgetary ax.
C1  A transplant surgeon seeks new frontier with baboon liver operation.
C1  Fashion Page A17  Nothing alarming under the sun.
Arts/Entertainment C11-15  In China, stone walls can a song make as well as a prison.
C11  Theater: Shakespeare in the Park becomes a Papp tribute.
C11  Music: Tanglewood Festival.
C11  Dance: Jose Limon's "Mazurkas" revived at Jacob's Pillow.
C11  Sports B8-13  Baseball: Commissioner orders realignment for National League.
A1  Mets' competition will get tougher.
B9  Yanks lose to Twins.
B9  Mets top Braves.
B11  Column: Anderson on realignment.
B9  Obituaries B7  Allen Sven Oxenburg, founder of American Opera Society.
Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials A18  Russia has earned its reward.
Marino's petulant walkout.
Surprises in Ireland.
Topics: Tennis speaks.
Letters A18  A. M. Rosenthal: China's black book.
A19  Russell Baker: The misery's fine.
A19  Pete du Pont: Conservatives -- Beware Perot.
A19  Flora Lewis: Would Rabin go to Damascus?
A19


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
No appearances scheduled.  Gov. Bill Clinton
TODAY: 10-11 P.M., PBS, interview with Bill Moyers. (Channel 13 in New York.)  Ross Perot
No appearances scheduled.  Vice President Quayle
No appearances scheduled.


Gap Is Reportedly Adding Women's Underwear Brand
Gap Inc., the red-hot retailer specializing in casual clothes, appears ready to put its brand name on another garment -- women's panties.
Nantucket Industries announced last week that it would begin making Gap-brand women's panties.
It said it would begin shipping the underwear, which will be sold in about 800 Gap stores, in the summer.
Nantucket, based in New York, also said it was making underwear for some of Gap's children's stores, Gap Kids.


Antley Gets 10-Day Suspension but Appeals It
The Battle of the Homestretch took a new turn yesterday when Chris Antley was suspended for 10 days for aggressive riding that led to the disqualification of his mount, Three Peat, in the $200,000 Dwyer Stakes at Belmont Park on Sunday.
But he appealed the decision of the stewards, and will continue to ride until the appeal is heard in perhaps two weeks.
The 26-year-old jockey learned of his suspension after watching a rerun of the race films with the three stewards and several other jockeys invited to attend as witnesses.
They included Jorge Chavez, who was riding Agincourt when the two riders and their mounts became embroiled in jostling and bumping in the final eighth of a mile.


Ercros, a Chemical Group, Going Bankrupt
In what is likely to be the largest bankruptcy filing in Spanish history, Ercros S.A., Spain's largest chemical group, said today that it would file for receivership on Tuesday after failing to reach an agreement with its creditors.
The group, indirectly controlled by the Kuwait Investment Office, has debts totaling about $1.5 billion, and its bank creditors include Citibank and Chase Manhattan.


Change in Israel Gives Peace Its Best Chance; 'If You Force Them'
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb, in his June 22 column about the essence of the Arab-Israeli conflict, unfortunately reinforces the Western cultural bias against Arabs and Islam.
He calls the Arabs "dreamers," from which it follows that to reach a solution they must submit their "fantasies" to a prolonged peace process.
Can 200 million people all be "dreamers" and prisoners of their "fantasies"?
This is an expression of cultural superiority at its most superficial.
Mr.
Gelb quotes a former chief of Israeli military intelligence as saying: "Islam doesn't recognize coexistence as a basic doctrine. Coexistence goes against Islam's sense of world order." What is the basis for such a sweeping generalization?


A Van Der Waals Solid
Scientists at the Carnegie Institution of Washington have created a molecule held together on novel principles, a discovery that they believe will open a new line of scientific research, and that may in addition help scientists to understand the surfaces of icy planets like Neptune and Pluto.
The new molecule is held together not by the usual covalent bonds between atoms, but solely by the weak Van der Waals forces that cause the mutual attraction between molecules in a liquid.
In the July 2 issue of Nature, Dr.
Willem Vos and his associates report that they had created their new molecule, known as a Van der Waals molecule, in a solid state and at high pressure.


Cuomo Turnabout: Now He Will Nominate Clinton
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who had insisted that he did not want and would not accept a speaking role at the Democratic National Convention, agreed today to place Gov.
Bill Clinton's name in nomination next week at Madison Square Garden.
The New York Governor's decision to give the high-profile speech signified a mutually beneficial rapprochement between two men who have had more than their share of personal and political conflict in recent years.
Coming one week before the opening of the convention, the announcement defused any possibility that the Cuomo-Clinton contretemps would become an unwelcome sideshow to Mr.
Clinton's coronation.
Brown Mentions No. 2 Role


New Jersey's Bond Rating Holds Firm
As indigent kidney dialysis patients worry about where they will get their medicine and state employees wonder which of them are going to lose their jobs, one thing in New Jersey was more certain than it had been: The state's credit rating was affirmed today by Standard &amp; Poor's.
But the bond-rating agency also said the state's long-term financial outlook was poor.


Chess
Much has been said about how the breakup of the Soviet empire would destroy its chess dominance by dispersing its powerful army of top grandmasters among the new emergent nations.
The chess federations of some of their rivals were looking forward to exploiting the supposed new weaknesses in the Olympiad, which finished on June 25 in Manila.
Forget it.
The Russian team, even without Anatoly Karpov on second board behind Gary Kasparov (they don't get along) romped to victory, just as the Soviet Union did in the old days.


Keep Service Contracts and Community Empowerment Distinct
To the Editor:
New York City's intention to direct its contracts with private social service agencies to community-based groups, discussed in Sam Roberts's June 8 column, confuses two purposes.
One is to provide high-quality social and health services; the other is to build the infrastructure of poor communities populated, in large measure, by African-American and Latino people.
The service purpose is best served by a contract-procurement process that awards points for elements in the bidder's proposal that have a demonstrated relationship to quality service delivery.
Included would be preparation of staff, past record and productivity.
Awarding points for employment of qualified staff members whose race and ethnicity match the customers is justified.


Murder Count For a Suspect In Abduction
Arthur D. Seale was charged today with felony murder as he and his wife, Irene J. Seale, appeared in New Jersey state court in connection with the kidnapping and death of Sidney J. Reso, the president of the Exxon Company International.
The state's Medical Examiner has conducted an autopsy, but the cause of Mr.
Reso's death has not been released.
W.
Michael Murphy, the Morris County Prosecutor, said today that the final autopsy report had not been completed, but he said that infection from a gunshot wound and asphyxiation were factors in the death of the 57-year-old executive.
Mr.
Reso was held in a box in a public storage unit rented by Mrs.
Seale not far from his Morris Township home.


Los Angeles Journal; A Crowded Bus That 'Nobody Rides'
Sarah Spitz took the bus once.
She was 16 and had no car.
She and her friends had gotten a ride from the San Fernando Valley to Hollywood to go to the movies.
They took the bus home, and considered it an adventure.
That was 24 years ago, and Ms.
Spitz, the publicity director at KCRW-FM in Santa Monica, has had no particular reason to board a bus in Los Angeles since.
She drives to her office, two miles from her home.


Corrections
An article on April 25 about the plans of Tri-Star Pictures to make films of books written and illustrated by Maurice Sendak included an erroneous reference to his movie experience, supplied by Tri-Star.
Two of his books have been made into animated films; the Tri-Star films will not be his first.
The books, "Where the Wild Things Are" and "In the Night Kitchen," were adapted and directed by Gene Deitch.
Mr.
Deitch and Allen Swift, the narrator of "Where the Wild Things Are," each wrote to The Times about the error shortly after it appeared.
A misunderstanding between departments delayed this correction.


Mexico Sells Off Last Of 18 Banks at Big Profit
A decade after it nationalized the country's financial system in a fit of economic desperation, the Mexican Government today sold off the last of its 18 banks.
The sale in Mexico City of a controlling 66.3 percent stake in Banco del Centro, S.A., marked the end of a privatization program that has been lucrative beyond even the Government's more optimistic estimates.


Jackson Provided Forum for Many Voices
To the Editor:
"Sister Souljah Is No Willie Horton" (editorial, June 17) questions the appearance of the rap performer Sister Souljah at the Rainbow Coalition conference in Washington.
You ask, "are there not better role models than a careless voice for violence?" As one who attended the conference, perhaps I can provide some context.
Sister Souljah was one of about 40 participants in a portion of the conference that was billed as a "Youth Empowerment Summit." The event was a lengthy round-table discussion among a variety of people from the 20-something generation, organized by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's son, Yusef.
The young people were predominantly black, although some whites and Hispanics took part as well.


Watchdog Group Assails Pace of Reorganization
An independent group that monitors New York City's finances contends that Mayor David N. Dinkins and the City Council have failed to make good on promises to fundamentally reorganize the city government and reduce its size.
In letters to the Mayor and the Council's Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, the watchdog group, the Citizens Budget Commission, said the city budget for the fiscal year that began last week did not deliver on many of the pledges made earlier by the Mayor and Council to overhaul municipal government.


U.N. Warns Iraqis to Open Ministry to Arms Inspectors
The Security Council clashed with President Saddam Hussein again today, demanding that Iraq immediately admit United Nations inspectors to a building they were barred from entering on Sunday.
A statement issued by the Security Council President said Iraq was in "material and unacceptable" breach of the cease-fire agreement that ended the Persian Gulf war as a result of its refusal to admit inspectors to the Agricultural and Irrigation Ministry in Baghdad.


Microframe Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


FORD OFFERS FREE ROAD SERVICE TO LEASE CUSTOMERS
The Ford Motor Credit Company, a unit of the auto maker, said it was offering free roadside assistance to all leasing customers.
"We are offering this feature on every vehicle in our lineup, from the Ford Escort to the Lincoln Town Car," said Daniel Taylor, vice president of marketing.


Bird Begins Therapy and Hopes for Best
LARRY BIRD began two weeks of physical therapy yesterday in Boston in the hopes that he still might play in the Olympics, according to the Boston Celtics.
"When the two weeks are up, we're hoping Larry can be back with the team in Barcelona," DAVID ZUCARRO, a Celtics spokesman, said.


Left-of-Center Party Holds Edge in Nigeria
With most of the results now in, Nigeria's left-centrist Social Democratic Party was heading toward a narrow victory today, appearing to have won a majority of seats in both chambers of the new national Legislature.
The voting on Saturday was the first such contest here since 1983, when Nigeria's military leaders seized power.
It marked the penultimate phase of a six-year plan to hand power back to elected civilian officials.


Fervid Appeals on Abortion Follow High Court Decision
ABORTION rights groups are wasting no time in trying to rally support in the wake of last week's Supreme Court decision that upheld the constitutional right to abortion but permitted states to enact restrictions.
Fervid television commercials and newspaper advertisements, as well as strongly worded direct-mail appeals, are appearing that interpret the Court's narrowly decided verdict in the most apocalyptic terms.


Woes for Mets as the Reds and Braves Go East
The state of the Mets, which hasn't looked good no matter what perspective the organization has chosen to see it from this season, appeared in even greater peril today when seen against the ominous specter of next season.
The Mets, an aging, expensive club that has found it impossible to be competitive in an undistinguished National League East Division, now face the compounded challenge of having two of the superior clubs in all of baseball inserted into the divison as a result of the realignment announced today by Commissioner Fay Vincent.


Chicago Mayor Threatening to Drop Airport Plan
Plans to build a third Chicago airport, on the city's southeast side, have been jeopardized by Mayor Richard M. Daley's angry reaction to the State Legislature's failure to approve key legislation for the project.
Mayor Daley said he would now drop his two-year crusade for the airport, but his announcement is widely viewed as a political maneuver to put pressure on the Legislature to approve the airport at Lake Calumet, the Mayor's favored site, on the southeast side.


Total System Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Dance; Homage to Chopin and Limon in Revived 'Mazurkas'
Jose Limon's 1958 "Mazurkas" has just been revived at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival here, and it shows a lyrical side that is not customarily identified with the choreographer as a modern-dance pioneer.
Nothing less than the human condition was Limon's overriding theme until his death in 1972.
While he could distill drama on an intimate scale, as he did with "Othello" in "The Moor's Pavane," that drama was nonetheless universal in scope.


Surprises in Ireland
While few were watching, Ireland has been redefining a once unyielding nationalist tradition.
A republic whose founders exalted sovereignty above all is now leading the way to European union while politicians bred to baiting the English are seeking a new relationship with an ancient adversary.
Dublin's new Prime Minister, Albert Reynolds, can claim a major triumph in persuading the Irish electorate to endorse closer political union with Europe under the Maastricht treaty.
It helped that Irish farmers have benefited generously from European subsidies.


By Design; The Elusive Black Skirt
There is one fall fashion that will not wait for the new season, and an awful lot of women seem to know it.
That is why trying to find a mid-calf-length black skirt is a catch-as-catch-can situation.
As soon as one appears on the selling floor, it is snapped up.
There are a few to be found, however -- and the price can range from almost $50 to more than $1,000.
Bloomingdale's has a front-wrap version from French Connection for $49.98, a Vittadini Sport cotton-spandex style for $116 and a Tapemeasure lycra-stretch for $120.
The store also has the most desirable: the original Chanel, with a center-back, hem-line-up zipper.
Made of wool, lycra and spandex, it costs $1,092.


Topics of The Times; Tennis Speaks for Itself
NBC's "Today" show gave tennis fans a rare treat yesterday morning -- championship men's doubles from Wimbledon without the endless babble of the network's regular commentators.
The explanation?
It wasn't NBC at all, but the civilized, non-babbling BBC broadcast that NBC tapped into.
Play had been suspended at dark Sunday, after four and a half hours.
John McEnroe and Michael Stich, the eventual winners, were tied with Richey Reneberg and Jim Grabb, two sets apiece and 13-13 in the fifth.


Physicists Struggle To Save Supercollider From Budgetary Ax
A STUNNING vote by the House of Representatives to scuttle construction of the $8.25-billion Superconducting Supercollider poses the biggest threat the huge particle accelerator has faced in its 10-year gestation, and has sparked a desperate struggle by supporters to keep the project alive.
If the supercollider should now die, supporters believe, the chance to discover the cosmic origin of whatever it is that endows objects with mass could be lost for at least a generation.
A team of some 2,000 scientists assembled and carefully tuned for their roles in the supercollider venture would be scattered at enormous cost, and to the regret of many scientists.


Sallie Mae Issue
A $500 million floating-rate financing by the Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, was priced yesterday.
The floating- rate notes, due Jan. 14, 1993, were priced to yield 6 basis points more than the bond-equivalent rate of the 91-day Treasury bill, with the interest adjusted the day after each weekly bill auction.


Allen Sven Oxenburg, 64, Dead; American Opera Society Founder
Allen Sven Oxenburg, the founder and the artistic director of the American Opera Society, died on Thursday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, said Muriel Oxenberg Murphy, a cousin.


2d Jail Term Looms for Man Who Plundered a Foundation
For years, James R. Halperin, a New York lawyer, enjoyed the good life.
There was a waterfront home on Long Island and another residence in Florida, both adorned with valuable artworks, as well as golfing vacations and costly trips to France, Hawaii and Israel -- all luxuries that the Attorney General's office charges were paid by illegally dissipating the funds of the Nate B. and Frances Spingold Foundation of which he was controlling director.
Last Wednesday, Mr.
Halperin, 46 years old, was confined to the Manhattan Detention Center and could face a three- to nine-year jail sentence for violating a probation agreement that required him to pay a first installment of $203,596 in restitution to the foundation in March.


Conservatives: Beware Perot
As a conservative who has watched low taxes and restrained Government spending and interference create the world's strongest economy, and who sought the Presidency on these principles in 1988, I urge fellow conservatives to be wary of Ross Perot's candidacy.
I understand why Mr.
Perot is receiving such attention.
The Bush Administration has given most voters, those who helped the Republicans to three landslide victories in the 1980's, the impression that the principles that fueled those triumphs are open to negotiation and easy dismissal.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; MASSACHUSETTS GOVERNOR ATTACKS CLINTON'S RECORD
Acting in his capacity as a surrogate speaker for the Bush/Quayle campaign, Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts traveled to the Arkansas capital today to attack Gov.
Bill Clinton for his record on taxes and the environment.
Saying that Mr.
Clinton had gotten a "free ride" in his criticisms of Mr.
Bush, Mr.
Weld said it was unconscionable that the Arkansas Governor had not been taken to greater task for his spotty record on the environment and for having raised taxes to pay for enhanced education programs.


Police Name Suspect In Armed Robberies
The New York City police yesterday named a suspect in a series of 54 armed robberies in Queens and Nassau County since Jan. 31.
The robberies all took place between 1:20 and 1:30 in the afternoon, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.
In each case, a man approached his victims as they climbed out of their cars in their driveways, then flashed a handgun and demanded their cash and valuables, Officer McInnis said.


Malone Is Now a Forward in the Guard
When KARL MALONE was in Portland for the Olympic qualifying tournament last week, the Utah Jazz forward mentioned that he'd always wanted to be in the armed forces.
Oregon National Guard officials heard the comment and decided to grant his wish.
On Sunday, Malone was presented with a certificate making him an honorary member of the Oregon National Guard.


Change in Israel Gives Peace Its Best Chance
To the Editor:
American Jews were angry with President Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d when they refused to grant Yitzhak Shamir's request for loan guarantees without a commitment by the Israeli Prime Minister to halt settlements in the West Bank and Gaza.
This anger was fueled, in part, by disclosures about $5 billion in loan guarantees the Bush Administration granted Iraq's President Saddam Hussein just before his invasion of Kuwait.
However, Mr.
Shamir's statement that he intended to stall the peace process for the next 10 years to settle half a million more Israelis in the territories (front page, June 27) sheds a different light on the Administration's decision.
It also throws new light on the results of Israel's elections.
The stunning victory by the Labor Party should be understood as a reaffirmation by Israelis of their genuine commitment to the peace process and a rejection of narrow ideological goals.


Sit Down and Read This (No, Not in That Chair!)
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, the Bauhaus architect, once remarked that it was easier to design a skyscraper than a good chair.
Today, the challenge of accommodating the delicate cargo of the seated human being seems all the greater, especially in the office.
Each working day, more than 40 million Americans hunch in front of desktop computers, and more and more of them are falling victim to painful, sometimes crippling, stress-linked injuries to their shoulders, arms, hands and backs.


Sargent Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


RABIN IS PRESSED TO END CRACKDOWN
Yitzhak Rabin, the designated new Prime Minister, was urged by an Israeli human rights group today to end harsh measures against Palestinians that he himself had put into effect in the occupied territories when he was Defense Minister a few years ago.
The group, the Association for Civil Rights in Israel, protested that collective punishment and other abuses continued in the territories, including mass curfews, the demolition and sealing of houses and the expulsion of Palestinians held responsible for violence in the uprising against Israel known as the intifada.


Microwave Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Choice of Running Mate Is a 'Pro-Choice' Test
Democratic leaders pride themselves on having moved beyond litmus tests.
Their presumed nominee, Gov.
Bill Clinton, was, until a year ago, the chairman of a group, the Democratic Leadership Council, that said the party had lost touch with "mainstream" America because of its obsession with ideological purity and tests of one kind or another.
Now Mr.
Clinton is about to choose a running mate, at a time when the activist wing of his party is superheated on the issue of abortion.
And the question in some political circles is just how "pro-choice" his running mate will have to be.
It is just part of what makes the selection of a Vice-Presidential nominee so revealing about a candidate and his party.
What litmus tests are left for the Democrats?
How much is Mr.
Clinton willing to be bound by them?


Books of The Times; Promise and Betrayal Of the American Dream
Motor City By Bill Morris 337 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $21.


Review/Music; A Trim Mozart Requiem From Hundreds of Voices
If nothing else, the choral extravaganzas that Mid-America Productions presents are wonders of entrepreneurship.
The company is essentially a travel agency with a musical gimmick: its tours, sold to choirs and orchestras all over the United States (and sometimes in Canada) include a trip to New York and a performance at Carnegie Hall.
Usually the performances bring together many choirs from many states, and no doubt Mid-America will one day stage a concert featuring choirs from all 50 states.
On Sunday evening the company's aims were more modest.
Seven choirs from as many states joined forces with the New England Symphonic Ensemble, the British conductor John Rutter and four soloists for a performance of the Mozart Requiem.


Sit Down and Read This (No, Not in That Chair!)
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, the Bauhaus architect, once remarked that it was easier to design a skyscraper than a good chair.
Today, the challenge of accommodating the delicate cargo of the seated human being seems all the greater, especially in the office.
Each working day, more than 40 million Americans hunch in front of desktop computers, and more and more of them are falling victim to painful, sometimes crippling, stress-linked injuries to their shoulders, arms, hands and backs.


Tescorp Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Converse Switches Along With Admen
Converse Inc. of Reading, Mass., unexpectedly announced yesterday that it would follow the creative executives on its $25 million account and switch shops with them.
The maker of athletic shoes said it would follow the team of Peter Favat, 30 years old, and Rich Herstek, 38, to Houston, Effler &amp; Partners in Boston from Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson, the Boston agency Converse had used for a decade.
The move increases Houston, Effler's billings by about 50 percent, to approximately $75 million; Converse will be its largest account.


Charles Andrew Barber, Critic, 35
Charles Andrew Barber, a critic, poet and theater director, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 35 years old.
He died of AIDS, said Jonathan Sheffer, a friend.


Bonilla Is Ejected But Mets Carry On
On a night the Mets for once escaped defeat, they didn't escape controversy.
The neat, uplifting details first: The Mets, with David Cone's moxie on the mound and clutch runs delivered in the late innings, beat the Braves, 3-1.
Cone improved to 8-4, Dave Gallagher doubled in a critical run in the eighth and Daryl Boston slugged a solo homer in the ninth as the Mets won for only the fourth time in the last 11 games.


Japan Admits It Set Up Army Brothels
Bowing to pressure from neighboring countries to acknowledge a brutal chapter of its wartime history, Japan reversed itself today and admitted that its military had recruited and organized tens of thousands of women in a vast network of Government-run brothels for Japanese soldiers during World War II.
As recently as six months ago, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa and other senior officials denied that the wartime Government had organized and run the brothels, in which thousands of women died, insisting that they were set up by entrepreneurs.
Thus, the officials said, Japan was not in a position to pay compensation.


Mr. Marino's Petulant Walkout
No sooner had New York's Legislature performed the unusual feat of passing this year's state budget almost on schedule than it slid right back into its bad habit of shirking responsibility.
The lawmakers actually packed up and left Albany last week without voting on several pieces of critical legislation.
Unless they return, the public won't have a chance to vote in November on an $800 million bond act designed to create jobs and spur economic development; Nassau and Suffolk counties won't get a chance to bail themselves out of fiscal trouble, and other bills that merit attention won't get any.
Lawmakers cannot allow the impasse to continue.
They have an obligation to go back to work.


METRO DIGEST
CUOMO TO NOMINATE CLINTON
Governor Cuomo, who had insisted that he did not want and would not accept a speaking role at the Democratic National Convention, agreed today to place Gov.
Bill Clinton's name in nomination at Madison Square Garden next week.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  CUNY CHANCELLOR'S PLAN FOR CHANGE


Business and Health; Helping Retirees Sort Out Drugs
IN an effort to contain costs while also looking out for their retired employees' health, many companies are trying to dissuade their retirees from buying assortments of prescription drugs that can interact in harmful ways.
Prescription drugs are among the fastest-growing health costs for many employers, especially companies with many retirees, who often consume pills at an alarming rate.
Americans over age 65 spent about $11 billion on prescriptions and $5 billion more on over-the-counter drugs last year, according to Stephen W. Schondelmeyer, a pharmaceutical economist at the University of Minnesota.


Regulators Agree on Rules To Prevent More B.C.C.I.'s
Banking regulators from the United States and 11 other industrialized countries moved today to reduce the chances that banks with operations in more than one country would fall through the regulatory cracks the way the Bank of Credit and Commerce International did.
The regulators said they had agreed to tighten the minimum standards for the supervision of international banking groups and their cross-border operations.


McEnroe and Stich Profit From Double Overtime
Their match took up two days, was played on two different courts and required a five-hour effort, but John McEnroe and Michael Stich won the Wimbledon doubles championship this afternoon by defeating the fourth-seeded duo of Jim Grabb and Richey Reneberg, 5-7,7-6, 3-6, 7-6, 19-17.
This was McEnroe's fifth Wimbledon doubles title -- the first four won with Peter Fleming -- and a first for Stich, last year's singles champion.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The auto industry reported strong sales for late June, propelled by consumers' "buying American." Detroit's Big Three gained market share against the Japanese, and G.M.'s Saturn division had a particularly strong month.
June's seasonally adjusted annual selling rate for domestic cars was the best in 18 months.  [ Page D1. ]
For millions of Americans looking for work -- and for the Presidential candidates -- June's surge in unemployment poses a big question: Is the economy's new weakness a blip or a dip?  [ D1. ]


Patterns
Two Decades of W
John Fairchild will jump out of a cake this week.
This whipped dream is to occur Thursday when the eminence grise of Women's Wear Daily appears in the windows of Barneys New York -- in mannequin form, that is -- to mark the 20th anniversary of W, the broadsheet weekly that put a new sheen on the Fairchild publishing empire.


Tokyo Stocks Level
Stocks were flat in Tokyo this morning, as investors awaited developments from the trade talks in Germany.
At midday, the Nikkei index of 225 shares was up only 5.52 points, to 16,662.59.
On Monday, the Nikkei slipped 60.71 points.


How Gradual Erosion Builds Up Mountains
THOUGH most mountain ranges were formed when friction between two mammoth tectonic plates forced the earth between them to buckle upward, reasons for their continued growth have long been debated.
But a study published in the June 25 issue of Nature, the British science journal, corroborates a recent supposition: that gradual erosion of a mountain's peak reduces its top-heaviness, resulting in uplift that maintains the mountain's original grandeur.
The study, by Dr.
Douglas W. Burbank of the Department of Geological Sciences at the University of Southern California, focused on patterns of river flow and sedimentation found on the Indo-Gangetic plain south of the Himalayas.
Dr.
Burbank said that the "depositional patterns" left by rivers in basins adjacent to mountain ranges (like the Himalayas) might be clues as to how the range developed.


INDUSTRIAL NATIONS FIGHTING DEADLOCK ON FARM SUBSIDIES
Leaders of the world's seven major industrial democracies today made what they said was a last-ditch attempt to break a six-year-old deadlock and reach a world trade agreement that could reverse the global economic slowdown.
European officials said the leaders were nearer to resolving what has become an essentially French-American dispute over extensive European farm subsidies, which the United States wants to see cut back.
But United States officials cautioned against expectations of a breakthrough.


Digital Has New Models Of Computer
In an attempt to give its computer sales a lift, the Digital Equipment Corporation on Tuesday will introduce a new line of what it is calling "Alpha ready" VAX machines in Zurich.
A similar announcement is scheduled in the United States for July 15.


Fixed-Income Funds' Quarterly Performance


International Jensen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Putting Yourself in the Picture
VIRTUAL reality promises to create a convincing world inside the computer, one that the human user, wearing a special helmet, goggles and glove, can inhabit and interact with.
Outside the laboratory, however, its achievements so far are pretty crude.
Despite the name of its publisher -- Virtual Reality Laboratories -- Vistapro really does not come close to the ideal.
But what it does create is stunning enough: images that were the province of powerful main-frame computers the day before yesterday.


Lives of Unexpected Poverty In Center of a Land of Plenty
This city of 25,000 sits amid cornfields and factories in the center of a state that has been riding out the recession with one of the lowest unemployment levels in the country.
Yet around 2,000 poor people here are getting help of some kind from the welfare system, from vouchers to heat a house to a regular welfare check.
This is not the South Bronx or Appalachia, where poverty often is attributed to culture or behavior, to racism or reckless childbearing.


Laski Journal; Poland's Pity? The Fear of AIDS Burns Brighter
The rage had been building for weeks in this quiet hamlet just outside of Warsaw.
Plans to open two homes for children infected with the AIDS virus had already stirred nightly protests and vows of defiance.
Then, a Government helicopter dropped sheaves of leaflets challenging the local belief that AIDS can be caught from mosquito bites, sewage systems and water.
A riot erupted.
Villagers smashed windows in the two houses, which were being renovated for eight small children.
They set fires, scattered rotting garbage on the doorsteps and burned the leaflets, which accurately stated that AIDS can be transmitted only through sexual contact or blood.


No Quick Fix for PCB's
When the Environmental Protection Agency announced last year that workers had accidentally discovered that quicklime could destroy the persistent pollutant PCB, many researchers were delighted.
But now chemists at the University of Wisconsin say the announcement may have been premature.
New tests have found that at most the quicklime evaporated some PCB's but destroyed none.


Treasury Securities Prices Higher
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher again yesterday in the first trading session following the latest round of interest rate cuts by the Federal Reserve.
Even though yields on short-term bills and notes have fallen to exceptionally low levels, dealers said demand was especially strong for short- to-intermediate-term issues.
Bond prices also moved higher yesterday, but by more modest amounts.


Cygnus Joins Nicotine-Patch Fray
Cygnus Therapeutic Systems Inc. said today that it had begun shipping its nicotine patch, designed to help smokers quit the habit by delivering a steady trickle of nicotine through the skin.
Cygnus, based in Redwood City, Calif., is the fourth supplier to enter the super-heated nicotine-patch market, which despite supply constraints had sales of more than $200 million in the first quarter.


Change in Israel Gives Peace Its Best Chance; Understanding Islam
To the Editor:
As a Muslim-American, I am troubled by "Hear, O Islam," Leslie H. Gelb's June 22 column.
The headline is misleading for an essay on Israel's relations with its Arab neighbors.
As the Persian Gulf and Iran-Iraq wars have shown, Muslims are not a monolithic political bloc that can be addressed as one; nor can they all be assumed to share the same opinions on Middle East politics.
A large population of Muslims inside and outside the Islamic world does not seek the destruction of Israel.
Nonfundamentalist Muslims like myself do not share the interpretation that "Coexistence goes against Islam's sense of world order." The Koran preaches religious tolerance and coexistence.
Islam and Judaism have the same Abrahamic origins.


Recognition for Ali, Jackson and Powell
MUHAMMAD ALI, revered throughout the world for his accomplishments in and out of boxing, received the Life Time Achievement Award last night.


A Transplant Surgeon Who Fears Surgery
IN leading the University of Pittsburgh team that gave a baboon liver to a 35-year-old man on June 28, Dr.
Thomas E. Starzl was continuing a quest he began 30 years ago.
Over the years, he has advanced kidney transplantation.
After perservering for two decades, even when other surgeons abandoned the field, he made liver transplantation a standard procedure.
Now he is forging ahead with human bowel transplants.
Successfully transplanting an animal organ into a human is one of the few research goals to elude him.
But today, the man who received the baboon liver is reported to be recovering uneventfully, although a rejection crisis could occur at any time.


Angered by Police Killing, a Neighborhood Erupts
A neighborhood's simmering anger over the fatal shooting of a Washington Heights man by a police officer boiled over last night as scores of people rampaged through a 40-square-block area.
One man died in the violence and at least 15 people were reported injured, as people overturned cars, set fires to at least a half-dozen cars and an abandoned building and threw bottles from windows.


Russia Has Earned Its Reward
What a difference a year makes: Just that long ago, President Mikhail Gorbachev of the Soviet Union went to the economic summit meeting of the seven industrial democracies asking for aid, vaguely promising to launch market reforms.
Now President Boris Yeltsin of Russia will go before the same group, meeting in Munich, also to ask for aid.
But he comes with more than promises.
Russia has adopted astonishingly radical reforms.
Until the past few days the West had reacted more with promises of its own than with cash.
Last spring it promised $24 billion as soon as Russia and the International Monetary Fund could work out a feasible reform package.
But the fund dithered, unwilling to take a prudent chance on the Yeltsin Government.


James River Review: Incumbents Are Out
The last of the two incumbent agencies in the James River Corporation's review of its estimated $15 million consumer paper products account has been eliminated.
In a memo distributed yesterday to employees, Lintas New York said it had been notified that it was cut from the review, which had been announced in May.


Sit Down and Read This (No, Not in That Chair!)
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, the Bauhaus architect, once remarked that it was easier to design a skyscraper than a good chair.
Today, the challenge of accommodating the delicate cargo of the seated human being seems all the greater, especially in the office.
Each working day, more than 40 million Americans hunch in front of desktop computers, and more and more of them are falling victim to painful, sometimes crippling, stress-linked injuries to their shoulders, arms, hands and backs.


These Days, Fans Boo With Torborg in Mind
Buck Showalter, the rookie manager who sits at the helm in the Bronx, is obviously much-loved, and not only in his own clubhouse, a phenomenon that was very much in evidence last week when players rose to his support in the midst of yet another Yankee-commissioner crisis.
Over in Queens, a different story is unfolding for Jeff Torborg.
A rookie manager only in the sense that no one really experiences the barbs and outrageous fortune until he manages in New York, Torborg, unlike Showalter, is being put through some rigorous paces.


For a Chinese Songwriter, Stone Walls Can Make a Tune as Well as a Prison
His songs record the anguish of prison life, the loneliness in the cells, and Zhang Jingsheng need not worry about running out of material for his lyrics.
Mr.
Zhang, a 37-year-old political prisoner whose songs have spread throughout the nation, is about to begin the 4th year of a 13-year sentence for "counterrevolutionary" offenses.
He is not due to be released until 2002.


In Poll, Delegates Favor Bradley to Join the Ticket
Delegates to next week's Democratic National Convention most frequently mention Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey as their preferred Vice-Presidential candidate, a New York Times survey shows.
But delegates most frequently named Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York, when asked to name someone who did not run for President this year who might be stronger than Gov.
Bill Clinton against President Bush and Ross Perot.


As New Orleans Plans Huge Casino, Some See Promise, Others a Threat
Arms flailing, expletives flying, Andy Antippas and Francois Lucet are shouting out their views on the issue obsessing New Orleans: will the world's largest gambling casino save this city or will it destroy it?
"You idiot," growled Mr.
Lucet, a French architect who often does business here and who supports the proposal to build a giant casino near the Mississippi River.
"This is the same unbelievable, negative nonsense you always have here where the clan in control opposes anything new."


Review/Music; Tanglewood Festival Opens Despite Weather and Illness
Dismal weather was only one of the wet blankets thrown over the opening weekend of Boston Symphony Orchestra concerts at the Tanglewood Festival here.
A few days before the first concert on Friday evening, the orchestra announced that its music director, Seiji Ozawa, would be unable to conduct because of tendinitis.
He was replaced by Roger Norrington, who was also scheduled to lead the second program, this afternoon.
Not that Mr.
Ozawa would necessarily have had much more to offer interpretively in the conventional fare: Mozart's Violin Concerto No. 5, with Anne-Sophie Mutter as soloist, and Dvorak's "New World" Symphony.
But Mr.
Ozawa was to have added a movement of Messiaen's "Turangalila," with the pianist Peter Serkin as soloist, in memory of the composer, a fillip Mr.
Norrington was unable to provide on short notice.


Convention Update: Lights, Check. Cameras, Check. Action? Tune In Next Week.


National Bancorp-Alaska reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thompson Gets Last Shot at Qualifying
DALEY THOMPSON, the world record-holder and Olympic gold medalist in 1980 and 1984, will make a final attempt to qualify for a fifth Olympic Games decathlon at an arranged meet in London on Thursday and Friday.
Thompson must achieve the qualifying standard of 7,850 points for a place on the British team.
He set the world record of 8,847 points in winning at the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles.


Topics of The Times; Reform the School Board
New York City's Board of Education needs a major overhaul.
But the State Legislature is reluctant to expand the seven-member board, and the terms of current members have yet to expire.
Thus any immediate changes will have to be self-administered.
The board can start to reform today when it meets to elect officers.
Carl McCall, who has served as president for the past year, has tried to focus the board's attention on setting policy, pulling it away from micromanaging day-to-day administration.
That this bank executive and longtime political friend of Mayor David Dinkins has often failed results more from the narrow interests of some of his colleagues than his consensus-building abilities.
He deserves re-election as president.


Stories Differ On Fatal Fall From Rooftop
A 28-year-old man fell to his death during a disturbance in Washington Heights last night, and the police and a friend of the man offered sharply different accounts of how he died.
The man, Dagoberto Pichardo, died at 10:25 at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center, apparently from injuries suffered in the fall, said Kevin Dahill, the administrator on duty.


Salick Health Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Why Adelaide Could Part With Her Mink
To the Editor:
I enjoyed your charming look back at lost New York references in "Guys and Dolls," the Tony-winning revival of the 1950 musical based on Damon Runyon stories (news article, June 22).
For the record, however, you have missed the meaning of Hollanderize in Adelaide's Take back your mink to from whence it came And tell them to Hollanderize it for some other dame!


Farther Down the Road With Favorite Subjects
These last six months have been busy in Our Towns.
Pre-vacation visits with people who've populated this column in recent weeks find a fair number of success stories, a few lives in limbo and one death.
Professor Bruccoli was unhappy with his writing, so he discarded nearly 200 pages, which hurts just to relate.
Teaneck's movies are still pretty cheap.
The Great Neck Library Insurgency lost.
And Wonder Woman's Mom remains, well, wonderful.
Nora Mitchell, that imperfect teen-ager from Elmont, L.I., extended her successes.
For years the 16-year-old scholar athlete conned everyone, scoring 1,515 points in basketball, whiffing too many boy batters, serving thousands of burgers and maintaining an 85 academic average.
Now, she's fooled Northeastern University into giving her a basketball scholarship while she studies criminal law. (She still leaves her socks on the bedroom floor, however.)


A Blip or a Dip?; The Candidates and the Unemployed Both Have a Big Stake in the Answer
For millions of Americans looking for work -- and for this year's Presidential candidates -- the surge in unemployment in June poses a big question: Is the economy's new weakness a blip or a dip?
Last Thursday's jobless report, which showed the unemployment rate jumping to 7.8 percent, led many economists to adopt more pessimistic forecasts.
And while most economists still doubt that the economy will slow to near zero for the third time in two years, some economists are now saying there is a 50-50 chance of a triple dip, even with the Federal Reserve's decision to lower short-term interest rates.


Would Rabin Go to Damascus?
Prime Minister-designate Yitzhak Rabin is putting together a sturdy government, improving relations with the U.S. and reviving Israel's capacity to absorb large-scale immigration -- difficult and immediate questions.
Soon he will face a much bigger decision -- whether to go on to what has long been the unthinkable.
Many Israelis, including important members of his Labor Party, are convinced the time has come for a real peace initiative.
It would be as audacious as Anwar el-Sadat's electrifying visit to Jerusalem in 1977.
That was unthinkable until he did it, and it led to the Israeli-Egyptian pact.
Fears remain intense, attitudes blocked, but as Mr.
Sadat showed, they can be suddenly transformed.
The cautious offer arguments for probing with minimal steps.
Bold Israelis say, "We have as much room to move as we have courage."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6-6.5
6-6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
3.37
5.91
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.22
5.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.32
3.33
5.71
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.43
6.48
8.20
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.61
7.62
8.49
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.55
8.59
9.53
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.41
7.19
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Change in Israel Gives Peace Its Best Chance; What Shamir Said
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis alleges in "A New Life" (column, June 28) that Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir was deliberately trying to drag out the negotiations over Arab "autonomy" in Judea and Samaria (the "West Bank") for 5 to 10 years to sabotage the autonomy proposal.
Mr.
Lewis bases his accusation on a remark "of blinding candor" that Mr.
Shamir supposedly made to an Israeli newspaper shortly after the Israeli elections.
If Mr.
Lewis had waited just one day, he would have learned from your June 29 news article from Tel Aviv that not only has Mr.
Shamir denied the quotation attributed to him, but that even the interviewer to whom the statement was allegedly made said that he "did not think Mr. Shamir was trying to drag out the peace talks to avoid autonomy."


Slater's Son Joins Colgate Coaching Staff
GRANT SLATER, the son of the late Colgate hockey coach Terry Slater, was hired by his father's successor as an assistant coach yesterday.
DON VAUGHAN selected Slater, 24 years old, and STAN MOORE, 35, as his assistant coaches.
Vaughan was named Colgate coach in April.
Terry Slater died Dec. 5, a few days after suffering a stroke.


Hunter Environmental Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Saga Continues At McElligott
The so-called palace coup saga involving Tom McElligott has taken another twist with Mr.
McElligott's return to his Minneapolis shop, McElligott Wright Morrison White, where he has been chairman and creative director.
In a telephone interview yesterday, Tony Wright, president of the agency, confirmed part of a report in the current issue of Adweek, which described Mr.
McElligott's plans to return and reassert control after other agency executives moved to dismiss him while he was out of the country last month.
Mr.
Wright said that while "as a stockholder, Tom has every right to come back in the office," he added, "Tom would need a map to take client control, because he hasn't in years."


Mercury Finance reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Making Choices in the Price War
THE bottom appears to be falling out of the personal computer business, as company after company joins the latest round of price cutting.
Most major companies have either cut prices sharply or created new families of low-cost computers in the last month.
Last week, as expected, the Dell Computer Corporation unveiled its plans to undercut the new price threshold set by its rival, the Compaq Computer Corporation.


Metro Airlines reports earnings for Year to April 30


John A. Miles, United Nations Official, 67
John A. Miles, a former director of the New York office of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees, died on Friday at the Sacred Heart Hospice in Sydney, Australia.
He was 67 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Shelter Island, L.I.
He died of a brain tumor, said William F. Lee, who succeeded Mr. Miles as director.


INSIDE
Auto Sales Perk Up
The American automobile industry posted strong sales in late June, propelled by what executives said was rising consumer confidence and a stronger economy.
Page D1.
Japan Admits It Ran Brothels
Japan admitted that its military put tens of thousands of women into Government-run brothels for its soldiers during World War II.
Page A8.


Yugoslav Nominee Pleads for a Delay in Reprisals
The Yugoslav Prime Minister-designate asked member countries of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe today to wait 100 days before deciding on any move to expel or suspend Belgrade from the organization in retaliation for its support for the Serbian offensive in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Delegates to the 52-nation conference are to debate a United States-backed proposal this week in Helsinki to exclude the new, truncated Yugoslav state from its meetings.
Serbia and Montenegro formed the rump Yugoslavia on April 27 in the hope of inheriting the international legitimacy and the the assets of the former nation of six republics.


Sports of The Times; Baseball's Year 2000 Geography
In ruling that the Chicago Cubs and the St.
Louis Cardinals will be switching divisions with the Atlanta Braves and the Cincinnati Reds in the National League next season, Commissioner Fay Vincent did what the N.L. owners didn't do: He looked at a map.
But with the year 2000 approaching, all the major league owners should look at a map.
Baseball needs to be realigned geographically, economically and emotionally.


A Scholar Finds Huck Finn's Voice in Twain's Writing About a Black Youth
You don't know about this without you have read a book by the name of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn"; but that ain't no matter.
Mr.
Mark Twain wrote it and he got considerable praise for using a boy's voice to tell a tangled story about race and about America and nobody kin say for sure where that voice come from.
Now a Twain scholar has linked Huck's voice to a 10-year-old black servant Twain met just before starting work on the book.
Twain described the boy in an almost forgotten article in The New York Times in 1874 as "the most artless, sociable and exhaustless talker I ever came across." Sassiness and Satire


Case for Other Pre-Columbian Voyagers
COLUMBUS, it sometimes seems, was the LAST of the discoverers to find his way to America.
At a conference here three weeks ago on "America Before Columbus," archeologists and an assortment of inspired amateurs recently paraded intriguing fragments of evidence, clues from linguistics and art, and botany and pottery, suggesting Old World influences on the New World centuries before 1492.


Hybrid AIDS Virus Could Aid Vaccine Tests
RESEARCHERS have constructed a hybrid AIDS virus from the human immunodeficiency virus and the AIDS virus that infects monkeys.
The purpose is to test vaccines against the human virus in monkeys.
The new hybrid has most of the monkey virus genes wrapped in a coat from the human virus.
The researchers call their virus S.H.I.V., standing for simian human immunodeficiency virus.
Dr.
William Haseltine of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston said he hoped it would serve as "a sharp little knife to pry apart the problem."


French Drop Offer to LTV
The French electronics giant Thomson-CSF has withdrawn its bid for the missile division of the LTV Corporation, a spokesman for the military contractor said today.
Thomson-CSF told the Federal Committee on Foreign Investment, which appeared to be opposed to the proposed takeover on national security grounds, that it would withdraw its $300 million offer for the military unit of LTV, based in Dallas.


Rare Gene Flaw May Help Explain Shaping Of Brain in Womb
AS young boys, the patients often suffer from two outstanding but seemingly unrelated symptoms: they have no sense of smell, and their genitals are abnormally tiny.
Scientists had long wondered why such disparate problems show up in a single genetic disease, and now they think they have the answer.
Their insights could result not only in better diagnosis and treatment of the rare disorder, called Kallmann's syndrome, but also in helping illuminate the fundamental mystery of how the brain shapes itself during the growth of a fetus.


French Military Moves Against Highway Blockades


U.S. Sales Of Vehicles Jump 23.9%
The nation's auto industry yesterday reported strong sales for late June, propelled by what executives said was rising consumer confidence and a stronger economy.
The news seemed to run counter to the gloomy economic picture painted by last week's report that the nation's unemployment rate had risen sharply in June.
But auto executives said the cut in interest rates that followed the release of the jobless data would help the industry.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
International Lease Finance Corp., a unit of American International Group, is offering $150 million in 6 1/2 percent notes due in 1997 at 99.796 to yield 6.549 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P.
*
Continental Homes Holding Corp. has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of $75 million in senior notes through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.


COMPANY NEWS
BANCTEC INC., Dallas, a manufacturer of computerized document processing systems, said its Scandata Nederland joint venture with Thompson-CSF had received an order worth $7.3 million from Olivetti (Schweiz) A.G. for Banctec's Imagefirst systems.
GE POWER GENERATION, a unit of the General Electric Co., signed two contracts totaling $24 million to upgrade seven G.E. steam turbines and perform other generator work for the Florida Power and Light Co., a unit of FPL Group Inc.


Executive Changes
APPLIED BIOSCIENCE INTERNATIONAL INC., East Millstone, N.J., appointed John H. Timoney senior vice president and Robert F. Amundsen chief financial officer.
EL PASO NATURAL GAS CO., El Paso, appointed John W. Somerhalder 2d senior vice president of operations and engineering.
FLEET BANK OF MASSACHUSETTS, Boston, named Walter E. Mercer executive vice president of its commercial real estate division.
INTERNATIONAL SPECIALTY PRODUCTS INC., Wayne, N.J., a unit of GAF Corp. and a multinational maker of specialty chemical products, named Alan Z. Senter executive vice president and chief financial officer.
MAIL BOXES ETC., San Diego, a unit of Mail Boxes Etc.
U.S.A.
Inc., named Gary S. Grahn vice president of finance and administration and chief financial officer.
MATTEL INC., El Segundo, Calif., named Louis Gioia Jr. senior vice president of marketing for boys' toys.
SOMATIX THERAPY CORP., Alameda, Calif., a biotechnology company specializing in gene therapy, named Mark N. K. Bagnall vice president and chief financial officer.
VISA U.S.A., San Francisco, the credit card company, appointed Richard H. Hagadorn senior vice president of credit products.


CHRONICLE
In a brief statement issued through his Washington office yesterday, Senator BILL BRADLEY, Democrat of New Jersey, said that his wife has undergone a mastectomy.
"Last week," the statement read, "Ernestine Bradley underwent a mastectomy for breast cancer. She will be receiving further treatment over the next several months and is expected to have a normal recovery."
ERIC HAUSER, the Senator's press secretary, said no further information would be made available.
Mrs.
Bradley -- the former Ernestine Schlant, who is 56 years old and teaches German and comparative literature at Montclair State College -- and the Senator were married in 1974.


California Utility In Bond Offering
A $173.8 million tax-exempt financing by the Sacramento, Calif., Municipal Utility District was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The yields on the electric revenue refunding bonds range from 4.75 percent for an issue due in 1997 to 5.65 percent in 2002, 6.05 percent in 2007 and 6.1 percent in 2009.


Boeing and Taiwan in Pact
The Boeing Company said today that it was collaborating with Taiwan's Industrial Technology Research Institute to establish a quality assurance laboratory.
The lab would assure that parts manufactured in Taiwan for Boeing and other aircraft companies were in compliance with standards set by the Federal Aviation Administration, Boeing said.
The agreement to collaborate was signed June 19.
Boeing signed its first Taiwan supplier on March 25, the Chen-Tech Manufacturing Company, and expects to increase its use of Taiwan parts, said Valerie Kusuda-Smick, a spokeswoman.
Chen-Tech will supply aluminum forgings for the 757 airplane, with deliveries scheduled to begin in the fourth quarter of this year.
Initially, Taiwan manufacturers are likely to supply only small parts, such as fasteners, she said.


Carrots for Castro
Even in the case of Cuba, the cold war should be over.
The island is no longer a problem to us or others.
Cuban troops are out of Africa.
Cuban support for revolutionary groups in Latin America is finished.
Cuban-Russian military ties are no longer a matter of concern.
None of this, however, has resulted in any change in U.S. policy.
The Administration has moved the goal posts and now says that only after Cuba has a market economy and has held fully democratic elections can there be any change in our approach.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Volkov Is Upset in Sweden Top-seeded Aleksandr Volkov of Russia, ranked No. 17 in the world, was upset yesterday in the first round of the $260,000 Swedish Open in Bastad by Lars Johnsson of Sweden, 6-4, 7-6 (7-5).
Volkov raced to a 4-1 lead in the first set against Johnsson, who is ranked No. 117.
But then the Swede rallied strongly, winning five consecutive games and the set.
In the second set, Volkov took a 5-1 lead in the tie breaker before Jonsson took six consecutive points. (AP) Chang Gains in Switzerland: Second-seeded Michael Chang breezed by Javier Sanchez of Spain, 6-4, 6-1, yesterday in the opening round of the $330,000 Swiss Open in Gstaad.
Chang wore glasses because of problems with his contact lenses.
His second-round opponent will be Cedric Pioline of France, who defeated a countryman, Frederic Fontang, 6-4, 6-0. (AP) Wheaton Wins in Straight Sets: Top-seeded David Wheaton defeated Jim Pugh, 6-4, 6-1, yesterday in the first round of the $175,000 Hall of Fame championships in Newport, R.I.
Joining Wheaton in the second round was sixth-seeded Bryan Shelton, who turned back Jeremy Bates of England, 4-6,7-6 (7-4), 6-4.
Wheaton, who is ranked 41st in the world, took just 41 minutes to move into the second round. (AP) SOCCER South Africa Beats Cameroon Thousands of black fans cheered and sang in a strong wind and heavy rain yesterday as South Africa ended 28 years of isolation in the sport with a surprise 1-0 victory over Cameroon in Durban, South Africa.
Eight of the 11 South African starters were black, underlining the changes that caused FIFA, the sport's world governing body, to lift its ban against the country last week.
It was South Africa's first international match since 1963, a year before FIFA suspended it because of its apartheid racial policy.
Forward Doctor Khumalo scored the only goal in the 79th minute on a penalty kick to the upper-right corner after Cameroon defender Jules Onana handled the ball in the penalty area. (AP)


U.S. Is Sued Over Ban on Importing Abortion Pill
Abortion rights advocates went to Federal court today to challenge the Government's import ban on the abortion pill RU486 after a single dose of the drug was seized from a pregnant woman entering the country at Kennedy International Airport last week.
Lawyers for the Center for Reproductive Law and Policy in New York said that the Government had violated its own administrative rules by not asking for public comment before determining to prohibit the import of the abortion pill.


Again, a Struggle for the Soul of the Court
After the Supreme Court decision in Planned Parenthood v.
Casey, Sarah Weddington and I discussed the outcome on television with Barbara Walters.
Ms.
Walters seemed a bit nonplussed that both of us were unhappy.
Since the Court had both reaffirmed Roe v.
Wade's basic holding that abortion is a women's constitutional right and upheld most of Pennsylvania's regulations of the exercise of that right, one of us, she thought, should have been smiling.


Yugoslav Solution Suggested
The prickly question of how Yugoslav athletes might be allowed to compete in the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, might have been solved yesterday when world leaders attending the Group of Seven economic summit in Munich, Germany, agreed to recommend that the athletes be allowed to participate in the Olympic Games as individuals.
The leaders supported a suggestion by Prime Minister John Major of Britain that competitors from Bosnia-Herzegovina, Serbia and Macedonia take part as a single entity but not under the banner of Yugoslavia.
Major sent the recommendation in a letter to Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee.
A United States Government official in Washington said that the solution was acceptable, and that Spain would be notified as such.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Running Mate Is Being Sought In the Shadows
There are no longer things like quiet, private meetings for Gov.
Bill Clinton, the likely Democratic nominee.
Until the Arkansas Governor settles on his running mate, every day may look like today.
The setting was just three blocks from the White House, in the lobby of the Capital Hilton Hotel, where Mr.
Clinton was staying as he tried to whittle down the list of candidates he is considering to join him on the Democratic ticket.


Abortion Ruling Casts Shadow Over the Court
To the Editor:
"A Telling Court Opinion," your July 1 front-page news analysis on the special role played by Associate Justices Anthony M. Kennedy, Sandra Day O'Connor and David H. Souter in the abortion case, emphasizes the concern they have about preserving the legitimacy of the Supreme Court, which led them to stress the need for preserving the principles of Roe v.
Wade by not seeming to reject a 19-year precedent.
These are legitimate concerns, but the approach adopted by the three Justices, termed "courageous" by Justice Harry A. Blackmun, will not preserve the legitimacy of the Court, but will instead put it in the center of needless and continuing controversy on what should have been absolutely settled and laid to rest.


In the Caucasus, Ancient Blood Feuds Threaten to Engulf 2 New Republics
There is a notice in the building where assistance is gathered for Nagorno-Karabakh calling on all able-bodied men in the enclave to take up arms against the Azerbaijanis.
"All those who hold dear the graves of our ancestors, our churches and our holies, must sow terror on the foe," it says.
"By day and by night, they must perish, those who have used weapons to intrude on the land of our ancestors, on Buzlukh and Manashid, on Erkedzh and Karachinar."


No Free Lunches, but $19.92 Ain't Bad
THE floor of the Democratic National Convention in Madison Square Garden is not the only place where deals will be made next week.
From July 13 to 17, scores of New York City restaurants plan to offer special lunches for $19.92, in addition to their regular menus.
The meals are as colorful as the delegates themselves.
At the Union Square Cafe the menu reads, "Lightly smoked but not inhaled chicken salad," followed by "Texas billionaire refried beans," "semi-boneless quail with Bush basil sauce," and "chocolate mudsling pie."


Vagueness Seems a Virtue When Rabin Sweet-Talks the Right
There are likely to be two former army chiefs of staff in the new Israeli Government that is taking shape.
One is the next Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, the gruff, taciturn, no-nonsense leader of the Labor Party.


A Rebuff for Tyson Lawyers
The lawyers for MIKE TYSON have requested copies of any contracts between the boxer's rape victim and her former civil lawyer for use in appealing his conviction.
ALAN M. DERSHOWITZ, who is heading Tyson's appeal, said he is exploring "appropriate legal grounds" for the appeal and needs the contracts from Marion County Superior Court Judge PATRICIA J. GIFFORD.


A Rare and Extremely Modest Road Streak for Mets
The lead was shrinking for the Mets.
A 5-2 margin had been reduced to 5-3 after a Braves run in the seventh.
The 5-3 edge was trimmed by another run in the eighth.
Sid Fernandez, hurt, was done for the night, and the Mets' closer, the ailing John Franco, wasn't on call.
Soon enough, the phone was ringing in the bullpen.
Anthony Young, the right-hander, was up throwing when he heard the call, and he knew what he had to do.


Russian Court Weighs Communist Party's Legality
Amid a setting of high drama and legal confusion, Russia's new Constitutional Court started today to grapple with the issue of whether President Boris N. Yeltsin's ban on the Communist Party is legal under the Constitution written by that very party.
But as it hears arguments about legality and constitutionality, the court finds itself handling an inevitably political trial, which has more to do with Mr.
Yeltsin's legitimacy and influence as the inheritor of Soviet power than it does with any real effort to revive the Communist Party.


Gallego's Wrist Injury Spoils a Good Night As Yankees Triumph
Glance at the box score of last night's game at Yankee Stadium and it would seem the Yankees should be rejoicing.
Shawn Hillegas emerged from the bullpen and made an auspicious starting debut, Matt Nokes clubbed an upper-deck homer off Willie Banks and the Yankees topped the first-place Minnesota Twins, 2-1.
John Habyan pitched the ninth inning and notched a save in his fourth straight appearance as the new closer.
The Yankees won for the fifth time in the last seven games and regained the .500 mark as their erratic pitchers stifled the best hitting club in the American League on just six hits.


Off-Court Move for Laettner
Duke's all-America center, CHRISTIAN LAETTNER, who won a gold medal as the United States Olympic basketball team captured the Tournament of Americas, has grabbed another prize.
Laettner has completed the necessary work for his degree from Duke.


AT TEA WITH: Letitia Baldrige; The Calming Voice of Civility In Uncivil Times
O TEMPORA!
O mores!
The mores are enough to make Letitia Baldrige, the guru of social niceties, put down her cup of tea and wring her hands in Ciceronian despair.
She reeled off some recent examples.
The bride-to-be who faxed her wedding invitations.
The cellular phone that rang during Mass.
The young executive who goes from word processor at work to VCR at home and does not know how to make small talk.


3 College Prospects Are Signed by Devils
The Devils signed three prospects yesterday, including the college player of the year, but there continued to be little movement in signing several of the team's free agents.
Lou Lamoriello, the president and general manager, has signed only Craig Billington, the backup goaltender, among the nine players who became free agents at the end of the season.


Lead Changes Hands After Long Breakaway
So who thought that Richard Virenque, with a lead of 4 minutes 34 seconds in the Tour de France, or seemingly enough time to stroll through today's stage, would keep the leader's yellow jersey for just one day?
He lost the jersey by less than a country mile -- actually about a kilometer -- to an RMO teammate, Pascal Lino, but he lost it nevertheless.


Public &amp; Private; A Team Dream
People talk about turning 40 as though it were akin to having your wisdom teeth removed -- exceedingly painful, the horrid loss of something grown in the bone.
The loss of that gilded age called youth, which is wasted on the young and which many grown-ups wouldn't have on a bet, knowing what they know today.
So far, Day One, 40 feels fine.
The days of expensive fashion errors, crazed momentary friendships and 2 A.M. feedings are over.
Things are somehow settled.
There are those who think settled is synonymous with death and stagnation; I'm the kind who thinks settled is synonymous with security.


Market Place; Is This the Year Of 'The Big One'?
THE year 1973 was known for financial disaster on Broadway, consumer disaster for fuel users and political disaster for Richard M. Nixon, who was making a last effort to deny involvement in the Watergate scandal.
The year was also disastrous for investors just entering the stock market.
Indeed, with the benefit of hindsight, 1973 could be called the classic case of suckers coming in just before things fell apart.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Stocks fell sharply as investors appeared to be shaken by inklings that second-quarter earnings would be worse than expected.
The Dow dropped 44.03 points, to 3,295.17.  [ Page D1. ]
The dollar fell across the board in hectic trading on world currency markets.  [ D14. ]  Despite the decline in the dollar, interest rates moved lower, as investors continued to buy dollar-denominated fixed-income securities.  [ D13. ]
Silver prices retreated after a Middle Eastern holder sold millions of ounces as a result of the B.C.C.I. scandal.  [ D14. ]  The Economy
Detroit is putting a lot of faith in its expectations of rising sales by scheduling the most robust third-quarter production plan in six years.
Chrysler, for instance, has placed a $100 million bet by expanding its light-truck production.  [ D1. ]  Car dealers note that consumers may be buying, but grudgingly.  [ D1. ] Companies
Chiquita Brands has been the biggest victim of the great banana war of 1992, as prices and profits dropped sharply.  [ D1. ]
Dillard Department Stores' stock fell sharply after analysts cut their projections for the company's short-term earnings.  [ D3. ]
A.T.&amp;T. will announce an agreement with the Go Corporation, a software developer, as part of an effort to make the telephone giant a potent force in the new market for wireless computing.  [ D3. ]
Electric utilities are turning up the heat in search of a better refrigerator by offering a $30 million reward to the developer of a more efficient model.  [ D3. ]
Creepy Crawlers are coming soon to a toy store near you as a result of the infatuation of baby boomers with their lost youth.  [ D3. ]
Boeing is collaborating with an organization in Taiwan to establish a quality assurance laboratory.  [ D4. ]
Carter Hawley Hale detailed a reorganization plan that would have it emerge from bankruptcy in September.  [ D4. ] International
U.S., Mexican and Canadian officials are expected to permit any of the three nations to bar imports that fail to meet health or environmental standards, under a proposed free-trade pact.  [ D2. ]
Brazil and its bankers are on the verge of reaching an agreement that would reduce and restructure the country's $40 billion of debt, bankers involved in the talks said.  [ D2. ]
A top executive of Saudi Arabia's biggest bank quit following his indictment in the B.C.C.I. scandal.  [ D2. ]
Mexico's cement giant plans to take over the leading cement producer in Spain.  [ D3. ]
The French businessman Bernard Tapie is selling off his controlling interest in the sporting goods company Adidas.  [ D4. ]  Business Technology
Companies with widely divergent technologies are pursuing a common, compelling goal: a substitute for human blood.  [ D5. ]
Several computer companies have designed financial terminals that include a television as well as screens of data.  [ D5. ]  Today's Columns
Some technical analysts see dangerous similarities between the current market and the beginning of the deep bear market in 1973.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]
An advertising executive is trying to persuade advertisers and their agencies to associate with colorful characters, like Spider-Man and Captain America.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D17. ]


Car Buyers Drift Back, Raising Detroit's Hopes; One City's Dealers See Modest Gains But Meager Profits
Policy makers groping to understand how auto sales could be rising even as more Americans are losing their jobs could do at least as well consulting Steven M. Parr as their statistician or economist.
"We had a great June," he said today at the Haldeman Ford dealership here, tapping a well-polished loafer on the floor for emphasis.
"Our sales staff is charged up. The buyers are there."


Harry Gottlieb Is Dead; W.P.A. Artist Was 98
Harry Gottlieb, a social realist painter and printmaker who depicted working people, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 98 years old.
He died of Alzheimer's disease, said his daughter, Amy, of Toronto.


Book Notes
No 'Gay' in Directory
It's O.K. to reach out and touch someone, but as far as the A.T.&amp;T. 800 Consumer Directory is concerned, it had better be someone of the opposite sex.
A Different Light, a leading gay and lesbian bookstore and mail-order service with stores in New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco, tried to place a display ad in the next A.T.&amp;T. 800 directory, but it was told that the words gay and lesbian could not appear in the advertisement.


A Weekend of Sailing Is Capped by a Morning of Marching


Families' Painful Wait for Answers and Justice; For Bronx Parents of Slain Children, Even a Trial May Not Answer All the Questions
Bonnie Rosario poured the coffee.
They drink cup after cup in these meetings, brooding marathons of hate and tenderness attended by six Bronx families who share a fundamental horror: Each has a child who was killed.
And each believes the killer was Alejandro Henriquez.
Mr.
Henriquez is expected to go on trial in the Bronx this week, charged in the deaths of three of the children: Shamira Bello, 14 years old; Lisa Ann Rodriguez, 21, and Jessica Guzman.
Jessica, a tomboyish 10-year-old, was killed in October 1990, and her death stirred a city sickened after a violent summer and led the police to link three of the deaths to Mr.
Henriquez.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  A WARNING TO SARAJEVO FACTIONS


Banks Is a $4 Toll and Light Years Away
Willie Banks could not believe it, understand it or try to make sense of it.
As the car he was a passenger in whizzed through the Jersey City streets last Sunday night, Banks observed kids on every corner.
They were not flipping baseball cards.
The visit was supposed to be a homecoming for Banks, a chance to hang out with the Rodriguez brothers, kiss his mother and reminisce with his older brothers two nights before he was scheduled to pitch for the Minnesota Twins against the Yankees.
But when Banks saw little kids selling drugs, he was saddened.


INSIDE
Ex-Housing Aide Indicted
A top aide to the Housing Secretary in the Reagan Administration was charged with conspiring to steer lucrative housing grants to favored developers and consultants.
Page A14.
Navy Altered Scandal Report
Senior Navy officials tried to soften the language of a report on a rowdy naval aviators' convention last year, Pentagon officials said.
Page A11.
Chrysler Bets on the Future
In a $100 million bet that the U.S. automotive market will keep improving, Chrysler said it would expand its light-truck production.
Page D1.
Safer Bank Machines
A measure requiring New York City banks to increase security at automated tellers is virtually assured of passage by the City Council.
Page B1.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Polls; Older Americans Are Found More Alienated Than the Young
Older Americans express much more alienation than young people do nowadays about politics and Government and are much more willing to run risks for the sake of change.
That is the central finding of a poll conducted a month ago and made public today by the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press.
It is one of the most thorough surveys ever conducted of the differences in attitudes and political views of various generations of Americans.


Abortion Ruling Casts Shadow Over the Court; Fate of the Unwanted
To the Editor:
When an unwanted baby writhes in pain, a victim of his mother's crack addiction, or huddles in a corner trying in vain to shield herself from an incestuous attack or the lash from a metal belt buckle, where will the Supreme Court be?
Who will protect and love the children forced into life by the restrictions on abortion that the Supreme Court upheld in Planned Parenthood of Southern Pennsylvania v.
Casey (front page, June 30)?
Where is the wise Court of years past that understood that restrictions are the tools of the powerful to deny and not merely limit rights?
The Justices on the Court used to understand that, for example, literacy tests were created to deny the right to vote to minorities or that separate schooling had a profound effect on educational opportunities.


Bridge
It is not quite clear when the first intercollegiate bridge match took place, but historians will look askance at the claim that Harvard played M.I.T. in 1690.
The claimant is Dr.
William Cole of Harvard, who suggests, with equal validity, that he is "the world's finest bridge player."
His book, "Fishheads," is a highly entertaining account of the bridge exploits of the Fishhead family in the century before the United States won its independence.
It can be obtained for $10.95, including mailing, from Baron-Barclay Bridge Supplies, telephone (800) 274-2221.


Management Offers Plan to Buy The News
Richard Ravitch, long a prominent figure in New York City affairs and a director of The Daily News, told the bankrupt paper's unions yesterday that he was helping to prepare a proposal for the paper's management to acquire The News.
James P. Willse, the paper's editor and publisher, joined Mr.
Ravitch in making the general presentation, which included no details about union concessions but would involve unions taking an equity stake in the paper.


Tension in Washington Heights; Amid Dinkins's Calls for Peace, Protesters Skirmish With Police
New York City political and religious leaders issued passionate calls for peace in Washington Heights yesterday, even as groups of angry protesters engaged in brief street skirmishes with the police throughout the day and into the evening.
The pleas for calm came with hundreds of additional police officers flooding the upper Manhattan neighborhood that has been the scene of intense and sporadic violence over the last three days.


The Pop Life; Rapping Time Warner's Knuckles
Law-enforcement officers, as well as family members of slain officers, are planning to take their protest against the rap artist Ice-T, whose song "Cop Killer" is part of an album produced by Time Warner, to a meeting of the company's stockholders in Beverly Hills, Calif., next week.
Mark Clark, a spokesman for the Texas law-enforcement associations that are leading the protest, said they would distribute the song's lyrics and details of the officers' objections to stockholders outside the meeting.
If Time Warner refuses to withdraw the album "Body Count," which includes the song, and apologize to police officers, Mr.
Clark said, law-enforcement groups will begin a nationwide boycott of the company's products.
The boycott could include having pension funds divest themselves of "several hundred million dollars" worth of company stock, he said.


Former Alabama Coach Is Sued
A onetime assistant to the former Alabama basketball coach WIMP SANDERSON filed suit in Federal court in Birmingham, Ala., yesterday accusing him of striking her in the face during an argument.
The suit by NANCY WATTS against Sanderson, Athletic Director HOOTIE INGRAM and the school's trustees charged that she was required to work "in a hostile environment which was tainted by impermissible sex and gender discrimination."


New Sabres Arena Gains
Buffalo's City Council agreed yesterday to put up $2.35 million to buy land and prepare architectural plans for a new arena to house the Sabres.
With Sabres owner SEYMOUR KNOX 3d saying that the team could move from Buffalo or be sold if an arena isn't built, the Council authorized selling bonds to cover the initial expenditure.


Four New French Films Look at Colonial Past
This year the French are looking back to their colonial past.
They are doing so in fiction films and documentary films, in theaters and on television, in museums and magazines and newspapers.
Sometimes they do it nostalgically, sometimes sexily, sometimes with painstaking seriousness.
But no matter how they do it, they seem to obsess on their lost colonial role at a time when their place in the new Europe is being debated.
The most visible, literally and symbolically, of these colonial examinations are in four films.
Jean-Jacques Annaud turned Marguerite Duras's 1984 novel "L'Amant" ("The Lover"), a barely veiled reminiscence of her own sexual coming of age in Indochina in the 1920's, into a steamily sexual, commercially successful film that will open in the United States this fall.


Florio Aides Prepare for Thousands of Layoffs
The Democratic administration is preparing for thousands of layoffs in state government, saying it is impossible as well as unconstitutional to take only the steps Republican legislators spelled out in the budget they passed over Gov.
Jim Florio's veto.
With some big state departments still to weigh in, proposed and potential layoffs already total more than 3,000, compared with the 1,400 that the Republican-controlled Legislature predicted would be necessary under its $14.6 billion budget for the next year.
When other departments bring in their layoff proposals this week, the number will be higher.


Bank Yields Down Sharply
The Federal Reserve's decision last week to lower the discount rate and the subsequent cut in the prime lending rate by most big banks set the table for a steep decline in yields for bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit in the week ended today.
Analysts at The Bank Rate Monitor said the declines in yields were among the biggest weekly drops in many years.
"This clearly refutes what many banks were talking up last week -- that the decline in yields was near the bottom," said Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor.


A.T.&amp; T. Forming Alliances For Wireless Computing
A.T.&amp;T. will announce an agreement on Monday with the Go Corporation, a Silicon Valley software developer, as part of what industry executives say is a quiet but extensive set of alliances and investments aimed at making the telephone giant a potent force in the new market for wireless computing.
One indication of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's intense interest in that market is the discussions it held this year with McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. after the Seattle-based cellular phone company approached it about a purchase or investment, according to industry executives.
A cellular capability is considered essential for A.T.&amp; T. if it is to offer access to the new generation of mobile computing the company envisions.


Knicks Charged With Tampering by Bullets
The Washington Bullets filed a grievance against the Knicks with the National Basketball Association yesterday, charging that the Knicks negotiated before July 1 with restricted free-agent Harvey Grant.
If the tampering charge is upheld, then the offer sheet that the Bullets' forward signed with the Knicks last week will be invalidated.
The Bullets' charge has been vehemently denied by the Knicks, although front office personnel refused to comment on the record.


We Must Not Abandon Africa to AIDS
To the Editor:
You report in a June 22 news article from Nairobi, Kenya, the prediction of Roy M. Anderson, head of the department of biology at the Imperial College of Science and Technology in London that AIDS will lead in 20 years to a decrease in population in the African countries worst afflicted by the immune system virus.
You accurately report Professor Anderson's controversial position, but you slight important criticisms.
Four points deserve comment:


Wine Talk
Three years ago, somber spokesmen for the Champagne industry declared that the good times were over.
For too long, the public had been enjoying their wine at artificially low prices, and the time had come to return to (harsh) reality.
Grape prices were about to skyrocket, they warned, because of a breakdown in relations between growers and the Champagne companies, most of whom own very few of the vineyards whose fruit they crush.
Prices had to climb -- steeply.


7 LEADERS DIVIDED ON A-PLANT SAFETY
Leaders of seven major industrial nations failed today to agree on ways to assure the safety of deteriorating nuclear power plants in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
The two leaders who are urging such a program, Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany and President Francois Mitterrand of France, met today to discuss the matter.
According to Mr.
Mitterrand's chief spokesman, Jean Musitelli, they concluded that a major international effort to upgrade the plants was not now possible because of "strong opposition" from the United States and Japan.


CHRONICLE
When GLENN CLOSE steps onstage to enact her role as the victim of politically motivated torture in "Death and the Maiden" at the Brooks Atkinson Theater tomorrow evening, she will be playing to a special audience -- more than 100 doctors and other members and supporters of Physicians for Human Rights.
The six-year-old Boston-based organization sends teams of physicians around the world to document the physical and psychological consequences of human-rights abuse.


Why Not the Best?
Some purists see nothing but runaway nationalism and crass commercialism in the star-studded basketball team that will represent America at the Olympics in Barcelona.
Once again, they say, the U.S. acts the bully, dispatching professionals -- the cream of the National Basketball Association -- to bring back the gold that has eluded recent amateur squads.
But why not basketball's best? Isn't that what the Olympic games aspire to measure?


Jazz Makers Swing From Ham Hocks To Health Food
CALL it another kind of improvisation, those meals at odd hours in barbecue joints and greasy spoons washed down with beer or stronger stuff.
Like late nights on the road in smoke-filled clubs, they were basic to being a jazz musician.
But these days many jazz performers are doing their dining improvisations with fresh vegetables, brown rice and tofu instead of gumbo, beans with ham hocks or a breakfast at dawn of steak and eggs.
It's no wonder that a new book about jazz greats and their recipes, "Jazz Cooks" by Bob Young and Al Stankus (Stewart, Tabori &amp; Chang, $24.95), shows an Arcimboldi-like photograph of a saxophone made entirely of vegetables on the cover.


Ex-U.S. Diplomat is Indicted As a Pro-War Kuwaiti Agent
A former United States Ambassador and two other men have been indicted on charges that they violated Federal tax laws by failing to report that they received millions of dollars from the Kuwait Government for a "propaganda campaign" to generate support for the war against Iraq in 1991.
The indictment, returned by a Federal grand jury in Denver on Thursday, was announced today by the Justice Department.


Exxon Capital
The Exxon Corporation, one of the few corporate issuers whose debt is still rated triple-A, said its Exxon Capital Corporation unit was offering $250 million of 6 1/2 percent notes due in 1999 at 99.435 to yield 6.602 percent.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the lead underwriter, said the yield spread over Treasury securities with a similar maturity was 17 basis points.
The noncallable notes are rated triple-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P.


In Elections To Top Jobs, School Board Reveals Rifts
H.
Carl McCall was re-elected president of the New York City Board of Education yesterday at a meeting that exposed the deep fissures on the board over personalities and politics.
In a sign of how divided the board remains, senior school officials said yesterday that Mr.
McCall worked unsuccessfully to deny the vice presidency to Dr.
Irene H. Impellizzeri, who has held the post for the last six years and who has been at odds with Mr.
McCall on the best way to teach AIDS prevention in the public schools.


With Smile on Face, and Foot in Door
IN two decades, Amal Martelli has sold 2,800 sets of World Book Encyclopedias and seems to be just hitting her stride.
She sat on a couch in an apartment in Stuyvesant Town in Manhattan, surrounded by sales paraphernalia, making a soft, not unsubtle pitch.
"I'm here because of you, not because of your daddy," she assured 5-year-old Michael Hood.
"You are the important person here for me."


CHRONICLE
One of the more coveted invitations for Sunday, the eve of the Democratic National Convention, when New York will be awash in parties, comes in the names of ETHEL KENNEDY, Senator EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Gov.
MARIO M. CUOMO and Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS.
They are inviting guests to a garden reception at Gracie Mansion commemorating the 25th anniversary of Robert F. Kennedy's last campaign, and the office of the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial foundation has been deluged with requests for tickets ($1,000 each).
"It never happens that people call and say, 'We want to come to a fund-raiser,' but it's just the opposite for this," said KATHLEEN KENNEDY TOWNSEND, the senator's eldest daughter and a convention delegate.


Emerson Foote, 85, Who Headed Large Advertising Agencies, Dies
Emerson Foote, the outspoken co-founder of the Foote, Cone &amp; Belding advertising agency and former chairman of McCann-Erickson Inc., died on Sunday at a convalescent home in Carmel, N.Y.
He was 85 years old and a longtime Carmel resident.
His family said he had been stricken with appendicitis and died of postoperative complications.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Detective for Perot Describes Inquiry Into a Rival Business
Convinced he had been cheated out of a lucrative state contract in the 1980's, Ross Perot hired a private detective who undertook a thorough and unrestrained investigation of an arch-rival in the computer processing business.
The detective tried to get the Federal authorities to investigate the senior executive of the competing company and worked with officials to encourage the criminal prosecution of one of the executive's chief aides.
The detective, Joseph T. Wells, who had been an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation for 10 years, said he spent at least 18 months gathering incriminating information against the System Development Corporation and the executive, Edward Doyle, vice president in charge of government sales.
Casting a Wide Net
Mr.
Wells, who says he worked both for Mr.
Perot's corporation, Electronic Data Systems Inc., and for Mr.
Perot, questioned many former and current employees and co-workers of Mr.
Doyle, as well as his former wife and the woman he lived with after his divorce.


Abortion Ruling Casts Shadow Over the Court; Fate of the Fetus
To the Editor:
While you conclude in "This Honorable Court" (editorial, June 30) that the Supreme Court "preserved liberty for American women," the issue not satisfactorily addressed is whether or not the right to abort children is a liberty worth preserving in a compassionate society.
Our liberties have many limitations -- we are not free to kick others, nor can we possess and use illegal narcotics.
Abortion is no more a humane solution to the challenge of an unexpected pregnancy than shooting a spouse can resolve a bad marriage.


Stephen A. Wareck, Developer, 61
Stephen A. Wareck, a New Haven developer and former president of the New Haven Board of Aldermen, died yesterday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
A New Haven resident for nearly 30 years, he was 61 years old.
His family said he died of cancer.


Books of The Times; Populism, Politics and the Pollsters
Speaking American How the Democrats Can Win in the Nineties  By David Kusnet  240 pages.
Thunder's Mouth Press.
Paperback, $11.95.
The Superpollsters How They Measure and Manipulate Public Opinion in America  By David W. Moore  388 pages.
Four Walls Eight Windows. $21.95.


LEADERS IN MUNICH WARN RIVAL FORCES IN BOSNIAN STRIFE
The leaders of seven major industrial democracies warned the belligerents in Bosnia and Herzegovina today that they would support United Nations-backed military action if it became necessary to get aid through to civilians in Sarajevo and other parts of the war-torn country.
The leaders issued a strong warning to the leaders of Serbia and of the armies it controls that further fighting was unacceptable.
Resurgent nationalism and ethnic tensions there and in parts of the former Soviet Union, they said, were causing "death, destruction, and widespread dislocation of innocent people."


When Welcome Mat Has Its Limits
A photograph from the 1960's in Harris Russell's office captures the slow ebb and flow of change in the village of Southport, a jewel-like historic district on Long Island Sound.
Then, as now, the narrow harbor is lined with pleasure boats.
Then, as now, the harbor is the focal point of what Mr.
Russell, the third generation of his family to live here, calls "the most beautiful place in the world."


Metropolitan Diary
THE place is the McDonald's on East 23d Street.
Dramatis personae: Exasperated mother; her daughter, about 6 years old, dawdling over a half-eaten sandwich; Milton Wyatt, who hears their conversation.


SUMMIT IN MUNICH -- Bush on a Tightrope; Behind the Facade of Good Intentions Summit Crystallizes Some Problems
Behind their expressions of good intentions on world trade, the Russian evolution and Yugoslavia, President Bush and President Francois Mitterrand of France danced a tense minuet today, with one eye on their own political problems and the other on an increasingly difficult trans-Atlantic relationship.
Carried out in dinners, formal meetings and ad hoc negotiations in the corridors of Munich's Residenz palace, the relationship between Mr.
Bush and Mr.
Mitterrand at the seven-nation economic summit meeting seemed to crystallize the problems of the Atlantic alliance as the United States and its European partners try to fit themselves into a post-cold-war order that none seems able to define clearly.


Making Work More Attractive: Many Suggestions, Little Money
Most people agree that there is something wrong with a welfare system that penalizes women like Linda Baldwin for trying to support themselves.
But the laws of politics and economics alike have made the problem surprisingly difficult to fix.
There are really only two options for bolstering work incentives: the country can either make welfare less rewarding, or it can make work more so.
Both choices pose difficulties.


D'AMATO IS FACING G.O.P. CHALLENGER
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato yesterday hit a bump on what had been his clear path to the Republican nomination for a third term with the announcement that Laurance Rockefeller, a 47-year-old political novice with a famous New York political name, would challenge him in a Republican primary.
Mr.
Rockefeller, known as Larry, is an environmental lawyer with the Natural Resources Defense Council, a nephew of former Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller and the son of Laurance S. Rockefeller, the philanthropist and conservationist.
He has never run for political office, but has been active on behalf of environmental and liberal causes, and had been weighing a race for the United States Senate seat for months before telling reporters several weeks ago that he would not run.
Impact on Candidacy Unclear
But aides said yesterday that several recent events, including the Earth Summit in Brazil and the Supreme Court's upholding of a Pennsylvania law placing restrictions on the right to abortion, had impelled him to change his mind.
He is to announce his candidacy formally today in Manhattan, one day before the legal start date for collecting nominating petitions to get on the September primary ballot.


French Police Clear Some Roads; Public Fury Aims at Government
As thousands of French riot police officers began reopening some of the highways blocked by protesting truckers over the last nine days, the Government became the target today of growing anger over the economic damage caused by the dispute.
Farmers, hoteliers and factory managers, whose businesses have been hurt by the blockades, said they would sue the French Government for not guaranteeing freedom of movement.
Groups in Spain, Britain and Belgium also indicated they would seek compensation for losses resulting from shipping delays across France.


Personal Health
EACH year about 350,000 Americans experience the sudden intense pain that results when a "stone" forms in the urinary system and is of sufficient diameter to plug a passageway transporting liquid body wastes.
Capable of bringing even the most stalwart to their knees, kidney stones are a frightening and costly illnessthat accounts for more than 1 percent of the hospitalizations in this country.
Still, it can be said that the bark of kidney stones is worse than their bite.
Despite the excruciating agony they can cause, a pain said to be worse than any other, they rarely have a serious aftermath.


Carter Hawley Gives Debt Plan
Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc. outlined a plan of reorganization yesterday that would help it emerge from bankruptcy protection sometime in September.
The plan will eliminate almost $600 million in debt from the department store company's balance sheet by distributing 35 million shares, worth $350 million, in the reorganized company to creditors and stockholders.


Quotation of the Day
"For every step forward in electronic communications we've taken two steps back in humanity. People know how to use a computer and answering machines but have forgetten how to connect with one another." -- LETITIA BALDRIGE, authority on etiquitte.  [ C1:1 ]


Women and Stone Age Warriors
It took $190,000 of the Navy's money to fly members of the Tailhook Association, 1,500 retired and active-duty aviators, to Las Vegas last September for a convention.
It took what went on there -- male streakers, pornographic films, female guests forced to drink from a simulated rhinoceros penis and run a gantlet of drunken gropers -- to lift the lid on a pervasive problem.
And it took J. Daniel Howard, who's been serving as Navy Secretary, to describe that problem precisely.
"What happened at Tailhook," he said the other day, "was not just a problem with the integration of men and women in our ranks. It was just as much a problem with the toleration of Stone Age attitudes about warriors returning from the sea . . . that think the rules of civility and common decency can be suspended."


Real Estate; New Offices Bring Worry In Houston
THREE high-rise office buildings are under construction in Houston, even though the city has an office vacancy rate of 22.5 percent.
The new building has raised fears that the city's high vacancy rates will be a long-term phenomenon, as tenants move to newer buildings and leave older ones empty.
The symbol of Houston's high vacancy rate are a pair of 18-story office buildings sitting empty in the Galleria area, one of the city's prime office markets.
Park Towers North and South, which were built 20 years ago with a total of 486,000 square feet of space, have been vacant since Tenneco Inc. moved out five years ago.
The pair of buildings, now owned by an American subsidiary of a Belgian real estate company, are for sale for $20 million.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.75
3.15
5.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.23
5.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.25
3.32
5.70
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.37
6.43
8.23
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.60
7.61
8.52
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.55
8.55
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.39
7.19
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Buck Never Stops for Bettors
Down there in Louisiana Downs in Bossier City, where no faded blue jeans or T-shirts or sneakers are permitted in the Pelican Room restaurant, they opened "a new era" in horse racing the other day.
The track opened at 9 o'clock in the morning, which was long before any horse showed up.
But plenty of people showed up with money, and they were greeted by symbols of the new era, mainly 548 video poker machines that take quarters and dollar bills for 17 hours a day, seven days a week.
If you have any money left by nightfall, the track obligingly brings in TV simulcasts of races from Evangeline Downs and Delta Downs.
And if you have to wait on line to put your money into action, be of good cheer: The track is wired for 900 video poker machines.


Has Community Policing in New York Begun to Reduce Crime?
To the Editor:
In a June 9 news article, you report on awards to members of the New York Police Department for doing the many good deeds that form the cornerstone of community policing.
While this change in police management is newsworthy, such instances of professional excellence do not tell us whether or not community policing is reducing crime citywide.
Individual acts constitute anecdotal evidence and are no substitute for systematic data collection and analysis.
In response to testimony presented at a City Council Public Safety Committee hearing last November, I plan to convene a panel of criminal justice experts to help us assess community policing.
The panel will use conventional performance indicators (crime rates) and devise new ways to determine the effectiveness of precinct management teams.
Indicators such as number and types of cases solved and number of reported crimes may also be recast to reflect and set standards for public safety improvements.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Optioned Jeff Johnson, pitcher, to Columbus of the International League.
Purchased the contract of Jerry Nielsen, pitcher, from Albany of the Eastern League.
National League
NL -- Suspended Cincinnati pitcher Rob Dibble and outfielder Glenn Braggs four games; Houston pitcher Pete Harnisch three games and Houston coach Ed Ott seven days for their parts in a brawl on June 24.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Placed Moises Alou, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Matt Maysey, pitcher, from Indianapolis of the American Association.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
CHICAGO BULLS -- Traded the rights to Litterial Green, guard, to the Orlando Magic for a 1993 second-round draft pick.
DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Signed Donald Hodge, center, to a four-year contract.
DETROIT PISTONS -- Named Alan Srebnick assistant coach.
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Tendered qualifying contract offers to Mario Elie, guard, and Jud Buechler, forward.
Announced that the team did not offer a contract to Vincent Askew, guard, making him an unrestricted free agent.
NEW JERSEY NETS -- Announced the retirement of Fritz Massmann, head trainer.
Promoted Ted Arzonico from assistant trainer to head trainer.
FOOTBALL National Football League
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Agreed to terms with Santana Dotson, defensive lineman, on a two-year contract.
Arena Football League
CINCINNATI ROCKERS -- Signed Robert Roland, wide receiver-defensive back.
Canadian Football League
BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Signed Kasey Dunn, wide receiver.
HOCKEY National Hockey League
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Signed Scott Pellerin and Curt Regnier, left wings, and Donevan Hextall, center, to multiyear contracts.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Signed Randy Gilhen, center.
GENERAL National Federation of State High School Associations
NFSHSA -- Announced the retirement of Brice Durbin, executive director.
COLLEGE  BROWN -- Named Bill Almon baseball coach.
DARTMOUTH -- Named Kelly Blasius women's assistant soccer coach.
DUQUESNE -- Announced the resignation of Larry Harris, men's assistant basketball coach, so he can take the same position at Oregon State.
MISSOURI -- Named Brian K. Hoffer men's and women's swimming coach.
PEPPERDINE -- Announced that Allen Fox, men's tennis coach, will resume his duties after taking a one-year leave.
RUTGERS -- Named Ed Roskiewicz associate coach for the men's and women's track and field programs.
ST. FRANCIS, PA. -- Named Gina Leis women's volleyball coach.
ST. JOSEPH'S -- Named Geoff Arnold men's assistant basketball coach.
SAN FRANCISCO -- Named Deron Johnson full-time assistant baseball coach.
SPRINGFIELD -- Named Judy Van Raalte women's tennis coach.


Yes, They Have Too Many Bananas
Call it the great banana war of 1992.
It broke out when the European market did not open as expected, saddling the big growers, newly expanded for the cause, with surpluses.
Prices in Europe -- and to a lesser degree in the United States -- dropped along with the profits of the big brand companies like Del Monte, Dole and Chiquita.
Investors have stampeded out of fruit stocks.
As the world's biggest banana marketer and the only one of the Big Three that relies on bananas for its fortunes, Chiquita Brands International has been kicked hardest.
While shares of Dole Foods, the other large public company with banana operations, dropped to $27.75 yesterday, from a high of $48 last year, Chiquita's stock price has plunged to $15.75 from a high of $50.75 last year.
That brings the company's stock price below its year-end book value of $19.39 a share.


Officials Say Navy Tried to Soften Report
Fearful of angering the public, senior Navy officials tried to alter the language of a report concerning the assault of 26 women at a convention of naval aviators last year, apparently to make the incidents seem less offensive, Pentagon officials say.
The office of the naval inspector general prevailed in keeping most of the original wording in the report, but only after debating the matter strenuously with superiors, Navy officials said.
Its inquiry was one of two by Navy agencies into the events at the convention, in Las Vegas, and a subsequent cover-up.


Events Don't Surprise Dominican Residents
"The glass is full and it has started to spill," said Manuel Viera, citing a Dominican saying as he reflected on the anger and violence that have erupted in his community since Jose Garcia was shot to death by a plainclothes police officer on Friday night.
"All this was coming, with all the problems we've been having," said Mr.
Viera, who owns a travel agency in Washington Heights.
"The death of that man filled the glass."


Employment Official Charged With Embezzling
An assistant commissioner for the New York City Department of Employment, whose job was to insure that companies comply with their city contracts, was charged yesterday with embezzling more than $181,000 of her department's funds through a private agency she formerly directed.
The assistant commissioner's roommate, who is chairwoman of the private agency, the Korean Manpower Development Corporation in Woodside, Queens, was also charged with embezzlement.


Has Community Policing in New York Begun to Reduce Crime?; Review Board Plans
To the Editor:
Mayor David N. Dinkins has announced his intention to introduce legislation to establish an independent "all-civilian" complaint review board agency (news article, June 25).
I believe that the plan advocated by the Mayor, and one proposed by the New York Civil Liberties Union and 19 of my Council colleagues, are politically motivated and fiscally irresponsible.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
FRIDAY: 7 P.M., PBS interview with Robert MacNeil on the MacNeil-Lehrer News Hour (Channel 13 in New York)


Lichtenstein Unveils a New Sculpture in Barcelona


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Quayle Says Character Will Be Big Issue in Fall
Vice President Dan Quayle road-tested the White House's most likely fall re-election strategy yesterday in Manhattan, using a speech and a news conference to raise questions anew about Gov.
Bill Clinton's independence and integrity.
At a fund-raising event for New York Republican candidates, the Vice President said pointedly that character would be an issue in the election, and that Mr.
Clinton and Ross Perot would prove no match for President Bush on that score.


When Giving Up Welfare for a Job Just Doesn't Pay
At 7:30 A.M.
Linda Baldwin was out the door, down a dank public housing stairway, past the armed lobby guards, and headed for the El on another workday morning.
Twelve hours later she was home, crossing a courtyard carpet of broken glass and, as usual, about $7.75 poorer than if she had never left.


Regrets? Bonilla Has None
Bobby Bonilla, saying he had no regrets about the behavior that led to his ejection from Monday night's game here, firmly rejected Umpire Harry Wendelstedt's charge that he had "appeared to want to get himself ejected."
"I don't know what Harry was talking about," said the right fielder for the Mets before tonight's game.
"That's not me. That's not my makeup."


Feeling Betrayed, Police Grow Wary
With the 34th Precinct station house under siege -- from crowds of chanting demonstrators on upper Broadway outside and from Federal investigators looking for signs of corruption inside -- the police officers reporting for duty yesterday after a long night of street disturbances were in a bitter, dispirited mood.
As it was, Officer Thomas Barnett said, he had heard the angry remarks and felt the hard, suspicious stares that made any street on his Washington Heights beat seem an unsure and dangerous adventure.
But in the past, he said, there had at least been the comforting notion that a few residents welcomed the officers and that drug dealers occasionally felt threatened by their presence.


Flamboyant Frenchman Sells Control of Adidas
Bernard Tapie, the flamboyant French businessman who made his name as a self-made politician and a self-made millionaire, today followed up his withdrawal from politics in May by selling off his controlling interest in the German sporting goods company Adidas A.G.
A statement by Bernard Tapie Finance S.A. said it had agreed to sell its share in Adidas to Britain's Pentland Group P.L.C.
Adidas is the world's third-largest sporting goods company, after Nike and Reebok.
As a result of the deal, Pentland will become Europe's largest company in that field.


Corrections
An article in the Media Business pages on Monday about special publications for the Democratic National Convention misstated the revenue source for The Getting It Gazette.
It is contributions from corporate and individual donors, not advertising.
The article also misidentified the newspaper where Jane O'Reilly, one founder of the paper, had been a syndicated columnist.
It was The Washington Star, not The Washington Post.


Not the Image Clinton Desires
It sounded like a skit concocted by the gag writers for Jay Leno or Arsenio Hall: the advertising agency named to help craft images for Gov.
Bill Clinton was also being considered to create ads for Playboy magazine.
But before those late-night talk-show hosts could zing Mr.
Clinton, the proposal was put on hold, at least until after Election Day.


Ulan Bator Journal; Mongols, Off Your Horses and Call Your Brokers!
There's something very suspicious about the telephones in the Mongolian Stock Exchange.
They work.
"Yeah, I had to pay a lot under the table to get phone lines to the provinces that work," admitted Naidansurengiin Zolzhargal, the 27-year-old chairman of the exchange.
He grinned impishly when he was asked if he might get in trouble for paying bribes.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 3
June 26
July 5
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.4
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.2
3.0
Gasoline stocks
222.7
223.2
216.2
Distillate stocks
103.7
102.16
112.9
Crude imports, daily
5.8
5.4
5.6
Product imports, daily
2.2
1.7
2.1
Crude stocks
327.1
330.8
350.2
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
91.7
92.9
88.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Direct Flight Is Top Choice
Direct Flight and Western Hanover were made the top choices today in the post-position draw for Friday night's $1 million Meadowlands Pace.
Helped by obtaining the second post in the draw at the Stony Hill Inn, Direct Flight was made the early favorite at 2-1.
Western Hanover was made a 3-1 choice primarily because he drew the No. 6 spot in the field of 10.
Both horses won their elimination heats last Saturday at the Meadowlands race track.
Direct Flight, driven by John Campbell, posted his third victory in five starts this season.
Western Hanover, driven by William Fahy, won his fifth race in eight starts.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the New York Shakespeare Festival misidentified the Tony Award-winning director of "Amadeus" in 1981.
He was Peter Hall; Adrian Hall won a Tony in 1981 for work as artistic director of Trinity Square Repertory Company.


Silver Prices Pushed Lower In Selling Linked to B.C.C.I.
The spreading stain of the scandal at the Bank of Credit and Commerce International appeared to hurt the international silver market yesterday, pushing prices significantly lower.
Traders said a chain reaction apparently set off by an indictment in the case led to a huge selloff of silver by a Middle Eastern holder of millions of ounces.


TOYOTA WILL TEACH SUPPLIERS TO IMPROVE QUALITY
The Toyota Motor Corporation said it would operate an office in Lexington, Ky., that would teach North American auto-parts suppliers how to improve productivity and quality.
Toyota said that in pilot studies, United States suppliers had shown sharp declines in defects and increases in cost competitiveness.


In 90's Cuisine, the Farmer Is the Star
A BRIEF history of food heroes:
In the 1970's, it was the restaurateur, the man who owned the joint and could give you the best table at the best time.


Curt Muser, Museum Trustee, 83
Curt Muser, a board member of the Museum of the American Indian and the Museum of the Hudson Highlands, died on Saturday at his home in New York City.
He was 83 years old and also had a home in Cornwall-on-Hudson, N.Y.
He died of prostate cancer, said his wife, Frani Blough Muser.


Dibble Faces Four-Game Ban
ROD DIBBLE, the volatile Cincinnati Reds relief pitcher, is facing a four-game suspension and an undisclosed fine for his part in a brawl during a Houston Astros-Reds game June 24 at Cincinnati.
The National League president, BILL WHITE, also announced three other suspensions yesterday in connection with the brawl.
Houston coach ED OTT was suspended for seven days, Houston pitcher PETE HARNISCH got three games and Reds outfielder GLENN BRAGGS was suspended for four games.
All three were fined undisclosed amounts.


Summit's Plea for Bosnia: Aid the Airlift
Following are excerpts from the Declaration on Former Yugoslavia issued today at the Group of Seven summit meeting:
We, the leaders of our seven countries and the representatives of the European Community, are deeply concerned about the ongoing Yugoslav crisis.  .  .  .
We appeal to all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina not to imperil the humanitarian effort.
We firmly warn the parties concerned, including irregular forces, not to take any action that would endanger the lives of those engaged in the relief operation.
Should these efforts fail due to an unwillingness of those concerned to fully cooperate with the United Nations, we believe the Security Council will have to consider other measures, not excluding military means, to achieve its humanitarian objectives.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; HARKIN TO GET HIS REWARD AT CONVENTION
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, the loyal soldier who ran for President, fell on his political sword and then turned into an energetic campaigner on behalf of the foe who vanquished him, will get his reward next Tuesday.
At 10 P.M. that night, aides to Mr.
Harkin said, the Senator will deliver a speech on jobs and the economy, giving him a valuable convention platform from which to deliver one of his trademark speeches.
Mr.
Harkin has been the most supportive of Gov.
Bill Clinton's original competitors for the Democratic Presidential nomination, but was never seriously considered for the Vice Presidency.


COMPANY NEWS;
Electric utilities are turning up the heat in search of a better refrigerator by offering a $30 million reward to the first company to build it.
A group of utilities that serve one-fifth of the households in the United States, including Long Island and nearly all of New Jersey, announced the prize yesterday.
The money would go to the developer of a refrigerator that would use 25 percent to 50 percent less electricity and no ozone-eating chlorofluorocarbons.


Council Backs Security Steps For A.T.M.'s
A measure that would require banks in New York City to significantly improve security at automated teller machines was virtually assured of passage by the City Council yesterday.
The Council's Public Safety Committee voted 8 to 1 to approve the bill, paving the way for a vote later this month by the full Council, where more than 40 of the 51 members have promised to support it.
The Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, and Mayor David N. Dinkins also back the measure, their aides said.


Croatia, the Butcher's Apprentice
Croatia, once seen as a victim of Serbian aggression, has now become a villain itself.
While the Serbian strongman Slobodan Milosevic carves up most of the tiny neighboring republic of Bosnia, Franjo Tudjman of Croatia is trying to slice off his own slab.
His brazen lawlessness threatens to throw away what little international good will Croatia may have built up.
If Mr.
Tudjman does not withdraw his troops from Bosnia, he will deserve a stern international rebuke, including sanctions as tough as those imposed on Serbia.


Former H.U.D. Aide Reindicted on Wider Charges
Deborah Gore Dean, executive assistant to the Reagan Administration's Housing Secretary, was indicted today on 13 criminal charges of fraud, perjury and conspiring to steer lucrative housing grants to favored developers and private consultants.
The Federal grand jury charges against Ms.
Dean, a top aide to Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce from 1984 to 1987, supersede a two-count indictment against her in April.


60-Minute Gourmet
CORNISH hens are particularly convenient this time of year, whether you roast or broil them or grill them outdoors.
They cook faster than other chickens and generally have more moisture, and each can serve as a single portion.
Most commercially raised Cornish hens weigh about a pound.
And because their flesh is firmer and moister than that of other chickens, they do not dry out as quickly.
Cornish hens are an American hybrid of an American fowl, the Plymouth Rock hen and a British bird, the Cornish or bantam rooster.
The term Cornish game hen was used earlier in this century, but because the birds are now raised commercially in large numbers under controlled conditions, their flavor is no longer gamy.


Abortion-Rights Supporters in Rush-Hour March


Officer Shot in Inwood
A patrol officer from the 34th Precinct was shot in the left foot early this morning in Inwood at the northern tip of Manhattan, the police said.
The officer, who was not identified, was shot about 1 A.M. in front of a restaurant at 213 Sherman Avenue at 204th Street, said Sgt.
Ed Burns, a police spokesman.
"He and another officer were in a van when they heard shots fired," Sergeant Burns said.
The officers stopped the van, entered the restaurant and exchanged shots with an unknown number of gunmen inside, he said.
He said it appeared that the shooting was not related to the sporadic violence that broke out in neighboring Washington Heights.


Balking at Going to West, the Cubs Go to Court
The Chicago Cubs, contending that the National League constitution takes precedence over the Major League Agreement, moved quickly yesterday to stay where they have been for the past 24 years: in the Eastern Division.
Acting only 24 hours after Commissioner Fay Vincent ordered the league to realign for next season, the Cubs filed a lawsuit in United States District Court in Chicago, challenging Vincent's decision to move the Cubs and the St.
Louis Cardinals to the Western Division and the Atlanta Braves and the Cincinnati Reds to the Eastern Division.


Dillard Stock Falls on Shift In Outlook
The stock price of Dillard Department Stores Inc. fell sharply yesterday after analysts cut their projections for the company's short-term earnings.
The revisions reflected a growing sentiment among investors, analysts and retailers themselves that the early signs of increased consumer spending, one of the engines critical to driving the economy out of its doldrums, are not as strong as they seemed in January and February.


Language Barrier Undermines Dinkins's Efforts
Struggling to keep the peace in Washington Heights after the fatal shooting of a Hispanic man by a police officer, Mayor David N. Dinkins has relied on Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch Jr. and other aides in pursuing a strategy that has proved successful in handling civil unrest in the past.
There have been calls for police restraint, invitations for the support of the clergy and community leaders in keeping calm and direct television appeals for peace.
But that approach, effective in squelching racial clashes in Crown Heights last summer and in maintaining calm after the Rodney G.  King verdict in California earlier this year, was not enough to prevent Washington Heights from exploding Monday night.


Indictment Details Fraud By Mafia Crime Family
By threatening to interfere with operations at a major wholesale newspaper delivery company in the New York metropolitan area, the Mafia's Bonanno crime family placed 51 nonexistent employees on the payroll and collected more than $1 million in unearned wages over five years, the authorities charged yesterday.
The charges were included in a state indictment of five men who were accused of operating a criminal enterprise between 1986 and 1991 at the Metropolitan News Company.
The company was purchased last week by The New York Times Company.


People
*
Steve McCloskey, senior vice president of account services at Bloom FCA, New York, was promoted to executive vice president and director of client services.
Victoria Horstmann was named to a new position at Bloom, senior vice president and director of marketing communications.
She had been director of corporate communications at Ayer Inc., New York. *
Wally O'Brien was named to the new position of executive client service director in charge of Ford of Europe at Ogilvy &amp; Mather, London.
Mr.
O'Brien, most recently a consultant, worked for agencies like J. Walter Thompson and Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos.


FCB Acquisition In Australia
FCB International, a unit of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications Inc., said yesterday that it had aquired the clients of the former JMA agency in Perth, Australia, to combine with FCB's Perth-based agency FCB/ Shorter.
The new shop, called Jenkin Shorter/FCB, becomes Australia's eighth-largest agency, with combined billings estimated at $19.5 million.
The new agency's principals will carry the same titles as they did at FCB/Shorter: Bruce Shorter, managing director; John Ilian, executive creative director, and Debra Shorter, director.
Ron Jenkin, managing director at JMA, and Julian Donaldson, director at JMA, will serve as directors of Jenkin Shorter/FCB.


Interest Rates Continue to Slide
Interest rates slipped again yesterday, as investors continued to buy dollar-denominated fixed-income securities despite a drop in the dollar to its lowest level in more than a year.
Aside from Treasury issues, demand was said to be strong for nearly $4 billion worth of new corporate bonds priced yesterday and around $1 billion of new tax-exempt municipal bonds.


Food Notes
Mending the Grill
Backyard chefs who have invested in gas grills and need to replace a part like a rack, knob or burner may find what they need from Grill Parts Distributors, of St.
Petersburg, Fla.
The company, founded in 1954, has a storehouse of parts from manufacturers no longer in business.
It also carries parts and accessories for charcoal grills.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on Monday with an article about the success of gay literature misidentified Walter Vatter.
He is director of publicity for A Different Light bookstore, not a co-owner.


This Just In: Sentry for Market Flashes
For securities traders who live by news flashes, the Cable News Network can be as valuable as the Reuters or Dow Jones wire services.
Having a television built right into their computer work stations could make it easier to monitor market-shaking events (and on a slow day might be a handy way to catch a few minutes of "Oprah" on the sly).
Toward such ends, Digital Equipment, I.B.M. and other computer companies have designed terminals for the financial market that include television among the several different windows of real-time market data that can appear simultaneously on a single computer screen.
The live television feed can be moved to any position on the screen and enlarged or shrunk at the user's discretion.


Different Paths to a Human Blood 'Substitute'
Companies with widely divergent technologies are pursuing a common, compelling goal: a substitute for human blood that can be used for accident victims or surgery patients.
The approaches include cultivating a key component of human blood in bacterial organisms and creating gene-altered farm animals that produce human hemoglobin.


Microwave Cooking
EGGPLANTS come in many shapes, sizes and colors, all of which cook beautifully and rapidly in the microwave oven.
Unless otherwise specified, these recipes use the large purple-black ones that weigh about a pound.
Many markets now sell the miniature variety, called Japanese or Italian eggplants, that are a deep purple, but weigh about four ounces each.
Confusingly, stores sometimes call these smaller ones Chinese eggplants.
In truth, Chinese eggplants are long and slender, weigh about two ounces each and are paler.


METRO DIGEST
A ROCKEFELLER WILL CHALLENGE D'AMATO
Senator D'Amato yesterday hit a bump on what had been his clear path to the Republican nomination for a third term with the announcement that Laurance Rockefeller, a 47-year-old political novice with a famous New York political name, would challenge him in a Republican primary.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Lendl Becomes U.S. Citizen
IVAN LENDL was sworn in as a United States citizen yesterday, taking the oath of allegiance in a private ceremony attended by his wife, SAMANTHA, and a few close friends in the Immigration and Naturalization Service office in Hartford.
Lendl, 32 years old, a native of Czechoslovakia, established his residency in Greenwich, Conn., in 1984.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Seeking Better Image, Perot Shifts Campaign
Moving to assert control over two crucial areas of difficulty, Ross Perot's campaign leaders retooled their press operation today and convened a semipublic gathering of advisers and supporters here to show progress on developing policy positions.
Thomas W. Luce 3d, the chairman of the Perot Petition Committee, said that Sharon Holman, a longtime Perot aide, would become the campaign's press secretary.
James Squires, the former Chicago Tribune editor who was Mr.
Perot's first political hiring, will remain as director of communications, but it was clear that the appointment of Ms.
Holman meant that she would replace Mr.
Squires as the chief day-to-day spokesman for the Perot campaign.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Sidelines; In Speech to Jews, Jesse Jackson Praises Zionism
Describing Zionism for the first time as a "liberation movement," the Rev.
Jesse Jackson brought a message of reconciliation today to a conference of the World Jewish Congress.
Leaders of Jewish groups said later that the speech could lead to a rejuvenation of political cooperation between black Americans and American Jews.
Mr.
Jackson, delegates said, went further than before in affirming the right of Israel to exist.
While not abandoning his support of Palestinian rights, Mr.
Jackson said the victory of Yitzhak Rabin's Labor Party in the Israeli elections last month was "a breath of fresh air for peace and security for Israel."


Turkey Burritos With a Kick, but Not All the Fat
USE meat as a condiment: That's the mantra for the 90's.
But serving a naked 4-ounce portion of steak to someone who is used to eating a minimum of 8 ounces is not likely to make a friend or win a convert.
On the other hand, if you disguise this tiny portion of meat inside a tortilla, mixed with lots of tomatoes and hot seasonings, the bigger eater may not even notice.


Dow Plunges 44.03, to 3,295.17, on Worries Over Earnings
Stocks fell sharply yesterday as investors appeared shaken by inklings that some second-quarter earnings reports due out next week would be worse than expected.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 44.03 points, or 1.32 percent, to 3,295.17.
After having moved upward in the morning, the Dow began slipping shortly after noon, and then dived steeply just before 3 P.M., ending below the 3,300 level.


Brazil Reported Nearing Debt-Reduction Accord
Brazil, the developing world's largest debtor, and its commercial bankers are on the verge of reaching an agreement that would reduce and restructure the country's $40 billion of debt, bankers involved in the talks said yesterday.
Three years of negotiations between commercial bankers and large debtor countries have so far produced agreements with Mexico, Venezuela and Argentina.
The completion of the Brazilian negotiation would come just about 10 years after the third-world debt crisis began, with Mexico defaulting on its loans in 1982.


Bosnian, Pressing for Help, Will Meet Bush in Helsinki
With heavy mortar fire resounding only a few blocks from his office in the heart of this old European city, the President of Bosnia and Herzegovina renewed his appeal today to President Bush for American arms and ammunition to help Sarajevo's defenders avert what he called "a terrible slaughter" by the Serbian forces besieging the city.
A few hours before he was scheduled to leave Sarajevo for a meeting in Helsinki with Mr.
Bush, the Bosnian President, Alija Izetbegovic, said in an interview that he would use the meeting to try to persuade the American leader of the gravity of the situation here and the consequences, for Sarajevo and "the whole civilized world," of allowing the city to fall.


Review/Television; 'Tales of Times Square,' on '48 Hours'
Tonight's edition of "48 hours" offers a quick tour of Times Square, part of it in the company of two South Carolina women named Thelma and Louise, part along with a couple of police officers named Sullivan (yes, Ed) and Kissinger (no, not Henry).
"Tales of Times Square," on CBS at 10 (Channel 2 in New York) is generous with cliches: Dan Rather reminds viewers that "There's a broken heart for every light on Broadway," and Phil Jones reveals that New York is "the city that never sleeps." You can meet, very briefly, two current stars, Faith Prince of "Guys and Dolls" and Gregory Hines of "Jelly's Last Jam," and a dancer's understudy who is waiting for her big chance.


COMPANY NEWS: As (Once) Seen on TV!; The Nostalgic Allure Of Molten Plastic
They're creepy, they're smelly and they're back.
For the last few years, toy companies have been rushing to introduce updated versions of toys that were popular when baby-boomer parents were young.
Creepy Crawlers, coming soon to a toy store near you, are the latest beneficiary of a generation's infatuation with its lost youth.


WHITE HOUSE KNEW OF POSSIBLE FRAUD
A White House official in late 1989 discussed the criminal investigation of an Atlanta bank's loans to Iraq with the Federal prosecutor supervising the case, possibly intervening improperly in the inquiry, the Democratic chairman of the House banking committee said today.
The chairman, Henry B. Gonzalez of Texas, who has been highly critical of the Bush Administration's friendly relations with Iraq before the 1990 invasion of Kuwait, did not identify the White House caller and provided only a fragmentary account of the conversation.
But he said it apparently left the prosecutor, Gail McKenzie, an Assistant United States Attorney in Atlanta, with the impression that the White House was concerned that the investigation might cause strains in relations between Washington and Baghdad.


Cemex Acquiring Spain's Top Cement Producer
Cementos Mexicanos S.A., the giant Mexican cement company, announced today that it would spend as much as $1.25 billion to take over the leading cement producer in Spain.
After intense negotiations with Spanish shareholders over the weekend, Cemex, as the Mexican company is known, acquired 24.9 percent of Compania Valenciana de Cementos Portland S.A. on Monday for 14,850 pesetas, or about $157, a share.
It did not disclose the total price, but said it had received commitments for an additional 29.1 percent.


Trade Proposal Includes Import Bans
United States, Mexican and Canadian officials negotiating a free-trade agreement will permit any of the three nations to bar imports that fail to meet health or environmental standards, Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, said today.
In an interview, Mrs.
Hills said the trade pact, known as the North American Free Trade Agreement, would safeguard United States environmental interests by allowing California, for example, to ban the import of Mexican oranges with pesticide residues above those allowed by state regulations.


Swiss Au Pair Found Not Guilty of Setting Fire That Killed Baby
After a single day of deliberations, a jury here tonight acquitted a Swiss au pair of all charges against her in the arson death of a baby in her care.
The case drew international attention because it crystallized the concerns and worries parents have about leaving their children in other people's care and the rapid verdict appeared an endorsement of an aggressive defense strategy.


Abortion Ruling Casts Shadow Over the Court; Judaism's View
To the Editor:
In light of John Cardinal O'Connor's leadership in a prayer march (June 14), it may be useful to point out that religious traditions with an equally strong pro-life bias take divergent stands on abortion.
Traditional Judaism, which sanctifies every moment of human existence, conditionally permits abortion precisely because it is pro-life; when the mother's survival is threatened by the fetus, for example, the pregnancy must be terminated as a life-saving act.
This rule is possible because Judaism does not regard the fetus as a person at conception.
The fetus does have the considerable moral status of potential life, but does not yet have an equal claim to protection with the mother.


Puckett Is in Big Demand
Everybody wants Kirby Puckett.
He has been in such demand this season, his only respite from the daily gauntlet of television cameras, tape recorders and notebooks that hound him is the early evenings of summer, when he trundles out to center field, glove in hand, for the Minnesota Twins.
It is a brief escape.


Selling Ad Space When the Heroes Wear Body Stockings
FOR almost four decades, one of the media industry's best-known advertising executives has been selling advertisers and their agencies on the merits of keeping company with colorful characters like Clay Felker, Ed Kosner and Tina Brown.
Now he will try to persuade them to associate with even more colorful characters, like Spider-Man, Captain America and the Incredible Hulk.
David O'Brasky, who has sold advertising space for publications like Esquire, where Mr.
Felker was editor; New York, where Mr.
Kosner has been editor, and Vanity Fair, where Ms.
Brown has been editor in chief, has joined the Marvel Entertainment Group in New York in the new position of vice president and group advertising sales director.


Accounts
*
H.
P.
Hood Inc., Boston, to Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly, Providence, R.I., to provide advertising for the dairy distributor's three operating groups, which had been handled for the last seven years by Ketchum Advertising New York.
Leonard Monahan won the account, with billings estimated at $5 million, in a review in which Ketchum did not participate.
The review also included three other Boston shops -- Arnold Fortuna Lane &amp; Cabot; Houston Effler &amp; Partners, and Lawner Reingold Britton &amp; Partners -- and Pagano Schenck &amp; Kay, Providence, R.I.
A campaign for Hood's ice cream is expected to begin in August. *
Casablanca Fan Co., City of Industry, Calif., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill Advertising, San Francisco, for the ceiling fan and climate control manufacturer's account, previously at Fotouhi Alonso, Los Angeles.
Goldberg bested Ketchum Los Angeles in a review for the account, with billings estimated to exceed $1 million.


Record Gift for Harvard Law Is Milestone for Blacks
Fresh out of Harvard Law in 1968, Reginald F. Lewis sent the school a check for $10, and he has been sending money ever since.
Now a financier and a philanthropist, Mr.
Lewis has announced he will give the school $3 million, the largest donation from an individual in the law school's 175-year history.
Harvard will reciprocate by renaming its international law center in his honor, making it the first building at Harvard to be named for an African-American.


Bob Macken, Football Coach, 65
Bob Macken, an assistant football coach at Fordham University for the last seven years, died after suffering a heart attack on the Rose Hill campus on Monday.
He was 65 years old.
Mr.
Macken was a three-time all-city performer at quarterback and linebacker at Power Memorial High School.
He spent two years in the United States Navy before he enrolled at Fordham after two weeks at North Carolina State.


Campus Journal; The Life of an Anarchist Captured on Microfilm
When her Irish Setter bounded into a guitar shop with her, Candace S. Falk, a young graduate student, thought she would get an unfriendly reaction.
Instead the store-owner stroked the pet and asked its name.
The answer sent him hurrying down to the store's basement to fetch an abandoned box of letters signed by the dog's namesake -- the turn-of-the-century anarchist "Red Emma" Goldman.
Ms.
Falk's discovery, in 1975, of that boot-sized box filled with letters between Emma Goldman and her lover, Ben Reitman, led her to begin a 12-year research project that was completed last month at the University of California at Berkeley.


Car Buyers Drift Back, Raising Detroit's Hopes; Buoyed by Figures, Big Three Expand Production Plans
The Chrysler Corporation, buoyed by recent strength in the American automotive market, has placed a $100 million bet that vehicle sales will continue to rise.
The company announced today that it would expand its light-truck production.
Chrysler's action came a day after late-June retail sales of domestically produced vehicles surged more than 20 percent, compared with the period a year earlier, and auto makers reported a rise in sales for the entire month.
Although one 10-day selling period is hardly a harbinger of recovery, several 10-day periods of improving retail sales have fueled demand for vehicles from dealers, whose inventories have dwindled.


Boy's Effort to Leave Parents May Rewrite Law
For most of his life, the 11-year-old child known as Gregory K. has bounced from parent to parent, house to house and state to state, hoping to find what he described to state investigators as "a place to be."
Now, in a case that children's advocates hope will give children the right to sue their parents, the boy is seeking to sever all legal ties to his mother and father so that he can be adopted by the foster family he lives with in this small central Florida town.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
New York City Transportation Department to OMON, New York, to encourage the use of seat belts. *
Georgia Partnership for Excellence in Education, Atlanta, to Wilson, Horne, McClelland &amp; Gray Inc., Atlanta, to develop a public service campaign promoting the need to improve the state's quality of education.


Ex-Prosecutor Named to Panel Investigating Police Corruption
A former special state prosecutor has been named to a five-member mayoral panel investigating accusations of corruption in the New York City Police Department, the Dinkins administration announced yesterday.
The former prosecutor, Roderick C. Lankler, 54 years old, will replace an investigator in the Brooklyn District Attorney's office who stepped down last week because of concern over the appearance of a conflict of interest.


Abortion Foes Rally in Louisiana
Members of Operation Rescue have gathered here for a week of anti-abortion demonstrations that leaders say will include following doctors who perform abortions, their families and their staff members.
A Monday night rally by the militant anti-abortion group drew 2,000 people.
Operation Rescue's director, the Rev.
Keith Tucci of South Carolina, told the audience to "follow God's law, not man's."


Eating Well
TWELVE million Americans consider themselves vegetarians, according to Vegetarian Times magazine.
That's about two million more than a decade ago.
While part of that growth may come from a looser definition of the term, the practice of vegetarianism, in all its many permutations, has moved beyond a cult and into the mainstream.
Some sort of meeting of the minds is at work here.
Those who have been vegetarians because they believe that not consuming animal products is morally or environmentally correct now have the support of a large body of scientific evidence suggesting that increasing the consumption of fruits, vegetables, grains and low-fat dairy products, and decreasing or eliminating the consumption of meat, poultry and fish, may forestall the chronic ailments of aging like cancer and heart disease and can reverse the effects of atherosclerosis.


Fewer Homeless in View Before Convention
In a Texas twang, Richard Brockaway said he was homeless and had no use for the likes of George Bush, Bill Clinton or Ross Perot.
But as he sat panhandling across Seventh Avenue from Madison Square Garden recently, the 64-year-old former cook displayed a keen sense of the political.
He spelled his name "B-R-O-C-K-A-W-A-Y-P-O-T-A-T-O-E." And he said that when the Democratic National Convention moves in next week, he expects he will have to move out.


Shore Up Democracy in Hong Kong
Five years is a long time in international politics, long enough for Britain to reinforce democracy in Hong Kong before turning over the territory to China in 1997.
With the last colonial Governor, Christopher Patten, due this week, London at last seems ready to take up the challenge.
Democracy is still a tender shoot in Hong Kong.
The colony chose its first popularly elected legislators only last year.
Virtually all winning candidates belong to, or are allied with, the United Democrats, a pro-democracy party.
But by agreement with Beijing, less than a third of the seats were popularly chosen.
China wants that proportion to increase only minimally in 1995.


Southbend Journal; Fear Eats Away 'Ideal' Neighborhood
In 1986 Tracy and Gene Sugasti moved their family to Southbend, a neighborhood of tidy homes and trim lawns that is part of the urban sprawl of Houston, because it seemed "ideal."
"We had never owned before and we could finally afford a house," Mrs.
Sugasti said.
"I loved it."


Sports of The Times; Two Wrongs And an Elusive Right
IS Fay Vincent a despot? A visionary? A daredevil testing the margins?
Or is the commissioner of baseball out of control?


COMPANY NEWS
AT&amp;T NETWORK SYSTEMS, a unit of American Telephone and Telegraph Co., signed an $82 million contract to expand and upgrade cellular telephone service in the Philippines.
BANC ONE CORP., Columbus, Ohio, a bank holding company, said its acquisition of First Security Corp. of Kentucky, Lexington, had been cleared by the Federal Reserve Board.


Family Is Convinced of Suspect's Guilt
As they waited for the verdict today in the arson murder trial of their former au pair, the parents of the infant who was killed said they were convinced of the au pair's guilt and of the innocence of the man that the defense lawyer contends played a role in setting the fire.
"I know she started it," said William Fischer, the father of 3-month-old Kristie Fischer, who died last Dec. 2 in the family's house in nearby Thornwood.
"No one else could have gotten into that house."


SUMMIT IN MUNICH: Reporter's Notebook; Yeltsin Quickens Tempo of a Diplomatic Lullaby
The economic summit meetings of the seven industrial democracies, begun 17 years ago in France, are facing a crisis of credibility.
With all the talk, pomp and expense, accompanied this year by scant action, people are asking: Where's the beef?
The nearest thing, it seemed, was President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia.
In an unusual twist, the head of an economy in virtually complete chaos, with an "inflation rate" of 640 percent in the past four months, was welcomed today by the Group of Seven as a potential savior.


Joe Newman, 70, a Versatile Trumpeter in Jazz
Joe Newman, a trumpeter best known for his long associations with the Count Basie Orchestra, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 70 years old.
He died of complications from a stroke, said his former wife, Rigmor Newman.
Mr.
Newman was an exceptional musician who bridged the swing and be-bop worlds.
Born in New Orleans, the son of the pianist Dwight Newman, he was a product of the city's rich musical heritage.
He studied with one of Louis Armstrong's teachers and attended Alabama State Teachers College, a breeding ground for talented musicians, where he was a member of the Bama State Collegians band.


Almon Named Coach at Brown
BILL ALMON, who played 12 seasons in the major leagues before retiring in 1988, has been named baseball coach at Brown University.
Almon played for seven teams, including the Mets.
(AP)


Son Has Upper Hand On Borg's Telephone
Bjorn Borg postponed a scheduled conference call with reporters yesterday, because his 7-year-old son, Robin, would not let him use the telephone.
According to Robin Gelman, publicist for the Mahwah, N.J., tournament, which will feature a Borg-Guillermo Vilas charity exhibition on July 20, Borg was unable to complete the call from Stockholm after his son became upset about the tennis star's impending six-week absence.


Review/Opera; A Fringe Work for Kirov's Mainstream Goal
It was a strange choice for the Kirov Opera, making its first American appearance on Monday night at the Metropolitan Opera House with Prokofiev's "Fiery Angel." The Kirov is now staking a claim to be the grandest of the grand opera companies in what was once the Soviet Union, and it has arrived just a few months after its smaller hometown rival, the St.
Petersburg National Opera, made its American debut at the New York State Theater.
Yet "Angel," completed by Prokofiev in 1927, was, the historian Richard Taruskin wrote, "the greatest fiasco of Prokofiev's career." It was never heard in his lifetime and remained unperformed in the Soviet Union until 1983.
This tale of a woman, Renata, possessed by a fiery angel, one both demonic and heavenly, includes a seance, an exorcism, an orgy involving nuns and a hodgepodge of ideas about lust and transcendence that would hardly have found favor in the days before the Communist thaw.
The Kirov could not have picked a work more outside the mainstream of the contemporary Russian operatic tradition.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
WHAT if you dislike one or more of your child's friends?
Parents pay close attention to their children's friends.
Associating with "the wrong crowd" is widely viewed as a sign of trouble.
But while few parents would hesitate to intervene or seek help if their child's friends were doing something illegal or self-destructive, the issue is more complicated when the problem is less clear.
What parents can and should do, say researchers who study children's friendships, should be largely determined by the child's age.
It helps to have an appreciation for the changing nature of friendship as children develop, and the effects that childhood friends have on behavior.


Audiovox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Lincoln Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Women Candidates Have to Run Scared
To the Editor:
As a volunteer raising money for the Pennsylvania Senate campaign of Lynn Yeakel, I am concerned lest anyone think women candidates may need less money this year because they have so successfully captured public attention.
We will make a big mistake if we go into the November election running anything but scared.


Hamptons Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Music; The 'Mostly' Festival Opens With All Mozart
What, at this late date, can be said about Mozart that hasn't already been said during the past two years of celebrations honoring the bicentennial of the composer's death?
Are there many who yearn for seven weeks more of his music after so much has been heard so intensely?
And what, given Lincoln Center's encyclopedic scheduling of every work, is yet to be heard that hasn't already been heard?
The Mostly Mozart Festival will be providing some answers to these questions in coming weeks as it winds up Lincoln Center's 19-month commemorative extravaganza, connecting the dots between leftover Kochel numbers.
Aside from offering the warhorse staples heard during the past 25 musical summers, the festival, which began on Tuesday night in Avery Fisher Hall, will be filling gaps.
Mozart's concert arias, in particular, are sprinkled throughout.


Women Candidates Have to Run Scared; Voter Turnout
To the Editor:
Your June 17 article on voter registration states: "Currently, more than a third of those eligible are not registered to vote, and only about half of those registered generally cast a vote in Presidential elections. In 1988, Mr. Bush was elected by about one-quarter of the eligible voters."


Au Pair's Acquittal Leaves Anger, Recriminations and Mysteries
Hours after a Swiss au pair was acquitted of killing the baby in her care, participants at her trial were raising questions about the mysteries of the case.
The judge said he was not convinced that Olivia Riner, 20 years old, was innocent.
Jurors criticized the police.
The defense lawyer berated the District Attorney.
And the parents of the infant who was killed in a fire last Dec. 2 said their tragedy had been swept aside while, they said, their child's killer was exonerated.


Chronicle
It took a while for JOANNE TOOR CUMMINGS to fully appreciate the avant-garde works of ROBERT WILSON, the theatrical and operatic director, playwright and designer.
Some of his productions run as long as 24 hours, but over the years Mrs.
Cummings has become an unabashed admirer.
"It was like developing a taste for oysters," Mrs.
Cummings said.
"Once you do, it's very rewarding."


Mc Cluckey Favored in Trot
With five victories and a second in six starts this season, Mc Cluckey was made the early favorite in yesterday's post-position draw for Saturday's Yonkers Trot, the first leg of the triple crown for 3-year-old trotters.
Mc Cluckey, whose lone defeat came in last week's eliminations for the final of the $370,265 race, was installed as the 8-5 favorite and will leave from post No. 3 with Mike Lachance driving.


Media General reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Beguiling Benches and Musical Chairs Under the Pines
THE benches in the Katonah Museum of Art's "Benchmarks" exhibit are functional sculptures meant to be looked at, touched and even sat on.
The 13 benches, set outside under giant pines, range in style from ironic to whimsical to downright political.


4 Shot in East New York
A 15-year-old boy and a 23-year-old man were shot to death and two others were wounded outside a Brooklyn housing project last night, the police said.
The shooting took place at 8:30 in front of 654 Kingsborough 6th Walk in the Kingsborough Houses in East New York, said Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokewoman.
The wounded victims, both males, were a 17-year-old who was shot in the left leg and a 23-year-old who was shot in the left leg and torso, Sergeant Wrensen said.


Still No Word From Borg
The elusive BJORN BORG failed again to link yesterday with reporters in a telephone conference call from Hittfeld, Germany, where he is playing in a seniors tour event.
JOHN KORFF, who is organizing Borg's scheduled charity exhibition on July 20 in Mahwah, N.J., said he was hopeful that Borg would also agree to play MONICA SELES in another charity exhibition, with proceeds going to the Safe Passage Foundation.
"I'd say it is a 50-50 chance," Korff said of the Seles-Borg match.
"I'll ask JENNIFER CAPRIATI if she will play him, too."


Yields on Money Funds Fall After Discount Rate Is Pared
After the Federal Reserve cut the discount rate last week, yields dropped sharply on tax-exempt money market funds and fell less severely for taxable funds, IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report said.
The seven-day compounded average yield for a tax-exempt fund fell 29 basis points, to 2.25 percent, while the simple yield dropped 27 basis points, to 2.23 percent.
Over the course of 30 days, the compounded and simple average yields both eased 10 basis points, to 2.46 percent and 2.43 percent, respectively.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Dinkins and Brown Walk To Calm Troubled Streets
With 2,000 police officers deployed throughout Washington Heights yesterday, New York City leaders strove to bring calm to a tense neighborhood where a police shooting ignited a volatile mix of needy immigrants, drug dealers and embattled police officers from a precinct under investigation for corruption.
With his police commissioner joining his entourage yesterday, Mayor David N. Dinkins walked the troubled streets for a third consecutive day, often receiving warm greetings.
After four days of sporadic, and at times intense, violence sparked by a man's fatal shooting by a police officer, tensions had begun to subside, although the community's anger toward the police was clearly still smoldering.


Suffolk, Facing a Budget Cliff, Gets a Little Rope From Albany
The State Legislature failed to approve financial bailout plans for Nassau and Suffolk counties before adjourning last week, but it did enact a local hotel room tax for Suffolk, the first such tax on the island.
The tax, which Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is expected to sign into law, was adopted with little notice last Friday amid a dispute between Long Island Republicans and Governor Cuomo and other Democrats over the counties' proposals to balance their budgets by borrowing $190 million.


Deltona Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Wheatley TXT reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Rangers Trade Kerr to Whalers
General Manager NEIL SMITH of the Rangers cut his losses yesterday on a disappointing acquisition, sending right wing TIM KERR to Hartford for an undisclosed draft pick.
Kerr, 32 years old, represented one of Smith's few failed experiments.
The hulking scorer was acquired from San Jose in May 1991 for BRIAN MULLEN, supposedly to help the Rangers' power play.
But injuries and conditioning problems limited Kerr to only 32 games, 7 goals and 11 assists.


For This Paris Designer, All the World's a Studio
IT'S the kind of place that makes you feel as if you have just discovered a secret source, like an explorer entering a forest of still-to-be-named flora.
Olga Soe's gallery and home in Paris, at 77 Boulevard Voltaire in the 11th Arrondissement, are filled with an intriguing mix of arcane and stylish wares that include textiles from Africa, drums from Mali and jars from Indonesia, along with accessories Ms.
Soe designs herself and works by contemporary artists like Gladys Nistor and Christine Esteve.


Baghdad 'Coup': An Assassination Bid?
The reported coup attempt against President Saddam Hussein appears to have primarily consisted of an effort to assassinate the Iraqi leader as his motorcade was to move through the Baghdad area last week, according to an American intelligence report.
The report said four officers of the Republican Guard plotted to kill the Iraqi leader on June 29.
Mr.
Hussein's security agents got wind of the plot and the Iraqi leader never got into the car.


Executive Changes
ATLANTIC BANK OF NEW YORK named Steven C. Matsakis executive vice president.
BLOCKBUSTER ENTERTAINMENT CORP.
Fort Lauderdale, Fla., named Greg Fairbanks senior vice president and chief financial officer.


Hope Is in the Mail
AT the John Heuss House, a drop-in center in downtown Manhattan, homeless men and women regain strength and promise.
The care and concern extended to visitors is reflected in note cards designed by artists to raise money for the center.


A Rematch for Slaney and Budd
MARY SLANEY and ZOLA BUDD PIETERSE will meet again on London's Crystal Palace track tomorrow, eight years after their famous collision in the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics.
In Budd Pieterse's first British appearance since anti-apartheid demonstrations drove her back to South Africa in 1987, the women will be part of an international field in the 2,000-meter run at the TSB Grand Prix track meet.
Slaney tripped on Budd Pieterse's barefoot heel in the Olympic 3,000-meter final at Los Angeles.
Slaney was the United States's gold medal favorite after setting world records and winning the World Championship the previous year.
Budd Pieterse was first disqualified and then reinstated.
The bitterness slowly healed, and in 1985 in Zurich, Slaney defeated Budd Pieterse in a mile race.


5 Are Indicted in Computer Credit Theft
A Federal grand jury yesterday indicted five New York computer hackers on charges of breaking into some of the most sensitive computers used by telephone companies and major credit reporting services and disrupting or stealing their data.
It is one of the most extensive thefts of computer information on record, Federal authorities said.
The five young men, who called themselves Masters of Disaster, or MOD for short, are accused of engaging in a widespread pattern of computer crime.
The information that the authorities say was stolen included 176 confidential reports on consumers' credit ratings, which were retrieved to be sold to private investigators.


Dreco Energy Services reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column yesterday, about a garden reception to be given at Gracie Mansion on Sunday by Ethel Kennedy, Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins to commemorate the 25th anniversary of Robert F. Kennedy's last campaign, included a name erroneously among those who said they would attend.
Douglas Dillon, a supporter of President Bush, does not plan to attend.


A.T.&amp;T. Prices $500 Million Of 8 1/8%, 32-Year Debentures
A.T.&amp; T. priced $500 million of 32-year debentures yesterday through an underwriting group led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
Interest on the debentures was set at 8 1/8 percent, and they were priced at 99.155 to yield 8.20 percent, about 60 basis points more than Treasury securities with similar maturities.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.


People
*
David Davis, vice chairman of Edelman Public Relations Worldwide, resigned, the agency said yesterday.
Guy Chaplin, executive vice president and general manager at Edelman Kuala Lumpur, will succeed Mr.
Davis as Asia-Pacific regional manager; Rosemary Brook, managing director of Edelman's European operations, will assume his duties as chairman of Daniel J. Edelman Ltd., London. *
Steve Lanzano, vice president and associate media director, and Joan Nealon, vice president and director of local broadcast, at Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, were promoted to senior vice presidents and group media directors.
Mildred Massey, vice president and management supervisor, was promoted to senior vice president.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush


For Perot, a Time of Need
Now is the testing time for Ross Perot.
The last few weeks have battered the Texas independent's still-undeclared Presidential campaign and have stalled its momentum, causing slippage in the polls and worry here in the offices of the Perot Petition Committee, a suite of rooms with a clean, shiny just-unwrapped look.
Mr.
Perot, who conceived of, and sold, his extraordinary run for the Presidency as a rebellion against the ways and wiles of party politics, has discovered he is not, after all, above the problems that bedevil mortal politicians: organizational weaknesses, turf battles in the ranks, criticism in the press and from opponents, the threats and persistence of pressure groups, the endless, complex demands of a national campaign.
On-the-Job Training


New Campaigns
*
Louie Anderson is starring in television commercials to promote Northwest Airlines' customer service, as part of the airline's recently introduced campaign carrying the theme, "Some people just know how to fly." The spots, created by J. Walter Thompson, New York, feature the comedian as a weary business traveler.
In one, he sits, stranded and suffering, on another airline as a continuous stream of Northwest flights depart on time. *
The American Olympic decathlete Dave Johnson and the middle-distance runner Suzy Hamilton endorse Pert shampoo in television commercials created by Leo Burnett U.S.A., Chicago.
The spots carry the tag line: "Performance. No Fuss."


Unitrin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New York Deserves Better Than the News Coverage It Gets; Teen-Agers See It Too
To the Editor:
At the very moment "The News at Six: TV's Grim Vision" (news article, June 14) was going to press, the Sullivan Street Players (the resident teen-age theater training program of the Children's Aid Society) were completing the run of "Alert: The Media." This collection of eight one-act plays and songs written by members of the multiracial teen-age company, examined the very problem you discussed -- our city is drowning in bad news, some of it badly reported.


Sculpturing Dreams in the Summer Sands


Belgrade Suspended by European Security Group
The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe suspended Yugoslavia for three months today, blaming the truncated nation for aggression against its neighbors, and leaders gathered here tonight to look for a way to prevent similar conflicts.
At a summit meeting of the security conference over the next two days, leaders from North America, Europe, and all the former states of the Soviet Union will set the seal on disarmament and will authorize an Oct. 14 review of Yugoslavia's suspension, which Russia had resisted until today.


G.M. Signs an Accord With Environmentalists
In an unusual expression of detente between industry and environmentalists, General Motors and the Environmental Defense Fund announced yesterday that they had signed an agreement to hold formal discussions on environmental issues.
"Over the last 20 years, it's been each side preaching to the heathen on the other side," said Joseph Goffman, a lawyer with the environmental group.
"We've decided to skip the great conversion speeches and talk about what we can talk about."


PAL Opens Playstreet Program With a Bang


Russian Military Men Deny Any Thought of Coup
Six ranking members of the Defense and Security ministries sharply criticized Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev today for his warning of a possible coup attempt, and they hotly denied that they are working to undermine the Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin.
At a news conference, they suggested that in the legal, economic and political "chaos" of today's Russia, spontaneous protest could spread.
But they denied that the military or the Security Ministry, the successor to the K.G.B., are beyond political control or acting independently.
Instead, they suggested that they were the targets of a conspiracy rather than the agents.


The Suburban Presence in Uniform
Beyond the question of Officer Michael O'Keefe's guilt or innocence in the killing of a young Dominican man last week, the clashes between the police and Hispanic residents in Washington Heights have exposed a fundamental tension found in precincts in many parts of the city.
The core of the trouble is that white officers from suburban neighborhoods continue to dominate the police force, despite gains for minorities in recent years through recruitment drives.
The State Legislature has stymied efforts to require officers to live in the city.


Rabin's Call: What's a Housing Start?
From a welter of numbers made public this week, it is beginning to appear that if Yitzhak Rabin is serious about scaling back settlement activity in the occupied territories, he may want to bring along statisticians and attorneys when he moves into the Prime Minister's office.
He may need them to define what a housing start really is, not to mention what it might take to keep his disparate coalition partners and the Bush Administration happy on this most sensitive issue.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.50
3.35
5.72
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.18
5.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.27
3.25
5.69
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.44
6.37
8.26
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.60
7.60
8.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.55
8.55
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.34
6.35
7.18
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Misgivings at Glassboro, er, Rowan; Some Alumni Say Price of a $100 Million Gift Is Too High
Though some students and alumni protested that the price was too high, trustees of Glassboro State College today voted unanimously to rename the school after the benefactor who is giving it $100 million.
And so, on Sept. 1, if state officials approve and the courts don't intervene, there will once again be a new name for the institution that began life in 1923 as the Glassboro Normal School and in 1937 became the New Jersey State Teachers College at Glassboro.
It became Glassboro State in 1958.


HOUSE VOTES BILL TOUGHER ON TRADE
Turning aside a last-minute surge of White House lobbying, the House of Representatives today passed a broad trade bill that would require the Federal Government to adopt a more confrontational approach to reducing foreign trade barriers.
The vote, 280 to 145, reflected election-year considerations as much as foreign trade factors, with Democrats hoping to present the President with a measure that would force him into a politically unpopular veto and Republicans hoping to be able to label the Democrats as crassly protectionist.
Prospects Remain Uncertain


Financial Documents Reveal Winners and Losers


Our Sisters, Our Lovers
Only in America has the fate of marriage been so linked to the idea of perfect love.
In the Presidential cam- paign, an attempt has been made to nail the fate of our political system to the same ideal.
At the same time, a flurry of books and articles brewed from pop psychology, a kind of women's magazine feminism and vacuous notions of self-help still advocate supposedly new styles of sexual behavior -- as if this and not economic security is the crucial problem for American women.


You May Remember This . . .


Lebanese Plan the Return of War Refugees
The Government announced today that it would begin returning hundreds of thousands of refugees who were forced to flee their homes at the outset of the Lebanese civil war 17 years ago.
The Government program provides for setting up local committees in 116 Lebanese villages and towns as well as establishing a National Council for Refugees that will try to facilitate the repatriation process by providing housing loans and for rebuilding the villages in addition to providing security for the returning refugees.


Premier Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bypass the Khmer Rouge
The immense diplomatic effort to end Cambodia's two decades of agony is threatened by Khmer Rouge obstruction.
The delicate choreography of the five permanent members of the U.N.
Security Council is being disrupted by the Khmer Rouge's unwillingness to surrender its arms -- it refused to do so again yesterday -- to open the areas it controls and to move its troops into cantonments.
Vigorous diplomacy is at work to induce the Khmer Rouge to comply with the peace accord.
What if it does not work?
Should the Khmer Rouge have a veto over the hard won hopes for peace?


High-Tech Equipment Finds Ready Takers
As the ball continues to fly farther and straighter in professional golf, the role of technological advances in equipment has become the center of an intense debate.
Pros don't dispute that they are playing with better equipment, but they disagree about how much difference it makes.
Strangely, in a game that reveres tradition, the truest believers in an equipment revolution belong to the older generation.


There He Goes Again: Carter Hits 19th
Blue Jays 6, Mariners 0
TORONTO, July 8 (AP) -- Joe Carter drove in four runs and Jimmy Key pitched a six-hitter tonight as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Seattle Mariners, 6-0, for their seventh consecutive victory.


Mets' Dreary Numbers: 3 on Base, Then 3 Out
The bases were loaded, and no one was out in the ninth.
The Mets trailed, 2-1, but a decent flyball meant a deadlocked game.
A single might mean a sweep of three games against the Braves, the defending National League champions.
Those Mets not on the bases were on their feet in the duguout while the atmosphere at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium was funereal.


Court Expands Pesticide Ban To Cover Many Used in Food
Seeking to resolve one of the most difficult scientific and legal conflicts involving the nation's food supply, a Federal Court of Appeals ruled today that the Environmental Protection Agency must remove from the market any pesticides that both have the potential to cause cancer and leave residues in processed foods.
A three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, ruled that such pesticides were covered by a 34-year-old provision of the Food, Drug and Cosmetics Act.
The regulation prohibits even trace amounts of any potentially carcinogenic additive in juices, breads, jellies, flour or thousands of other processed foods.


France Blocks the Way
No issue has more far-reaching implications for the future prospects of the world economy than the successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round. . . .
The aim . . . should be to complete the Round before the end of 1991. -- Final statement, London economic summit conference, July 1991.
A successful Uruguay Round will be a significant contribution to the future of the world economy. . . . we expect that an agreement can be reached before the end of 1992. -- Final statement, Munich economic summit conference, July 1992.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Breathing Trees
Q.
Is it true that trees "breathe" through their bark? -- Edward Kass, Scranton, Pa.
A.
It is true that gases, including oxygen, pass through the outer bark to and from the living cells of the inner layers of a tree.
This is a form of respiration, or breathing.
The gases move through stem pores called lenticels, whose function is equivalent to that of stomata, or breathing cells, found on leaves.


Settlement in Austin's Lawsuit
TRACY AUSTIN, a two-time United States Open champion, will get $1.35 million in a settlement of her lawsuit that charged that a 1989 auto accident in Morristown, N.J., ended her comeback.
Austin suffered a broken leg and neck and back injuries when her car was struck by a van driven by STEVEN M. REYNOLLS on Aug. 3, 1989, court papers say.
She was trying to come back from a five-year absence brought on by a bad back.
The 29-year-old Austin was playing team tennis for the New Jersey Stars franchise.


Electronics, Missiles &amp; Communications reports earnings for Year to March 31


7 Leaders Promise $1 Billion for Moscow
The leaders of seven major industrial democracies promised a "comprehensive partnership" with Russia and $1 billion in new aid to Moscow today.
But in a meeting with the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, they signaled that the formerly Communist countries of Eastern Europe and the old Soviet Union should expect no further injections of aid until they restructured their economies.
In a communique issued today at the end of their three-day economic summit meeting, the seven leaders said future aid to the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe "will be tailored to their reform progress and internationally responsible behavior, including further reductions in military spending and fulfillment of obligations already undertaken."


Corrections
The caption yesterday with a picture of a camouflaged Armenian looking at a portrait on a street in Yerevan misidentified the subject of the portrait.
He was an Armenian killed in the fighting, not a notorious local gangster who had been shot down.


Navy Investigator Removed From Inquiry on Assaults
A naval investigator looking into the assault of 26 women at a naval aviators' convention last year was removed from the case and disciplined after one of the victims complained that the agent was pressuring her to see him socially, the Navy said today.
Navy officials said Laney S. Spigener, a civilian agent with the Naval Investigative Service, was suspended without pay for three days because of the complaint by Lieut.
Paula Coughlin, a former admiral's aide and one of the women attacked by drunken aviators at last year's convention of the Tailhook Association, a private group of retired and active-duty aviators.


DeKalb Genetics reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about Romanian-Moldovan relations misstated Romania's policy.
The country says it does not want a quick unification with the former Soviet republic.


Paint Jobs for Appliances and Tubs
APPLIANCES are often the first thing you notice in a kitchen, particularly if they're faded, scratched or painted a color that was in style 20 years ago.
But like walls and furniture, appliances can be painted and rehabilitated to look new.
"A lot of people aren't aware that this process can be done," said James White, whose year-old Custom Spraying and Reglazing Company refinishes kitchen appliances and counter tops, metal cabinets and bathroom porcelain.
"It's paint on metal, so it's the same process as refinishing a car. If it's done right, it can look beautiful."


Perot's Standard Campaign Speech: 'Plain Texas Talk' About 'People Power'
Ross Perot, whose flirtation with an independent Presidential candidacy has shaken the political establishment of both parties, likes to boast that he has no handlers, no "spin doctors" and, most important, no speech writers.
For some voters, such a do-it-yourself candidacy is a refreshing change from slick politics as usual.
It also seems to mirror Mr.
Perot's political philosophy.


Maury Medwick, 81, Chemist and Sculptor
Maury P. Medwick, an artist and chemist who developed several widely used adhesives and other synthetic compounds, died on Monday at his home in Larchmont, N.Y.
He was 81 years old.
He died of natural causes, his daughter said.


Washington State Journal; Where Nobody Is Absolutely Real
With voter discontent sloshing around at the high tide mark this political season, somebody is actually trying to do something about all the frustration.
That somebody is Nobody.
Absolutely Nobody, age 35, is a candidate for lieutenant governor in the State of Washington.
If elected, he promises to work to abolish the office, which he calls a do-nothing and a largely ceremonial drag on the taxpayers.


Treasury Securities Dip in Price
Prices of outstanding Treasury securities dipped in fairly active trading yesterday, as dealers pared positions in order to place bids at yesterday's auction of $9.5 billion of seven-year notes.
Traders said demand was good for the new securities, which were sold at an average yield of 6.44 percent, down from the 7.11 percent average yield at the last seven-year note auction on April 8.
It is the lowest yield on a seven-year note since the auction on Jan. 8, when the yield was 6.40 percent.


Artwork That Stands Tall
CONSTANCE LESLIE works mostly with clay, but dislikes the label ceramicist.
"A ceramicist often implies a potter," she said.
"I work with other materials as well, like glass and stone."


Rain Delays Landing of Space Shuttle


Amoco Is Cutting 8,500 Jobs
The Amoco Corporation, the nation's fifth-largest oil company, said yesterday that it would eliminate 8,500 jobs, 15.7 percent of its 54,120 employees, by the end of the year.
Amoco's announcement was one of the largest staff reductions announced in recent months.
Hughes Aircraft, Aetna Life Insurance and Digital Equipment have also announced plans to reduce thousands of jobs, and economists, stunned by the extent of job losses last month, have issued more pessimistic forecasts.


Maradona Has Designs on a New Team
After a 15-month international suspension and repeated retirement plans, DIEGO MARADONA said he wants to play pro soccer again: with Boca Juniors in Argentina.
"I have a dream, if Napoli releases me: to play with Boca Juniors and help Boca to win the Argentine title following 11 years of failures," Maradona said in an interview aired yesterday by the television network Telemontecarlo.


Alfred Bradley Fitt Is Dead at 69; A Force in Capitol Budget Office
Alfred Bradley Fitt, a Congressional legal counsel and former Assistant Secretary of Defense, died on Tuesday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington, his hometown.
He was 69 years old.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


COMPANY NEWS
A.T.&amp; T. , New York, enhanced its Merlin Legend Communications System that lets customers handle calls, program their telephones and receive system reports in Spanish, French or English.
ABB SUSA INC. , Monmouth Junction, N.J., an engineering and construction a unit of Asea Brown Boveri A.B., said a contract to build a $110 million water treatment plant near Suez, Egypt, was awarded to a joint venture including ABB and Dillingham Construction Co., Pleasonton, Calif., to provide final design.


Paychex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Women Candidates Have to Run Scared; Maine Women
To the Editor:
Your report on the California Senate races of Dianne Feinstein and Barbara Boxer heralds "a first in American political history: an election with two women running for United States Senate from the same state" (front page, June 3).


Queens Democrats Oppose Flake in Primary
In a highly unusual move, the Queens Democratic organization has decided to oppose the renomination of Representative Floyd H. Flake and to back his opponent, Simeon Golar, in the Democratic primary in September.
The party's district leaders in Mr.
Flake's Sixth Congressional District in southern Queens voted on Tuesday to disavow the three-term Congressman, who first gained prominence and power in his district as a socially active minister.


Pretoria Can Stop the Killings at Any Time; Action by de Klerk
To the Editor:
President F. W. de Klerk has rejected the assertion that the South African Government has been idle, or has had complicity in the violence, as without foundation and reprehensible.
Both the national peace accord, signed last Sept. 14, and the appointment of the Goldstone Commission came about as a result of initiatives by President de Klerk.


First Federal Savings Bank of Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Opera; Kirov Confirms Mythology of Russian Tradition
During the cold war, Western opera fans clung to a mythology about the state of opera in the Soviet Union that held that the Russian tradition was being carefully preserved along with the distinctive vocal style that gave that tradition its life.
Recordings supported this belief, yet when the cold war ended the myth proved fragile.
Tour performances in the last year by the Bolshoi Opera and the St.
Petersburg National Opera left operagoers to wonder whether tales of Soviet operatic prowess were the creations of some obscure cultural branch of the Pentagon.
Now the St.
Petersburg-based Kirov Opera, in town for a two-week run at the Metropolitan Opera House, has inherited the task of saving Russian opera's reputation.
Its opening production, Prokofiev's "Fiery Angel," a modernist anomaly staged by a Western team, left mixed impressions.
But when the curtain came down on the company's opulent production of Tchaikovsky's "Queen of Spades" on Tuesday evening, it was reassuringly clear that there is a firm basis for all this talk of a living Russian opera tradition, and that the Kirov has the goods.


Digging Up the Mystical Through Mazes
IN 1989, Alex Champion decided to trade in his test tubes for a shovel.
Though he was not exactly confronting a midlife crisis, Mr.
Champion, a biochemist who is now 52 years old, decided that his work at Cutter Laboratory in Berkeley, Calif., was not half as interesting as digging earth mazes.


Bankers Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Marriott Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Events: Garden Tours, Near and Far
Days of Day Lilies
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8700.
Tours of the Stout Day Lily Garden, demonstrations, a plant sale and expert advice are part of the garden's day-lily weekend, from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday.
There will also be an outdoor concert by the Goldman Memorial Band on Sunday at 5 P.M.
Free with grounds admission: $3; $2 for students, children age 6 to 16 and those 62 and older.
Summer classes and workshops on many topics are being offered throughout the summer.
Full schedule, details of fees and registration: (212) 220-8747.
The Botanic Shakespeare
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.
Sunday is Shakespeare Day at the garden, and at 1 P.M. there will be a tour of the Shakespeare Garden, which has plants mentioned in his plays and poems.
Admission free.
Herb History
Planting Fields Arboretum, Planting Fields Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.; (516) 537-2223.
An illustrated lecture on the history of herbs in cooking, healing, scent and gardening will be given at 7:30 P.M. tomorrow, during a meeting of the Horticultural Alliance of the Hamptons.
Admission is $5.
In the Berkshires
Lilac Park, Main Street near Sunset Street, Lenox, Mass.; (413) 298-3089.
There will be a self-guided tour of six gardens and four houses from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. on Saturday.
Sponsored by the Lenox Garden Club to benefit the Lilac Park restoration project.
Tickets, $15.


Clinton Secures Rivals' Support And Considers Gore for Ticket
Gov.
Bill Clinton worked today to narrow his list of potential running mates, sending the head of his Vice-Presidential search team to Tennessee to meet with Senator Al Gore Jr., and interviewing Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska in a post-midnight meeting.
Mr.
Gore appeared to be getting the most intense attention from the Arkansas Governor as the search for a running mate neared its end.


It's Not the Rodney King Case
As the beam of the Democratic Convention spotlight swings toward New York, people all over the country have reason to wonder about the death of a young Dominican named Jose Garcia at the hands of a city police officer last Friday.
Anger in his Washington Heights neighborhood has boiled over into street violence.
In the wake of the Rodney King riots in Los Angeles, that leaves the quick impression of more police brutality in yet another poor community.
There may turn out to have been police misconduct in this case, but the story is much more complicated.
Washington Heights has in recent years evolved into a booming drug marketplace that imposes enormous stress on police and law-abiding residents alike.
A rush to judgment about this case creates grave dangers for the community and the city.


Richton International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Essay; Obstructing Justice
In 1958 Sherman Adams, Eisenhower's chief of staff, improperly called the S.E.C. from the White House to inquire about the status of an investigation into his friend Bernard Goldfine; that influential call led to scandal and prosecutions.
In 1989 Boyden Gray, President Bush's White House Counsel, told his aide Jay Bybee to call the U.S.
Attorney in Atlanta to express White House interest in a criminal investigation that might embarrass Saddam Hussein.


Sports of The Times; Leahy Fits New York's Rare Niche
When asked once if the legs go first for a kicker, balding Pat Leahy joked, "No, the hair goes first." But even when the legs go, the pride doesn't.
And shouldn't.
"I didn't want to be cut," he was saying now.


Yankees Score Early But Not Often Enough
Get to John Smiley early and rattle him.
That was the strategy the Yankees carried into their game against the Minnesota Twins last night.
As proficient as Smiley is, the Yankees learned he tends to become unnerved when situations get sticky.
The game plan started smoothly when Mel Hall, the second batter in the Yankees' first inning, clubbed a two-run homer that glanced off the right-field foul pole.
The Yankees had a 2-0 lead and wanted to increase the momentum by hitting Smiley more, running the bases and pestering him into trouble.
It was good strategy.
It was poor execution.


Foreign Affairs; Cuddling Saddam
Did President Bush's policy toward Iraq before its invasion of Kuwait involve law-breaking?
Maybe.
And maybe some official cover-up afterward.
In any event, it would take far too long for an independent counsel to get to the bottom of the matter, and the results would be problematic.
Was the policy merely a "mistake," as Bush officials are wont to say?
This remarkably generous description would be laughed off by Republicans if Democrats had committed even remotely similar sins.


If Vincent's an Autocrat, the Owners Are to Blame
He couldn't understand why major league club owners would place so much authority in the hands of one man, the judge said, but they did.
That is why the Federal jurist, Frank McGarr, decided 15 years ago that Bowie Kuhn had the right to tell Charlie Finley he couldn't sell his players for millions.
Since that decision in United States District Court in Chicago, the owners have had numerous opportunities to change the agreement that gives the commissioner all of that authority.
Unlike their predecessors in 1945, who reduced the commissioner's authority, they have chosen not to tamper with or dilute the commissioner's powers.
They only complain about them.


Japan, Citing Recent Accident, Delays Launching
In another serious setback for Japan's budding space program, the Government announced today that it would delay the initial launching of its next-generation rocket by one year because of a recent accident.
The rocket, known as the H-II, is the first to be built solely by Japan, without reliance on foreign technology.
As such it is a source of national pride and will be the first rocket powerful enough to let Japan launch communications and weather satellites for other nations and private companies.


Barcelona Journal; Games Aren't the Real Game: Renewing a City Is
For the 10,000 athletes who will parade at the opening ceremony of the Summer Olympic Games here on July 25, the challenge will be just beginning.
But for Barcelona's politicians, architects and engineers, who have also long prepared for this moment, the Games are as good as over.
The key word has been "excuse" -- the Olympics have been an excuse to modernize and spruce up Barcelona, an excuse to mobilize the money and energy necessary to do in five years what might normally have taken 30 years.
And now the results of $9.3 billion worth of investment can be seen.


In Quest to Help the Middle Class, House Passes a College Loan Bill
Trumpeting its allegiance to middle-class Americans, the House today passed and sent to President Bush legislation to help them get more college loans.
The higher education bill, which Mr.
Bush supports, also promised more college help for the poor.
But it offered them much larger direct grants than the Government has the money to deliver.


Garden Tickets to Cost More
Madison Square Garden has raised ticket prices for more than half the seats at Knicks and Rangers games for the 1992-93 season, including the posh club seats, which will now carry a $75 price tag.
Other Knicks ticket prices will be $12, $16, $24, $32, $39, $44 and $50.
The Rangers, who have two extra regular-season games at home next season, offer seats for $12, $16, $20, $25, $32, $39 and $50.
Only 4,000 seats for Ranger games were immune from the price increase.
The Knicks have 7,000 immune seats.


Frederick A. Jungmann, Advocate for Poor Youth, 55
Frederick A. Jungmann, an advocate for poverty-stricken youths, died on Saturday at University Hospital in Boston.
He was 55 years old and lived in South Wellfleet, Mass.
He died after an 18-year fight with cancer, said Kathy Shorr, spokeswoman for the Center for Coastal Studies, a sea-mammal research center in Provincetown, Mass., where Mr.
Jungmann was a board member and former executive director.


2 Ways of Subsidizing Farmers
The agricultural subsidies at the heart of the European-American trade dispute were intended to assure self-sufficiency in food in each country and prevent European farmers from leaving the countryside.
But the systems are being widely criticized as anachronistic as farm productivity has risen and the risk of food shortages has disappeared.
Support for the European Community's 12 million farmers consumes 63 percent of the trade bloc's $70 billion annual budget.
In essence, they are guaranteed a price for their products that is far above world market prices.


Home Video
Perot on Tape
After the Persian Gulf war, distributors had videocassettes of television highlights on store shelves before some of the troops got home.
This summer they are using the same quick-strike tactics with tapes of Ross Perot.
In the last few weeks five Perot video projects, most of them tapes of his television appearances, have been released or announced.


In Her Brightening Glance, a Community Sways
Lost in a whirl all her own, Dena Spurling spun, then fluttered her chiffon wings before soaring above the floor in a solo she had practiced to near perfection.
As the dancer leaped and glided across a bare basement floor in a community center in Queens, she became, as the recorded music suggested, a black butterfly.


Continental Cutting Some Vacation Fares
Just days after the major airlines promised to raise fares after a bruising price war, Continental Airlines said yesterday that it would cut many summer vacation fares by an average of 25 percent on roughly half its routes.
If recent history repeats itself, Continental's competitors may feel compelled to outdo the fare cuts, touching off yet another round of discounting, said Lee Howard, executive vice president of Airline Economics, a consulting firm in Washington.


60's Cigarette In Comeback
To help revive Lark, a cigarette brand popular in the 1960's, the Liggett Group and its agency, Bloom FCA in Dallas, are introducing a national print campaign featuring product-selling ideas from that period.
In a telephone interview yesterday, Jerry Reid, Liggett's senior vice president of marketing in New York, said: "Many consumers haven't heard of Lark since the 60's. As far as I'm concerned, it's a new product."


Cara Operations reports earnings for Qtr to June 21


State-O-Maine Inc.(X) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Port Authority Tries to Save Passenger Tax at 3 Airports
Federal transportation officials have threatened to reject a $3 passenger tax that would finance $1.5 billion in mass transit links at Newark, La Guardia and Kennedy Airports, but they have left the Port Authority baffled over the reason for the problem.
Richard Leone, chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, describes the threats as unofficial "negative noises" from the Federal Aviation Administration that came days before a decision was due on June 29.


Funds Pact Would Avoid More Cutbacks in Schools
The New York City school system will be able to stabilize class sizes and stave off cuts in the teaching staff under a budget agreement with City Hall and the state that appears close to completion, senior Board of Education and city officials said yesterday.
The core of the intricate and still fragile deal is not any infusion of new money.
Rather, it involves some groundbreaking shifts by all parties over what revenues and expenses to count in the school system's $7 billion budget.


Desanka Mohorovicic, Lifeboat Mother, 78
Desanka Mohorovicic, who made front-page news in 1942 by giving birth in a crowded lifeboat off North Carolina after the American ship she was traveling on was sunk by a submarine, died last Thursday at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
She was 78 years old and lived in River Edge, N.J.
She died after a long illness, the Beaugard Funeral Home in River Edge said.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Public Service Co. of Oklahoma, Tulsa, Okla., a unit of Central and South West Corp., is offering $65 million of 7 1/4 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2003 at 98.991 to yield 7.28 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The bonds are rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Comcast Corp., Philadelphia, is offering $300 million of 10 5/8 percent senior subordinated debentures due in 2012 at par through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is rated B-1 by Moody's and B by S.&amp; P. *
International Lease Finance Corp., Beverly Hills, Calif., a unit of American International Group, is offering $150 million of 6 1/2 percent notes due in 1997 at 99.796 to yield 6.549 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P. *
Continental Homes Holding Corp. filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of $75 million of senior notes through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
PREFERRED *
BankAmericaCorp., San Francisco, is offering 16 million preferred shares at $25 a share to yield 8.16 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Noncallable for five years, the preferred stock is rated A-2 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


Accounts
*
The Green Point Savings Bank, Brooklyn, to Brouillard Communications, New York, for corporate and consumer advertising, previously at the Al Paul Lefton Company, Philadelphia.
Brouillard bested Hal Riney &amp; Partners, New York, in a review.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $3 million. *
KPIX-TV, San Francisco, to Atlas Citron Haligman &amp; Bedecarre, San Francisco, for the CBS affiliate's advertising account, previously handled in-house.
Billings on the account were estimated at $1 million to $2 million.


Sonoco Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Cardiac Control reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Roadway Services reports earnings for 12wks to June 20


Topics of The Times; Toying With Labels
The Bush Administration's moratorium on new regulations has undermined at least one small reassurance to parents.
The Consumer Product Safety Commission, despite a staff study to the contrary, recently rejected a rule that would require clear warning labels on small toys that can choke young children.
That pleased some toy manufacturers, who fear the warning labels might hurt business.
The commission would do better to worry about parts that hurt children.
Present law prohibits the marketing of small toys and toys containing small parts to children under the age of 3.
But no explicit safety warning is required, and the labeling frequently used by manufacturers breeds confusion.


Showalter Stays Coy as Yanks Come Courting
The Yankees dismissed Buck Showalter as third-base coach last October, then rehired him 22 days later and made him the youngest manager in the major leagues.
Showalter was given a one-year contract but also became the lowest-paid manager in the majors with a salary of less than $200,000.
Now that the Yankees have played above expectations with a 41-42 record, and with Showalter having been very impressive on and off the field, the Yankees' general partner, Joseph Molloy, said for the first time yesterday that the organization was ready to begin courting Showalter intensively in an attempt to sign him to a multiyear contract.


Nike Earnings at Record; L.A. Gear Posts Deficit
Two makers of athletic shoes and sports wear reported widely divergent financial results today.
Nike Inc. of Beaverton, Ore., reported its fifth consecutive year of record revenues and earnings, while L.A.
Gear Inc. of Los Angeles reported a loss for its second quarter.
Both companies' stock moved sharply on the news.
Nike shares jumped more than 10 percent, closing at $66.375, up $6.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.
And L.A.
Gear slid more than 13 percent, closing at $10.625, off $1.625.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
WHEN wooden floorboards are so badly stained or damaged that refinishing will not restore them, they should be replaced.
Replacing floorboards requires modest carpentry skills but is within the range of most amateurs.
Then the job becomes a matter of matching the color of the new flooring to the original.
The solution is to refinish the entire floor by sanding it and applying stain to all areas after the repairs are made.


Safeway Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


Topics of The Times; Twain, Met
While scholars plunge into new debate over Huckleberry Finn's origins -- did Mark Twain, as one scholar suggests, adapt the voice of a black boy? -- only now will they be able to examine the whole work as Twain wrote it.
The author, once part-owner of a newspaper in Buffalo, N.Y., gave the second half of his manuscript to a trustee of the city's library in 1885.
But the first half was lost until the trustee's granddaughter, a Hollywood librarian, found it last year in an attic trunk.


Market Place; Polygram Stock Climbs the Charts
AN annual record awards ceremony in Britain last month was a particularly sweet occasion for Polygram Records, the unit of Philips N.V. that sold 20 percent of its stock to the public two years ago.
Polygram's Def Leppard, one of the best-selling rock groups in the world, was one of the award winners.
And Elton John, the British rock stalwart who has prospered under Polygram, was a center of attraction, symbolizing Polygram's stature.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Drechsler Excels  Heike Drechsler of Germany missed the world record in the women's long jump by less than two inches yesterday with a leap of 24 feet 6 1/2 inches, matching the second-best performance in history.
The world champion, Yobes Ondieki of Kenya, ran the season's fastest men's 5,000 meters in 13 minutes 3.58 seconds in another standout showing at the Athletissima Grand Prix track meet in Lausanne, Switzerland.
Drechsler, 27 years old, a former world record-holder, threatened the current mark of 24-8 1/4 set by Galina Chistyakova of the Soviet Union on June 11, 1988.
Yesterday's performance equaled the second-longest leap ever, by Drechsler herself in 1988.
Chistyakova was fifth yesterday, jumping 21-2 3/4.
Drechsler, a former East German, continued an astounding comeback after giving birth to a son in late 1989, confirming her status as the favorite for Olympic gold. (AP) TENNIS  No. 871 Stuns Wheaton  Brian MacPhie, an amateur, scored a stunning upset over top-seeded David Wheaton in the second round of the $175,000 Hall of Fame tennis championships in Newport, R.I.
MacPhie, ranked a lowly No. 871 in the world, was the beneficiary of a miserable performance from the service line by the 41st-ranked Wheaton and advanced to his first career quarterfinal with the 6-4, 7-6 victory.
The only men's tournament played on grass in the United States lost another seeded player in second-round action when seventh- seeded Luis Herrera of Mexico fell to the Australian qualifier Neil Borwick, 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (8-6).
The 275th-ranked Borwick next plays MacPhie.
Wheaton made his professional debut at Newport in 1988 and reached the Wimbledon semifinals in 1991, but it was MacPhie, the No. 1 singles player at the University of Southern California, who looked more at home on the grass courts of the Newport Casino.(Reuters) Gomez Is Injured  Top-seeded Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia advanced to the second round of the rain-plagued Swiss Open at Gstaad yesterday while Andres Gomez suffered an injury that may knock him out of the Olympics.
Gomez, 32 years old, retired in the first set against Thomas Muster of Austria after he slipped on the wet court and suffered torn ligaments in his right ankle.
The Ecuadorean, who trailed, 5-6, at the time, was taken to a hospital.
Korda, ranked fifth in the world, beat Horacio de la Pena of Argentina, 4-6, 6-2, 6-0.
Gabriel Markus of Argentina provided the first upset of the $330,000 tournament as he beat a countryman, seventh-seeded Alberto Mancini, 6-4, 3-6, 6-4. (AP) GOLF  Langer Shoots a 62  Bernhard Langer of Germany had nine birdies in a course record-tying eight-under-par 62 yesterday to take a two-stroke lead after the opening round of the $1.14 million Scottish Open at Gleneagles.(AP)


N.Y.R.A. Trustees Approve Lot Sale
The peace treaty between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the management of New York's three major race tracks was confirmed yesterday by the trustees of the New York Racing Association.
In their monthly meeting at Belmont Park, the trustees approved the agreement reached last week for N.Y.R.A. to sell 23 acres of parking-lot land at Aqueduct to the Port Authority for $50 million.
Since the association is a nonprofit franchise, the money would then be turned over to the state to help fill gaps in the Governor's $51 billion budget.


Police Clear Protesters' Trucks Off French Roads
A 10-day protest by truckers who blocked traffic on scores of French highways petered out today under pressure from heavily armed riot police.
But the real loser may be the Socialist Government, which has emerged from the dispute with its image badly bruised.
The Government at first hesitated to use force to reopen the highways, apparently fearing a political backlash that could damage its chances of winning approval of a treaty on European union in a referendum on Sept. 20.


Records at N.F.L. Trial Show Jets and Giants in the Red
From 1986 through 1989, before the National Football League landed the richest television sports deal ever, the Giants and the Jets were consistent financial losers, according to the teams' financial records.
The documents, supplied by the teams as evidence in the antitrust trial against the National Football League in Minneapolis, show that the Giants posted operating losses as high as $4.2 million in 1988 and the Jets racked up a $4.1 million loss in 1989.


Vanderbilt Gold Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gardens of Herald and Greeley Squares Are Spruced Up


New Austrian President Is Sworn In


Lease Deal By Airbus And United
United Airlines, long the most loyal and biggest customer of the Boeing Company, yesterday said it had leased 50 planes from Airbus Industrie, the four-nation European consortium battling Boeing's world dominance in commercial aircraft.
It was the first Airbus order for United, which had used Boeing planes exclusively, and analysts said it was a breakthrough that could lead to more orders in the future.


George Sawyer Sr., 66, Scientist and Educator
Dr.
George C. Sawyer Sr., a chemical engineer and drug developer who became an executive, professor and proponent of corporate social responsibility, died July 2 at the Butterfield Hospital in Cold Spring, N.Y.
He was 66 years old and lived in Garrison, N.Y.
He died of a lung infection, his family said.


Anthem Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Collaborative Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


COMPANY NEWS: For the Shirt-Pocket Library; The Trivial to the Arcane In 10 Easy Megabytes
As part of its endless quest to expand the carrying capacity of shirt pockets, Franklin Electronic Publishers Inc. this fall will introduce a portable electronic reference library.
The information is stored on small interchangeable cartridges that hold 10 megabytes of memory each -- roughly the equivalent of 10 Bibles.
Initially, the $249 calculator-size system will be sold with three cartridges: a dictionary and thesaurus, a word game and a listing of information on 7,000 movies available on videotape.
Franklin plans to have five or six data bases by January, selling for $29 to $99 each, and 30 to 50 by the end of 1993.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Jimmy Buffet  Jones Beach Theater Wantagh, L.I.
The first note Jimmy Buffett's band played Tuesday night was the rounded plink of a steel drum, the unmistakable sound of the Caribbean.
The audience was dressed for palm-lined beaches, wearing flowered shirts, Bermuda shorts, T-shirts with nautical messages and plastic leis, and tossing around an inflatable whale.
Mr.
Buffett happily noted that he was performing right next to the ocean.
But his backdrop -- a bar scene including a sign from the beer that sponsored his tour -- blocked the view.


Scott's Hospitality reports earnings for Year to April 30


Central Fidelity Banks reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Classic Slogans Hit the Spot: Here's a Book That Has a Lot
"When it rains, it pours" helped sell Morton salt for decades.
"Where's the beef?" enriched Wendy's by encapsulating consumer skepticism about the portions at other fast-feeders.
And "In your heart you know he's right" was a rallying cry for supporters of Barry Goldwater's bid for the Presidency in 1964 -- one wickedly rejoined by those backing President Lyndon B. Johnson: "In your guts you know he's nuts."
Those slogans, and some 5,000 more, can be found in a new book, "Every Bite a Delight and Other Slogans" (Visible Ink Press, Detroit, $15.95), which offers a compendium of themes, jingles and catch phrases arranged in 126 categories from adhesives ("Best glue in the joint" for Elmer's Glue All) to writing instruments ("All write with a Waterman Ideal Fountain Pen . . . all wrong if you don't.").


New York Deserves Better Than the News Coverage It Gets
To the Editor:
Eight years of assignments to New York City courts have certainly changed my perspective.
The mass media-created image of a city run amok with crime and terror caused considerable apprehension when I began my first month in the Bronx Supreme Court.
What a pleasant surprise to find that the people riding the subway with me and walking the streets in the evening were the same as people everywhere.


Tri Link Resources reports earnings for Year to March 31


Bridge
Leading partner's suit is normal, but it should never be done without thought.
A case in point is the diagramed deal from "Dear Billy," a collection of 47 deals.
The author is Billy Miller, and the book is obtainable from him at 3014 Badger Drive, Pleasanton, Calif. 94566 for $11.20.
In an expert game in a San Francisco club for a high stake, South overbid in continuing to six diamonds.
But he escaped the fate that was his due because West made a poor decision in selecting an opening lead.
He routinely led his partner's club suit, which proved to be a double disaster.
It gave the declarer a ruff and sluff, which was not unlikely in the light of the bidding, and prepared the ground for a repeat performance.


SUMMIT IN MUNICH -- Yeltsin's Song: Summit Blues; 7 Pats on the Back -- And Some Token Aid
Boris N. Yeltsin's journey to Munich was familiar: the preliminary vow that he would not "get on his knees" before the West, an encouraging pat from leaders of the rich world, a handful of change and promises of far more once he really got moving on reforms.
Mikhail S. Gorbachev had made the same pilgrimage a year earlier, when the Group of Seven met in London, and Mr.
Yeltsin had recently returned from much the same sort of thing in Washington at a meeting with President Bush.


ConAgra Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Lindros's First Opponent? The Nordiques
ERIC LINDROS will be on the ice with the Quebec Nordiques in his National Hockey League debut if he has signed with Philadelphia by then.
The Flyers host the Nordiques in their preseason opener Sept. 19.
The teams will face each other again the next night, this time in Quebec.


The Talk of Hollywood; Hollywood Hot Topic: Japanese Cold Feet
Are the Japanese growing queasy about Hollywood?
The question has stirred the town this summer, less than three years after the start of a spending spree by the Sony Corporation and, to a lesser degree, the Mat sushita Electrical Industrial Company, that amazed even Hollywood.
If the marriage between Japan and Hollywood seemed, from the outset, a bit shaky, the strains have now left the participants anxious and defensive.
What has caused the difficulties are the two interlocking facts of life about the movie business, which is often financially unpredictable, chaotic and nasty.
And the line between fact and fiction -- or truth and rumor -- is blurred.


Growing
I KNEW the neighborhood was changing when Frank Fenbe's place turned into the Kitty Castle.
Frank had a farm right next to ours, and his cows were always getting out into our pasture or the other way around, and his collie, Lassie, was always fighting with our boxer, Joe, and we'd crawl around in the bushes looking for them and drag them home to feed them aspirin water in their respective barns.
But Frank got old and his children didn't want the farm, so he and his wife, Catherine, moved to Wisconsin to be with their daughters and pretty soon his cornfields were cut up for house lots.
The old house and barn and outbuildings remained, though, because a nice young couple from Reisterstown had moved in.
They planted a big garden and kept up the old sour cherry trees and the grapevines, so nobody minded that their cats (a dozen or more -- who counts in the country?) roamed the fields.
Most cats around here were half wild anyway, because they were kept in the barn to catch rats.
Sometimes we'd let Babyface in to thaw out on the radiator, but paying money to "board" a cat would have been sinful.


Exabyte Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; In Shift, Perot Wouldn't Bar Homosexuals From Cabinet
Reversing a position that has made him the focal point of protests from groups representing homosexuals, Ross Perot said today that he would not rule out naming someone to a cabinet position on the basis of sexual orientation.
At the same time, Mr.
Perot declined to recant statements against homosexuals serving in the military.
In a statement sent to representatives of gay rights organizations, Mr.
Perot said that he had always opposed discrimination based on race, sex, religion or sexual preference and that he would adopt the same position as President.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the bankruptcy filing by the Spanish chemical group Ercros included two banks erroneously among its creditors.
Citibank and Chase Manhattan have no involvement with Ercros.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
The House of Representatives passed a broad trade bill that would require the Federal Government to adopt a more confrontational approach to reducing foreign trade barriers.
The White House lobbied against the bill, which faces a veto.  [ Page A1. ] COMPANIES
United Airlines leased 50 planes from Airbus, the European consortium battling Boeing's world dominance in commercial aircraft.
It was the first Airbus order for United.  [ D1. ]
The Fed found that Saudi Arabia's largest bank and its former chief violated Federal banking laws in trying to acquire control of an American bank with the help of B.C.C.I.  [ D1. ]
Amoco will eliminate 8,500 jobs, or 15 percent of its work force, because of the weak economy and low energy prices.  [ D1. ]
Braniff Airlines was on its way to profitability when it ceased operations last week, according to one of its owners.  [ D3. ]
Nike reported its fifth consecutive year of record revenues and earnings, while L.A.
Gear reported a quarterly loss.  [ D3. ]
Olympia &amp; York was notified by one of its lenders that its American subsidiary defaulted on a $57.5 million mortgage.  [ D3. ]
Franklin Electronic Publishers will introduce a pocket-size electronic reference library that can hold 10 Bibles.  [ D3. ]
General Motors and the Environmental Defense Fund agreed to hold formal discussions on environmental issues.  [ D4. ]
CBS profits rose 39 percent because of higher advertising revenue and increased demand for advertising time.  [ D4. ]
Sears said some of its auto repair shops were still operating on a commission basis despite a recent end to the practice.  [ D4. ]
Continental Airlines will cut summer vacation fares by an average of 25 percent on roughly half its routes.  [ D4. ] INTERNATIONAL
Industrial nations meeting in Munich made "no specific agreements," Britain's Prime Minister said.
The participants came close to reaching a trade pact, but ran into political obstacles.  [ A1. ]
The 60 percent plunge in the Tokyo stock market in the last two years has created more ripples than waves despite worries that it would devastate world markets.  [ D1. ] MARKETS
Blue-chip stocks closed slightly lower as worries continued over second-quarter earnings.
The Dow 1.89 points.  [ D6. ]
Prices of outstanding Treasury securities dipped as dealers pared positions to bid in an auction of seven-year notes.  [ D13. ]
The dollar was mixed in subdued trading and the price of gold rose.  [ D14. ]  Cocoa soared on concerns about dry weather.  [ D14. ] TODAY'S COLUMNS
Among the subjects not on the agenda at the Munich summit of industrialized nations is any discussion of Japan's role in the world system.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Polygram Records is doing well with a mix of established and new artists two years after its parent, Philips N.V., sold 20 percent of its stock to the public.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]
A new book containing 5,000 advertising slogans serves as a record of social trends and of what companies think is important to consumers.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D15. ]


Ted Einstein, 68; Built a Carpet Chain With the Moomjys
Ted Einstein, a founding partner in Einstein Moomjy, the carpet-store chain, died on Sunday at his home in Morristown, N.J.
He was 68 years old.
He died of Parkinson's disease and cancer, his family said.


Fab Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Allwaste Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Washington at Work; Stalked by Tales of Misconduct, His Promise Fading, Robb Vows to Endure
Once riding a fast track to power and a spot on a Democratic Presidential ticket, Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia will play only a minor role at next week's national convention.
Given the collapse of his political fortunes, it is a larger role than many party members had expected him to play.
Over the last 18 months, Mr.
Robb has endured a series of allegations -- unproved and adamantly denied -- that he mishandled his personal and political lives by consorting with drug users, having an affair with a former beauty queen and waging a vindictive campaign to destroy the career of his chief political rival, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder.


In Unrest, a Dominican Leader Steps Into Spotlight
At a news conference on the lawn of Gracie Mansion this week, City Councilman Guillermo Linares, his arm around the bereaved matriarch of the family of Jose Luis Garcia, gingerly plucked the microphone from Mayor David N. Dinkins.
The Mayor had already answered the question about tensions between the police and community in Washington Heights.
But this was Mr.
Linares's first real moment in the limelight as the only elected official from the Dominican Republic in a city where Dominicans are by far the largest -- and not the best understood -- immigrant group.


CBS Profit Rose 39% in 2d Quarter
CBS Inc. said yesterday that higher advertising revenue and increased demand for advertising time contributed to a 39 percent rise in its second-quarter earnings.
The company said its net income rose to $70.1 million, or $4.53 a share, from $50.6 million, or $3.31 a share, a year earlier.
Sales rose 10 percent, to $780.6 million from $710.0 million.


AT HOME WITH: Jeremy Railton; Setting the Scene For an Actor to Steal
THE rooms in Jeremy Railton's Mediterranean-style house in West Hollywood seem to have sprung magically off a sketch pad and leaped onto a movie screen.
Or maybe it's the other way around.
With Mr.
Railton, it's difficult to say: he has taken items from his home to use as props on a variety of movie, television and stage sets, and has borrowed set designs for use in his house, where he has his office.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY MAYOR DINKINS WALKS A FINE LINE


2 Incumbents Yield 1 Victor
Representative Bob McEwen, a House member since 1980, was declared the winner today by 286 votes of 66,000 cast in a primary on June 2 that pitted him against fellow Republican Representative Clarence E. Miller.
It was the only primary in the country this year pitting two Republican members of the House against each other because of redistricting.


Browsers Are Welcome
AT Entree Libre, a new contemporary-furnishings store in SoHo, browsing is encouraged, as if the shop were indeed an open book.
The quirky, limited-edition items inside are made by a roster of international designers.


Alice B. Dunnington, Intelligence Official, 87
Alice Bennett Dunnington, a Government intelligence official during World War II, died on Monday at Beaumont at Bryn Mawr, a retirement home in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
She was 87 years old.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, said Rodger McKinney, director of the Chadwick Funeral Home in Ardmore, Pa.


Banponce Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chronicle
Woody Guthrie, the balladeer of the Depression era, would have turned 80 next week.
So on Sunday, his son ARLO GUTHRIE and his compatriot PETE SEEGER will perform in Central Park, along with other musicians who have followed in his footsteps, including SUZANNE VEGA, NANCI GRIFFITH, BILLY BRAGG and the Disposable Heroes of Hiphoprisy.
The Summerstage concert will take place at 2 P.M. at Rumsey Playfield off 72d Street, west of Fifth Avenue.
"It is fabulous that there is a whole new generation of people discovering not just the fact of his being, but what he stood for," Arlo Guthrie said yesterday.


Pretoria Can Stop the Killings at Any Time
To the Editor:
The Boipatong massacre in South Africa (news article, June 19) demonstrated once again that the international community must remain vigilant in pressuring the South African Government to relinquish its control over the security forces and to dismantle the apartheid regime once and for all.


International Datacasting reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


The State of Political Fashion 1992
LESS than 10 blocks awayfrom the roiling speeches and thunderous ovations that will flow from the Democratic National Convention at Madison Square Garden next week, there will be a quieter expression of political sentiment: "V-O-T-E: The 1992 Election in T-Shirts" opens Monday at the National Museum of Fashion at the Fashion Institute of Technology.


Fannie Mae Deal
The Countrywide Funding Corporation, one of the country's largest mortgage bankers, and the Federal National Mortgage Association, the Government-sponsored investor in home mortgages, signed a commitment yesterday to finance a record $8 billion of mortgages.
Under the agreement, the mortgages originated by Countrywide, based in Pasadena, Calif., will be exchanged for mortgage-backed securities issued by the Federal National Mortgage Association, also known as Fannie Mae.
Countrywide will sell the securities to investors.


INSIDE
Drug Picture Worsens
Hospital treatment of heroin and cocaine cases is up sharply in New York City and dealers are dropping prices, state officials say.
Page B1.
United Airlines Snubs Boeing
United Airlines, Boeing's biggest and most loyal customer, leased 50 planes from Airbus, the four-nation European consortium.
Page D1.
Hispanic District Challenge


Business Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


W. B. Doner Wins Chiquita Account
W.
B.
Doner &amp; Company in Baltimore and Southfield, Mich., said yesterday that it had been awarded the European advertising account of the Chiquita Banana Company B.V., Rotterdam, the Netherlands, a unit of Chiquita Brands International, with billings estimated at $10 million.
The decision means that Chiquita has consolidated all its banana advertising, with total billings estimated at $30 million, at Doner.
The agency has worked for Chiquita since it won the American account in 1976.


Intel Invests In VLSI
In an effort to cement its position in the emerging market for hand-held computers, the Intel Corporation invested $50 million today in VLSI Technology Inc., a chip maker based in San Jose, Calif., that designs custom-based semiconductors.
The agreement means that Intel will acquire about 20 percent of VLSI's common stock in exchange for a license to use Intel's low-power 386sl microprocessor, which is specially designed to control the power consumption functions of portable and hand-held computers.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Laibach  Limelight
One of the stranger things about current pop is the desire on the part of fans and critics to find sophisticated political understanding emanating from the music.
With a group like Laibach, which performed at Limelight on Tuesday night, the impulse is even stronger.
The group, from Slovenia, has always combined fascist, communist and militarist images with its blend of industrial and dance music.
At Limelight the group let the imagery speak for it, and if the imagery said anything it said that the mockery of totalitarianism, divorced from a context and pompous, is funny.
It's also trivializing.


CBS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dinkins, Amid Crowd, Nurtures Fragile Peace
Mayor David N. Dinkins's visit to Washington Heights yesterday was the latest example of an aggressive strategy to restore peace through broad symbolic acts and small administrative actions.
Sensitive and possibly risky political matters confronted the Mayor as a fragile calm held through the day.
As he sought to reassure the predominantly Dominican community that there would be an impartial and thorough investigation of the death of Jose Garcia Friday night, he had to be wary of antagonizing the Police Department's rank and file.


Economic Scene; Who Will Pay, If Not Japan?
THIS economic news just in from Munich: Leaders of the industrial powers have affirmed, in principle, their support for open trade, stable growth and aid for the former Soviet Union.
Wait; don't turn to the crossword puzzle.
While the gathering in Munich, Germany, was a snooze -- economic summit meetings are convened to reassure, not entertain -- some of the subjects conspicuously not on the agenda are very interesting indeed.
And surely nontopic A was Japan, or more precisely, the contradictions between what the world says it wants from Asia's economic colossus and what it really needs.


Bound to Looms by Poverty and Fear, Boys in India Make a Few Men Rich
As the summer sun labored toward the desiccated plains of northern India, Amarnath Kumar, a straw-thin 10-year-old boy, and three friends crept away from the red adobe hut that had been their prison for 18 months.
Across the blistered soil of fallow wheat fields, the boys hurried north, avoiding other people, hurrying into the descending darkness.
Behind them, in the adobe enclosure, they left other children -- children bought or stolen from their parents, taken to toil as virtual slaves on the carpet looms of eastern Uttar Pradesh.


Holyfield Sets Sights on Next Opponent
EVANDER HOLYFIELD would consider defending his world heavyweight title against LENNOX LEWIS in London if the challenger wins his next bout and shows big-fight marketability, his promoter said.
Lewis's handlers said yesterday that the 1988 Olympic gold medalist will fight DONOVAN (RAZOR) RUDDOCK at Earls Court in London on Oct. 31.


CFCF Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Quotation of the Day
"There are no specific agreements on anything in the final declaration." -- PRIME MINISTER JOHN MAJOR, at the end of the summit conference in Munich.  [ A12:5. ]


'Savior' Tells Olympia Its U.S. Unit Defaulted
Li Ka-shing, a Hong Kong billionaire and partner of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. in several properties, has notified the company's American subsidiary that it defaulted on a $57.5 million mortgage on a lower Manhattan office building.
Mr.
Li -- one of the richest men in Hong Kong -- was regarded as a savior of Olympia &amp; York just eight months ago, when he bought a $160 million maturing bank mortgage on 60 Broad Street from CalFed Inc.
But now he could force Olympia's American subsidiary into bankruptcy protection if he seeks a judgment against it.


A Saudi Bank and Ex-Chief Violated U.S. Law, Fed Says
The Federal Reserve Board has found that Saudi Arabia's largest bank and its former chief executive violated American banking laws in trying to acquire control of the Washington-based First American banks with help from the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
The board last week determined that Sheik Khalid bin Mahfouz and the National Commercial Bank of Saudi Arabia had failed to properly report the 28.7 percent of First American's holding company they acquired in 1986, according to papers the Fed released today.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Placed Mike Gallego, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Mike Humphreys, outfielder, from Columbus of the International League.
National League


Braniff Head Expects Others to Close
When Braniff International Airlines abruptly shut its operations last Thursday, it was the third time a financially troubled carrier named Braniff had called it quits.
But Jeffrey R. Chodorow, the chairman and co-owner of Braniff Inc., said the discount airline was well on its way to profitability when it fell victim to predatory pricing by rival carriers.
Mr.
Chodorow also predicted in a telephone interview yesterday that one or more airlines would be forced out of business this year as a result of the industry's half-price sale on advance-purchase domestic flights this summer.
He declined to name the airlines he felt were vulnerable and would not say whether he would join Northwest, Continental and America West in suing American Airlines for predatory pricing.
American has denied the charge.
A Rumor Denied
Addressing many of the rumors that have swirled through the airline industry since the unexpected demise of Braniff, Mr.
Chodorow flatly denied that Braniff was forced to suspend operations for failure to pay income taxes.


Financial Documents Yield Some Surprises
National Football League financial documents released at the N.F.L.
Federal antitrust trial over free agency show that in the four years before the league signed its $3.6 billion television contract, the dominant team of the 80's was also the biggest financial failure.
The San Francisco 49ers, Super Bowl winners in the 1988 and '89 seasons, prided themselves on their first-class travel, facilities and salaries.
The documents show that from the 1986 through 1989 seasons, the 49ers and their owner, Eddie DeBartolo, paid dearly for those amenities, posting $31.2 million in operating losses in that span and suffering a huge one-year loss of $14.033 million in 1989.


Walesa Reluctantly Nominates New Premier
After a week of political wrangling, President Lech Walesa today reluctantly nominated Hanna Suchocka, a 46-year-old lawyer, to be the country's next Prime Minister.
Mr.
Walesa sent a letter nominating Ms.
Suchocka to the Parliament, which is expected to vote on Friday.
If she is accepted, Ms.
Suchocka would be the country's first woman to serve as Prime Minister, succeeding Waldemar Pawlak, who offered to resign last week after failing to form a governing coalition after a month in office.


Timetable on Lawsuit Seems a Setback for Cubs
The Federal judge presiding over the Chicago Cubs' lawsuit seeking an injunction against Commissioner Fay Vincent set a schedule yesterday for submission of papers that will not meet the Cubs' request that Vincent's forced realignment of the National League be stopped before July 20.
The Cubs were expected to file a brief in United States District Court in Chicago shortly after Judge Suzanne B. Conlon set the timetable, which also requires Vincent's lawyers to file arguments by next Thursday.
The Cubs will then have four days, until July 20, to file a reply brief.


Solarz Will Run in District Tailored as a Hispanic Seat
The effort to send a second Hispanic Representative to Congress from New York City ran into an unexpected problem today when Congressman Stephen J. Solarz, his Brooklyn base carved up in redistricting, announced that he would run in the new district drawn with the intention of electing a Hispanic member.
Mr.
Solarz made his decision after considering races in other districts and deciding that he would probably lose to any of several incumbents he could have challenged, including Representative Ted Weiss.


Calendar: Shopping and Exploring
Frank Lloyd Wright Items
Tiffany &amp; Company, Fifth Avenue at 57th Street; (212) 755-8000.
Vignettes of four rooms replicated from Frank Lloyd Wright houses and decorated with reproductions of chairs, rugs, tables, lamps, china, silver, fabric and stained glass designed by the architect will run through Sept. 5.
All of the items on display are available for sale.
Hours are 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., Monday through Saturday.
No charge.
The Great Movie Palaces
Architectural League of New York, The Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 753-1722.
"Ticket to Paradise: American Movie Theaters" is the title of an illustrated talk by John Margolies based on his book about the architecture of movie theaters and drive-ins, next Thursday at 6 P.M.
Admission is $5 (members, no charge).
Manhattan Walks
Citywalks; (212) 989-2456.
John Wilson, who calls himself an amateur historian, is leading walking tours of Manhattan neighborhoods on Tuesdays through Fridays through August.
Weekend tours will also take place this Saturday and Sunday and the first three weekends in August.
The fee for the tours, which last twohours, is $12.
No reservations necessary.
Schedule and meeting places available by telephone.
Furnishings Sale
International Design Center of New York, Center Two Atrium, 30-20 Thomson Avenue (between 30th Street and 30th Place), Long Island City, Queens; (718) 937-7474.
Wool rugs, leather sofas, tables, chairs and lighting fixtures are among the items for sale from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. today.
Shuttle buses will run on a 20- or 30-minute schedule between the center and two Manhattan locations: 201 East 56th Street and 22d Street at Fifth Avenue.
Admission is free.
Greek Revival Picnic Spot
Old Merchant's House, 29 East Fourth Street (between Lafayette Street and the Bowery); (212) 777-1089.
The 1832 row house is opening its garden -- planted with wisteria, foxgloves and morning glories -- for picnic lunches from 12:15 to 2 P.M.
Wednesdays through July 29.
Tours of the house, which is furnished with period furniture, textiles and other decorative arts, will also be given at 12:15.
Admission is $3.
Reservations are required for the tours.
Sag Harbor Houses
John Jermain Library, Main and Jefferson Streets, Sag Harbor, L.I.; (516) 725-0049.
A self-guided tour of seven houses, including an Italianate Victorian-era house, a Greek Revival house decorated with imported wallpaper from the early 1900's and a California-mission-style house built on a waterfront bluff will be held from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. tomorrow.
Tickets, $12.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  A NARROWING OF DIFFERENCES
The heads of seven leading industrial democracies narrowed their differences on world trade and, while they failed to reach an accord, left the economic summit meeting in Munich with many of them confident that an agreement was possible by the end of the year.
A1  A PARTNERSHIP WITH RUSSIA
The summit leaders promised a "comprehensive partnership" with Russia and $1 billion in aid.
But in a meeting with President Yeltsin, they signaled that the former Communist countries of Eastern Europe and the old Soviet Union should expect no further injections of aid until they restructure their economies.
A12  YELTSIN'S FAMILIAR JOURNEY
Yeltsin's journey to Munich was familiar: the preliminary vow that he would not "get on his knees" before the West, an encouraging pat on the back from leaders of the rich nations, a handful of change, and promises of far more once he really gets moving on reforms.
A12  Six Russian aides denied they are trying to undermine Yeltsin.
A5  EUROPEANS DROP YUGOSLAVIA
The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe suspended Yugoslavia for three months, accusing it of aggression against its neighbors.
World leaders, in the meantime, gathered in Helsinki to seek ways of preventing similar conflicts.
The leaders -- from North America, Europe and the former republics of the Soviet Union -- planned to set the seal on disarmament.
They are expected to review Yugoslavia's suspension in October.
A13  CHILD LABORERS IN INDIA
For 12, 14, 16 hours a day, every day of the week, every week of the year, thousands of children, some as young as 8 are forced to sit on rough planks and help make the carpets that India sells around the world.
The United States is the biggest customer for Indian carpets.
A8  SETBACK FOR JAPANESE ROCKET
In another serious setback for Japan's budding space program, the Government announced that it would delay the launching of its next-generation rocket by a year because of a recent accident.
The H-II is the first rocket to be built solely by Japan and is a source of national pride.
It will be the first rocket powerful enough to let Japan launch communications and weather satellites.
A9  MORE ON FAILED IRAQI COUP
The reported coup attempt against Saddam Hussein appears to have mainly consisted of an effort to assassinate the Iraqi leader as his motorcade was to move through the Baghdad area last week, an American intelligence report said.
A3  A top aide hinted the U.S. may have interfered in Iraq case.
A2  Barcelona Journal: Games are second to urban renewal.
A4  National A14-19, D18  CLINTON NARROWS HIS LIST
As its search for a running mate neared an end, the Clinton campaign interviewed Senators Gore and Kerrey.
The Governor also won the endorsement of a onetime rival, former Senator Tsongas, and is expected to gain Jesse Jackson's backing this weekend.
A1  Clinton's economic plan: more Roosevelt than Reagan.
A19  THE TESTING TIME FOR PEROT
News analysis: Ross Perot, his still-undeclared Presidential campaign now lacking momentum, needs any number of things to get it going again, above all the very thing he most mocked a month ago: detailed positions on the issues.
A1  Perot reversed the ban on homosexuals in his Cabinet.
A18  Washington at Work: The collapse of Robb's fortunes.
D18  A TOUGHER STANCE ON TRADE
The House of Representatives passed a broad trade bill that would require the Federal Government to adopt a more confrontational approach to reducing foreign trade barriers.
The White House lobbied against the bill, and President Bush now faces the prospect of a politically unpopular veto.
A1  EDUCATION BILL GOES TO BUSH
Trumpeting its allegiance to middle-class Americans, the House gave final Congressional approval to a bill helping them get more college loans.
The legislation has the President's support.
A1  COURT CURBS PESTICIDES IN FOOD
A Federal appeals court ruled that the E.P.A. must remove from the market any pesticides that leave residues in processed food if they have the potential to cause cancer.
The ruling was a defeat for the environmental agency, which in regulating pesticides had relied on a law that allowed small amounts of cancer-causing chemicals in food if the chemicals' benefits to farmers and consumers could be shown to outweigh the risk to health and the environment.
A1  AIR-QUALITY STANDARDS VOIDED
Air-quality standards for the workplace were thrown out by a Federal appeals court, which said the Government had not given sufficient supporting evidence for them.
The standards had been challenged by unions as too weak and also criticized by industrial groups, which said regulators had not shown that the rules were economically and technologically feasible.
A14  FIVE COMPUTER HACKERS INDICTED
A Federal grand jury charged that five New York hackers had broken into computers used by telephone companies and major credit reporting services and had disrupted or stolen their data.
A14  Metropolitan Digest, B1 DINKINS URGES CALM
Mayor Dinkins's visit to Washington Heights yesterday was the latest act of an aggressive strategy to restore peace to the neighborhood through broad symbolic acts and small administrative actions.
A1  Business Digest, D1 The Home Section C1-12  All the world's a studio for this Paris designer.
C1  At home with Jeremy Railton.
C1  Houses that rent along party lines.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C13-22  The Japanese companies and Hollywood.
C15  Theater: Stein's "Faustus." C15  Music: More Mostly Mozart.
C14  Kirov Opera confirms an operatic myth.
C15  Sports B10-16  Baseball: Braves defeat Mets, 2-1.
B11  Yanks talking contract with Showalter.
B11  All-Star teams are named.
B13  Twins beat Yanks, 3-2.
B13  Column: Anderson on Pat Leahy B11  Football: Records show Jets and Giants were money losers.
B11  Olympics: Marciulionis leads Lithuania back to Games.
B15  Obituaries D19  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A21  It's not the King case.
France blocks the way.
Holier than Cheney.
Topics: Twain, met.
Letters A21  William Safire: Obstructing Justice.
A22  Leslie H. Gelb: Cuddling Saddam.
A22  Barbara Probst Solomon: Our sisters, our lovers.
A22  William E. Colby and Jeremy J. Stone: Bypass the Khmer Rouge.
A22


Holier Than the Defense Secretary
The V-22 Osprey takes off like a helicopter and flies like a plane.
Its budget flight path has been filled with ups and downs.
Ever since 1989 Defense Secretary Cheney has tried his best to ground it, only to see Congress unwisely interfere.
Last week, he reluctantly gave in to the pressure and agreed to spend $1.5 billion this year and next to develop the tilt-rotor aircraft.
But he rightly considers it expensive and expendable.
And he's right to remain opposed to spending $30 billion for full procurement of 500 Ospreys.


7 NATIONS UNABLE TO AGREE ON TRADE BUT SEE PROGRESS
Leaders of the world's richest industrial democracies narrowed their differences on world trade today.
While they failed to reach an accord, they left the economic summit meeting here with many confident that an agreement was possible by the end of the year.
As they have at the last two summit meetings, the leaders vowed to conclude the so-called Uruguay Round of trade negotiations within a few months.


Argonaut Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ripken Is Popular But Padres Merit Stars
In an election in which 6,622,808 fan ballots were cast and in which Cal Ripken Jr. of the Baltimore Orioles proved undoubtedly to be the people's choice by garnering the most votes, the San Diego Padres yesterday undoubtedly won fan approval as the organization with the most star quality.
The Padres did so by having three players voted to starting positions for the All-Star Game on Tuesday night in San Diego: catcher Benito Santiago, first baseman Fred McGriff and right fielder Tony Gwynn.


Benihana National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Horizon Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Review/Theater; Gertrude Stein Interprets Faust
When Gertrude Stein created "Dr. Faustus Lights the Lights," her whimsical play based on the Faust legend, she made the invention of the light bulb the brilliant central metaphor for the human assumption of godlike powers.
And in the director Robert Wilson's staging of the 1938 play, which opened a three-night run at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday as part of Lincoln Center's Serious Fun festival, the director has dug deeply into his bag of lighting tricks to illustrate the concept with some striking visual effects.


Books of The Times; Most of What People Say About Trash Is Rubbish
Rubbish!
The Archeology of Garbage  By William Rathje and Cullen Murphy  Illustrated. 250 pages.
HarperCollins. $23.


Reavis Cox, 91, Dies; A Marketing Authority
Reavis Cox, an internationally recognized marketing authority and former chairman of the department of marketing at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School, died on Saturday at his home in Swarthmore, Pa.
He was 91 years old.
He died of natural causes, his wife, Rachel, said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; BILL BRADLEY ECLIPSES WILLIS REED FOR A WHILE
Senator Bill Bradley's number may have been retired by the New York Knicks, but it was put back to work by the Democratic Party yesterday.
Mr.
Bradley wore No. 24 during his professional basketball career, and the New Jersey Senator's retired jersey number hangs in the hall where he will deliver a keynote address at next week's national convention.


InterVoice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Fight on Trenton Aid to Poor School Districts Goes to Court, Again
Two years after the New Jersey Supreme Court ordered that school spending in the state's poorest districts be brought up to the level of the most affluent, lawyers returned to court today to argue about whether the resulting legislation is doing the job.
Whatever the ruling by Judge Paul G. Levy of the Chancery Division of Superior Court, the case is expected to return to the State Supreme Court -- the 10th time in 22 years that the court has been asked to rule on whether New Jersey is meeting the mandate in its own Constitution to provide students with a "thorough and efficient" system of public education.


Rockefeller Enters Race for Senate
New York's newest United States Senate candidate officially began his campaign yesterday with a Jerry Brown-style appeal for volunteers to call a toll-free number and a vow to shun television commercials in his bid to oust the Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato.
Forty-seven-year-old Laurance Rockefeller, who said voters should think of him as "Larry" as much as they think of him as a Rockefeller, is a political novice, an environmental lawyer with the Natural Resources Defense Council and a nephew of the late Governor and Vice President, Nelson A. Rockefeller.
In announcing his candidacy yesterday, he pledged to spend no more than $250,000 of the family wealth on the campaign.
And he said that if he won, he would serve no more than two six-year terms in the Senate because he was bothered by "the unhealthy preoccupation of many politicians with their own re-elections."


Review/Television; 'The Real World,' According to MTV
Billed as a reality-based soap opera, MTV's "Real World" is real largely by accident, and its seven principal players are far too independent to be stuffed into a tidy little soap opera.
Yet this force-fed documentary series, reaching the 9th of its 13 half-hour episodes tonight at 10, has been steadily evolving into the year's most riveting television, a compelling portrait of twentysomethings grappling with the 90's.
In the beginning, the executive producers Mary-Ellis Bunim and Jonathan Murray (she comes out of network daytime drama, he from news and documentary production) set out to put an MTV spin on a traditional soap-opera format.
But even on the drawing board, it looked too expensive.
So, taking a cue from commercial television, the producers turned to a "reality" concept requiring no expensive actors or writers.
Find some telegenic young people, turn on the cameras and let the editors go to work.


ExecuFirst Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to month 00


Robert Calkins, 89; Headed Brookings Institution
Robert D. Calkins, an economist and educator who was president emeritus of the Brookings Institution, died yesterday at the Carriage Hill Nursing Center in Silver Spring, Md.
He was 89 years old.
He died of pneumonia, the nursing center said.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section yesterday, about special lunches for $19.92 offered by some New York City restaurants during the Democratic National Convention, misstated the closing date for the offer.
The price will last from July 13 to 16, not through the 17th.


Red Wings Sign 2d Generation of Howe
MARK HOWE said yesterday that he hopes to close his career in the city where his father became a hockey legend, signing a two-year contract with the Detroit Red Wings.
The veteran defenseman said he chose Detroit because he was looking for a team with a good chance of winning the Stanley Cup in the one or two years he has left to play.
Howe, 37 years old, is a son of the Hall of Famer GORDIE HOWE, who played for the Red Wings from 1946 to 1971.


Hospital Data Show Increase In Drug Abuse
After showing modest signs of improvement, the drug situation in New York City has taken a turn for the worse, state officials said yesterday.
Hospital treatment of heroin and cocaine cases is up sharply, they said, and some dealers are expanding their operations and dropping prices.
In a midyear assessment, the New York State Office of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse Services reported that emergency-room treatment for adverse effects from heroin increased by more than half in the first nine months of 1991 over the previous year and that emergency treatment for cocaine was up almost a third.


Bold Doctor Is Dismissed By a Dean
The outspoken doctor who oversaw the restructuring of postgraduate medical training in New York State has been dismissed as director of ambulatory-care services at Bronx Municipal Hospital Center, but will retain his tenured teaching position.
His dismissal, some doctors and hospital officials say, illustrates the broad powers of hospital affiliation agreements and points to the lingering tensions over the death of Libby Zion.
Friends and colleagues of the doctor, Bertrand M. Bell, described his dismissal last week as a response to his criticism of the dean of Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Dr.
Dominick P. Purpura.
Einstein's affiliation contract with the hospital gives Dr.
Purpura the power to hire and fire doctors who staff Bronx Municipal.


Tokyo Slide Has No Shock Wave
Just a few years ago, lots of people worried that a financial collapse in Tokyo would devastate financial markets and economies everywhere, and nowhere more than in the United States.
But now that the wildly inflated Tokyo stock market has dropped a swooping 60 percent in two years, hitting a six-year low just last week, the plunge has created more ripples than waves in this country.


Waterloo Violinist Cancels
Sarah Chang, a violinist, has canceled her appearance with the Waterloo Festival Orchestra at Waterloo Village in Stanhope, N.J., on Saturday evening because of an injury.
Anne Akiko Meyers will replace her as soloist in the Mendelssohn Violin Concerto, under the direction of Karl Anton Rickenbacherl.
The rest of the program remains unchanged: "Un Sourire" by Messiaen, and the Brahms Fourth Symphony.
The concert begins at 8:30 P.M.
Information: (201) 347-4700.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Economic Memo; Clinton's Economic Plan Has a Roosevelt Tone
Democrats hate to admit it, but Bill Clinton sometimes sounds like Ronald Reagan, especially when he says that the economy can grow its way out of the budget deficit.
Bush partisans who deride Governor Clinton's economic program often sound the way Democrats did when they questioned whether the tax cuts of President Reagan's first term would reduce the Federal deficit.


First Empire State reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Western Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A book review on May 25 about "Helen Gahagan Douglas: A Life" misstated Richard M. Nixon's Congressional committee assignment before he became Vice President.
As a Nixon scholar recently pointed out in a letter, Mr.
Nixon was a member of the House Committee on Un-American Activities, not of the permanent investigations subcommittee under Senator Joseph R. McCarthy.


Bush Staff Lawyer's Call On Iraq Case Is Reported
A lawyer on President Bush's legal staff discussed the criminal investigation of an Atlanta bank's loans to Iraq with the Federal prosecutor supervising the case at least once in late 1989 and perhaps on a number of occasions, the senior Assistant United States Attorney in Atlanta said today.
The suggestion that the White House may have interfered in the bank case is likely to figure in a meeting Thursday of Democrats on the House Judiciary Committee to discuss whether to request an independent counsel to investigate allegations of criminality by the Bush Administration in its handling of its policy toward Iraq.


Houses That Rent Along Party Lines
A TWO-STORY house in Mount Pleasant has no Reaganites.
A spacious, beautiful house on 16th Street welcomes only liberal "think tank" types.
A small three-bedroom in Fairfax tolerates no liberals.
To rent a room in a Washington group house it is not enough to be clean and free of felony convictions.
Even sharing a living space resonates of politics.


What the Court Ruled On in Kidnap Case
To the Editor:
"Kidnap? Sure, Says the Court," (editorial, June 18) ignores the limits on the Supreme Court's holding in the case of Umberto Alvarez Machain, the physician captured in Mexico in the case of the 1985 murder of a United States drug agent.
The Court held that our extradition treaty with Mexico does not apply to governmentally induced kidnappings; the Court did not hold that the United States may lawfully kidnap foreigners in their own countries for trial here.


Oases for the Politics-Parched Soul
Following the advice of Omar Khayyam, let us not waste time on the convention that can better be spent in the bar.
The messy spectacle of the political arena requires a certain philosophical distance that only a good drink in a cool, ill-lighted place can provide.
Fortunately, Manhattan has places where the roar of public life recedes to a faint murmur, and the din of partisan politics fades to a civilized buzz.
Such a place is the Landmark Tavern (626 11th Avenue, at 46th Street), a model for any serious drinking establishment and a reproach to the fad-ridden bars that infest lower Manhattan and the Upper West Side.
The Landmark began life in 1868 as a waterfront saloon, and since then only the waterfront has changed, moving west as landfill created 12th Avenue.
The look is mahogany, glass and cool tile.
The massive bar, turned from a single tree, looks out over a barroom whose stand-up drinking area is set off from a cozy arrangement of seven wood tables by a dark-wood divider.
The ceiling is pressed tin.
Most of the front-room fixtures are original, and the philosophy is straightforward.
"I don't even have a blender," said Ted Anderson, the bartender.
"The most complicated it gets is a Seabreeze -- vodka and cranberry juice. It's more like a scotch and beer place."


Rabin Weaves a Parliamentary Majority
Yitzhak Rabin put together a working coalition tonight for the new Israeli Government he will lead, one that is committed to rapid progress in Middle East peace negotiations.
The alliance that Mr.
Rabin's Labor Party formed was not as broad or as politically balanced as he had hoped, and negotiations were expected to continue into the weekend.


Slaney Pulls Out
MARY SLANEY, suffering from a virus, yesterday withdrew from her planned confrontation against ZOLA BUDD PIETERSE in a 2,000-meter race at the TSB track and field meet in London.
The two were to compete today in their first meeting in seven years.
They last raced against each other in Europe in 1985, a year after Slaney tripped on Pieterse's barefoot heel in the 3,000-meter final at the Los Angeles Olympics. (AP)


America's Mixed Neighborhoods Need Support
To the Editor:
"Two Neighborhoods, and a Wall Called Race" (front page, June 21), about the Chicago communities of Roseland and Mount Greenwood, gives the depressing side of the story of racial change in urban America.


Albertville in Mountain of Debts
Jean-Claude Killy and Michel Barnier, co-presidents of the Albertville Winter Olympics this year, announced today that the committee that organized the Games recorded a $56.8 million loss, equivalent to 6.8 percent of its $836 million budget.
In a news conference today, Killy, a former French skiing idol, and Barnier, who heads the Savoy regional council, played down the significance of the deficit, arguing that the success of the two-week-long Games in February was more important.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Wife; 1985 Crusade by Tipper Gore Is Likely to Help 1992 Ticket
When Tipper Gore began a campaign against violent and sexually explicit lyrics on record albums seven years ago, her crusade was widely viewed as an inappropriate call for censorship.
But with the recent uproar over the lyrics of rap artists, including Sister Souljah and Ice-T, and calls from the White House for a return to family values, Mrs.
Gore now looks politically prescient.


Accounts
*
Brooks Shoe, Rockford, Mich., to Griffin Bacal Inc., New York, to develop worldwide advertising for the athletic footwear manufacturer and place media in the United States.
Billings on the account, previously at BBDO Chicago, were estimated at $6 million.


Trenton Grows Uneasy as Personnel Whets Ax
The state Department of Personnel said today that it was not close to figuring out what state workers would be losing their jobs starting July 31.
A spokesman for the Department of Personnel, Tom Vincz, said that Commissioner Anthony J. Cimino Jr. was waiting for lists from the Treasury and Corrections departments before he could specify how many layoffs would be required and from what departments.


Nature, It Turns Out, Made a Molecule Long Before People Did
Carbon-based molecules shaped like soccer balls have fascinated chemists since the first one was synthesized seven years ago.
Now for the first time these molecules, fullerenes, have been found in nature, lodged in rock that seems to date from the dawn of life on our planet.
The discovery, reported in today's issue of the journal Science, has mystified scientists, who cannot explain the origin of the natural fullerene molecules or even of the enigmatic mineral in which they were found.


Status on Cummings
San Antonio Spurs forward TERRY CUMMINGS injured a knee and could miss the entire season, The San Antonio Express-News reported yesterday.
The newspaper report said that Cummings tore two ligaments in his right knee when another player fell on him Monday during a pickup game in Chicago.
Cummings was seen on crutches Tuesday night at San Antonio International Airport, according to the newspaper report.


Western Hanover Appears to Be the Steadiest Shot
A trip to the winner's circle tonight at the $1 million Meadowlands Pace would cap a splendid six-day spell for Gene Riegle, who was inducted into the Harness Racing Hall of Fame last Sunday.
The 64-year-old Riegle is the trainer of Western Hanover, regarded as the most consistent horse in the race, the eighth on the card.
But the field is very competitive, with 6 of 10 horses at odds of 8-1 or less.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Friday about Maj.
Gen.
Lewis W. MacKenzie, commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina, referred incorrectly to the transporting of a Serbian official into Sarajevo in a United Nations armored vehicle.
It was a subordinate, not General MacKenzie himself, who made the vehicle available to the Serbian official.


Corrections
An article yesterday about House approval of legislation providing financial aid to college students referred incorrectly to action by a House Appropriations subcommittee.
The committee moved to cut Pell grants to $2,300 from $2,400 in the academic year beginning in the summer of 1993, not 1992.


Grant System To Help Poor To Be Revised
The Dinkins administration, entering the volatile arena of antipoverty politics, is planning to abolish the community policy boards that have distributed tens of millions of Federal antipoverty dollars.
In a major overhaul of the poverty program run by the Community Development Agency, the city has also revised the formula that determines which neighborhoods are eligible for the money.
It hopes to encourage the development of comprehensive services instead of the current hodgepodge of small programs now supported by the grants.


What to Watch As the Country Waits
Here is a schedule of television coverage of the Democratic National convention and related programming in the New York region.
Sunday
"PREVIEW OF THE DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION." C-Span.
Sunday from 10:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.


Edwards Air Force Base Journal; Watching Space Ships, And History, in a Desert
James A. Clark is a die-hard, a sort of groupie.
The object of his devotion is depicted on the NASA cap he wears, on the banner he waves and on patches stitched to his nylon jacket.
No mere celebrity could so captivate Mr.
Clark, a 66-year-old retired auto worker.
His love is the idea that Americans can be hurled into space and brought home safely, which these days means the space shuttle.





Don't Blame the Juries for Liability Awards
To the Editor:
Your June 29 report on the soaring cost of liability suits against New York City focuses on juries, rather than the cause of the problem: the legal nexus that binds juries closely.


Making a Case for a Fiscal Jolt
Could fiscal policy, long buried under the rubble of the $4 trillion Federal debt, rise from the grave?
A few months ago, the prospects of using tax cuts or government spending to jolt the economy from its torpor were virtually nil.
But higher unemployment and, more important, the growing realization that business-as-usual means high unemployment for years to come, have made the unthinkable merely unlikely.


On Stage, and Off
Wasserstein Tests the Water
"The Sisters Rosensweig," the new play by Wendy Wasserstein, will begin performances at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center on Sept. 25 and open on Oct. 22, says Andre Bishop, the theater's artistic director.
Jane Alexander and Madeline Kahn will co-star, Mr.
Bishop says, and he hopes Frances McDormand will join them.


Children In Crisis Can Play At Court
In a setting that could pass for a day care center, children clamber on a Jungle Gym, play with stuffed animals and shoot pool, but the fun belies the somber reason they are here, at the new Los Angeles County Children's Court.
Most are waiting to find out whether they will be taken from their parents.
For the children who come here, traumatic experiences are distressingly familiar.
The $60 million courthouse, which opened this week, was designed, down to the smallest details, to prevent a court dependency hearing from becoming yet another trauma.
County officials and child abuse experts say they believe that the courthouse is the first of its kind in the country.


Eric Sevareid, 79, Is Dead; Commentator and Reporter
Eric Sevareid, a radio and television correspondent who became one of the country's most respected reporters and commentators, died yesterday at his home in Washington.
He was 79 years old.
He died of stomach cancer, said a spokesman for CBS.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  FOREBODING IN SARAJEVO
The gladness that is visible when food reaches Sarajevo's residents is offset by a growing terror that Serbian forces may soon break through the city's defenses.
A1
President Bush offers aid but not intervention to Bosnia.  A6
Croatia's image as an outgunned David fades as its units advance.
A6  BRAZIL REACHES DEBT ACCORD
Brazil, the largest debtor in the developing world, and its creditor banks agreed on a series of steps that will reduce the country's $44 billion debt.
A1  RABIN FORMS A COALITION
Yitzhak Rabin chose a working coalition for a new Israeli Government that he promises will seek progress in peace negotiations.
A3  JORDAN CUTTING OFF IRAQI TRADE
Jordan seems to have stopped letting Iraq export oil and import goods across its border in violation of the United Nations embargo.
The decision is expected to increase strains on the Iraqi economy.
A3  TRACING U.S.
MISSTEPS ON IRAQ
A House Committee requested the appointment of an independent counsel to determine whether the Bush Administration broke laws in executing its policy toward Iraq.
A3  HOUSE FEARS RUSSIAN COATTAILS
Though it has been approved by the Senate, Washington's package of Russian aid still faces an uphill battle in the House.
Neither party wants to bear sole responsibility for sending money to Russia.
A2  TAKING A LEAF FROM PRETORIA
While the African National Congress has broken off negotiations on the end of white rule, in reality the talks have moved from the seclusion of the conference room to the public arena of dueling news briefings.
A8  MEXICANS PREDICT VOTE FRAUD
Mexican observer groups predicted that voting in two state elections this weekend would again be marred by irregularities.
A10  REPROACHING ZIMBABWE'S LEADER
As the jobless rate passes 40 percent, malnutrition soars and students are turned away from public schools, President Mugabe is losing much of the respect he once enjoyed in Zimbabwe and abroad.
A11  THAI LEADER'S DELICATE SCALPEL
Bangkok Journal: After a traumatic military crackdown, Thailand's caretaker Prime Minister sees his main mission as restoring calm.
Behind the scenes, he is also struggling to remove commanders who were responsible for the violence.
A4  National A12-18  CLINTON CHOOSES GORE
Governor Clinton selected Senator Gore of Tennessee to join him as his running mate when he receives the Democratic nomination for President next week.
A1
Excerpts from remarks by Clinton and Gore.  A16  'WE RAISED HIM FOR IT'
Man in the News: He was an unsuccessful candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination at age 39.
He was only 36 when he became a United States Senator.
And he was just 28 when he was elected to the House.
But Al Gore was much younger still when he decided he wanted to be President.
A1
Back in Tennessee, pride and hope in Al Gore Sr.  A17
Gore's wife, Tipper, and her crusade on sexually explicit lyrics.  A17
Hillary Clinton and Tipper Gore got together and campaigned.  A17
Four years ago Gore got risky, and was humiliated.  A16  THE BIG TASK AHEAD
News analysis: His choice of a running mate confirmed that Governor Clointon had set himself a mighty task: nothing less than the rejuvenation of the Democratic Party.
A1
Perot's camp said he would allow homosexuals in the military.  A18
Wall Street and the oil and gas industries lead in contributions.
A18  NEW ERA FOR SMALL PHONES
The F.C.C. moved toward authorizing a new generation of pocket-sized telephones and hand-held computers that communicate over the air.
A1  HOUSE CHIPS AT '90 BUDGET ACCORD
Trying to crack the barriers of the 1990 budget law that have curbed domestic spending, the House voted to take $400 million in foreign aid savings and spend it on transportation.
A13  THE SHUTTLE RETURNS
The space shuttle Columbia swept through a clear sky and landed at Cape Canaveral, Fla., ending a two-week journey, the space agency's longest shuttle flight.
A12
Edwards Air Force Base Journal: Desert disappointment. A12  GAIN IN IMMUNOLOGY RESEARCH
In a remarkable manipulation of the human immune system, researchers have trained white blood cells to protect patients against a particular viral infection.
A15  NEW MOLECULAR FINDING
Carbon-based molecules shaped like soccer balls have fascinated chemists since the first one was synthesized seven years ago.
Now for the first time these molecules, fullerenes, have been found in nature, lodged in rock that seems to date from the dawn of life.
A15  Law Page A19  Between oversight and stalemate: A Federal death row prisoner.
A Los Angeles County courthouse accommodates the small.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1 Weekend C1-30  Food, drink and fun for politicians and nonpoliticians.
C21-27  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  "As You Like It." C3  Film: "Prelude to a Kiss." C10  "The Best Intentions." C10  Music: Masur's Tchaikovsky.
C3  Dance: Hip-hop at Serious Fun.
C5  Restaurants C20  Art: The Art Market C19  Fragile old works.
C28  Sports B7-15  Baseball: Mets shut out by Astros.
B7  Yankees beat Mariners.
B7  Rangers dismiss Valentine.
B9  Cycling: Tour de France.
B12  Football: Giants select quarterback.
B7  Olympics: Red ink in Albertville.
B10  I.O.C. invites Yugoslavs.
B10  Tennis: Plans stalled for new U.S.
Open site.
B15  Obituaries D16  Eric Sevareid, news commentator  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials A28  A torch passes in Little Rock.
The Council's garbage test.
Pol Pot against the U.N.
Topics: Glassboro's gift.
Letters A28  A. M. Rosenthal: Captive neighborhood.
A29  Anthony Lewis: Hope turned to dust.
A29  Caroline Alexander: Partners in the slave trade.
A29  Warren Hinckle: Ross Perot -- hero of the counterculture.
A29


Money Fund Assets Up
Assets of the nation's 589 money market mutual funds increased by $23.73 billion, to $496.03 billion, for the seven-day period that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 217 institutional funds increased $19.65 billion, to $185.25 billion.


An Unequal Justice; Little Aid for Hard-Time Sisterhood
T.
J.
Rivera lingered remorsefully over her role in one of the most startling social turns of America's last decade -- a tripling of the number of women in United States prisons and jails, a growth rate well beyond that of male inmates.
"Here I had just assaulted this 74-year-old woman," Ms.
Rivera recalled, backtracking to bad times on the streets of Manhattan as a 28-year-old drug-addicted mugger of a pedestrian, a particularly vulnerable woman whose purse she grabbed.


It's So Unlike Them, but Giants Pick a Passer
The Giants took an uncharacteristic gamble yesterday on a young quarterback, grabbing Dave Brown of Duke in the supplementary draft and forfeiting their precious first pick in next year's college draft.
"I think we just surprised a lot of teams," said Tom Boisture, the Giants' director of player personnel and the team official who first scouted Brown.
"We've been known as being pretty conservative. All these people are always yelling that we never draft a quarterback. Well, we never had a strong conviction about a quarterback. Until now."


Desert Storm, Diamond Calm
Just listen to the Top Guy on his finest innings: "I'd like to hit the rewind button for you and go back to late 1989, when we began to formulate the strategy that is now on the street. . . . The first thing we concluded was that the world was still a dangerous place. . . . Our public saw the very best and brightest of our youth . . . and the country fell in love. . . . The name of the game is winning."
You would be justified in assuming that this was Commissioner Fay Vincent, trying to save his job by reminding us how he picked up the ball in September 1989 from the fallen St.
Bart, stood up to the forces of nature at the San Francisco Quake-Series, shared our pleasure at the last championship, yet fully understood the only reason to compete.


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW
West Fourth Street between the Avenue of the Americas and Washington Square East will be closed from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the West Fourth Street fair.
SUNDAY
Second Avenue between Second and 14th streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Lower East Side Second Avenue fair.


Topics of The Times; Glassboro State's Great Gift
Glassboro State College in Glassboro, N.J., received a gift of $100 million last week from a local businessman, Henry Rowan, and his wife, Betty.
It's the largest cash gift ever made to any public university.
The gift was all the more astonishing because Mr.
Rowan, chairman and founder of Inductotherm Industries Inc., which manufactures industrial furnaces, is not even an alumnus of Glassboro State.
He attended Williams College and graduated with honors from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


Drug Test Charges
NATALYA ARTYOMOVA of the Commonwealth of Independent States, one of the world's top middle-distance runners, has been accused of trying to manipulate her drug sample Saturday night at the Bislett Games.


George Sawyer Sr., 66, Scientist and Educator
Dr.
George C. Sawyer Sr., a chemical engineer and drug developer who became an executive, professor and proponent of corporate social responsibility, died July 2 at the Butterfield Hospital in Cold Spring, N.Y.
He was 66 years old and lived in Garrison, N.Y.
He died of a lung infection, his family said.


New Hong Kong Governor Takes Oath of Office


Biaggi Hopes To Return To Congress
Three years after he was convicted of extortion and one year after he was released from prison after pleading that he was near death, former Representative Mario Biaggi has told friends and political associates in the Bronx that he will run to reclaim his old Congressional seat this fall.
Suffering from heart problems, unable to walk without crutches and still several hundred thousand dollars in debt to the Government, according to court records, the 74-year-old Mr.
Biaggi seems to be hoping that he can rewrite the humiliating end to his political career as New York's senior Congressman largely on the strength of his name.


Slowly, Plan to Aid Russia Gains Support in the House
Although President Bush reassured President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia this week that Washington would support his economic reform program, the Administration's Russian aid package, which finally passed the Senate last week, still faces an uphill battle for approval in the House.
A month ago, Congressional leaders said the Freedom Support Act, as the United States contribution to the $24 billion Western aid package for Russia is known, had little chance of passage in the House in this election year.
Since then, however, two things have happened to improve its prospects.


Critic's Choice/Dance; Body-Painting to Choral Music From Estonia
There is not a lot going on in dance most summers in New York, but what there is tends to have an intriguing twist.
Tonight through Sunday, for example, for example, it will be possible to see an Estonian musical theater piece in which Marika Blossfeldt, a performer who manages to be both concentrated and serene, will have her body painted to music sung by 15 members of the Estonian Philharmonic Chamber Choir.
"Emapolv" ("Mother's Knee"), a new work that is part of Esto '92, the Sixth World Estonian Festival, will be performed at the Pace University Downtown Theater, 3 Spruce Street (two blocks south of City Hall) in lower Manhattan, tonight and tomorrow night at 8 and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets are $20; Theater Development Fund vouchers are accepted.
Reservations: (212) 346-1715.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
4.19
5.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.19
3.20
5.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.26
3.27
5.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.41
6.44
8.15
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.59
7.60
8.46
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.53
8.55
9.49
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.28
6.34
7.17
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Another Native Son Returns in Coffin
For years residents of this town have been accustomed to seeing its sons returned in coffins from a life of drugs and adventure in New York.
But they insisted today that the case of Luis Jose Garcia, a 23-year-old whose shooting by a police officer last week sparked days of turmoil in Washington Heights, was different.
The funerals regularly held for the returning drug dealers who have long made this town synonymous with new money and conspicuous consumption often resemble lavish fiestas.
In the last year, according to local news accounts, this town of 300,000 has buried 160 people killed in the United States.
But the simple funeral of Mr.
Garcia, who the New York City police say was also a drug dealer, was a solemn and bitter affair.


Partners in the Slave Trade
At the summit meeting of the Organization of African Unity in Senegal last week, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson proposed that Africa be compensated for the losses inflicted by the slave trade.
He said the plan would be comparable to aid given to Eastern Europe and reparations paid to Jewish survivors of the Holocaust.
Mr.
Jackson's proposal raises complicated logistical problems.
The donors he has targeted so far are limited to the people of the U.S. and European countries.
While no one would contest the proposition that the slave trade supplying America and European colonies inflicted untold evil on the African people, it is worth bearing in mind that slavery was an African institution before the appearance of Europeans on African soil: On the western coast of Africa, certain tribes, such as the Duala of Cameroon, possessed entire villages of slaves, who were not sold abroad but kept for domestic use.


Review/Art; Some Fragile Old Works From the New World
The Baroque art of colonial Colombia and Ecuador -- or the Vice-Royalty of Nueva Granada, as it was called for most of the 18th century -- is making a rare appearance in New York.
The place is the Americas Society on Park Avenue; the show is a solemn yet exuberant mixture of religious paintings, portraiture, sculpture, silver liturgical implements and secular objects under the title "Barroco de la Nueva Granada: Colonial Art From Colombia and Ecuador."
Some of these works are national treasures in such fragile condition that they may never be allowed to travel again.
Nearly all of them attest to the rich fusion of international styles and local sensibilities at the core of colonial Baroque art as it evolved in various northern Andean cities from the mid-17th to the late 18th century.


Pol Pot Against the U.N.
Remember last year's Cambodia peace agreement?
World leaders congratulated themselves that they had helped negotiate an end to 20-plus years of carnage.
But the world's diplomats underestimated the duplicity and intransigence of the Khmer Rouge.
The fanatics who butchered a million fellow Cambodians in the late 1970's survived the years of Vietnamese occupation, thanks to military support from China and Thailand and diplomatic support from the United States.


TVWeekend; Examining the Appeal Of David Duke's Oratory
"Backlash: Race and the American Dream" was evidently made while David Duke, the Louisiana politician best known as a former leader of the Ku Klux Klan, still seemed to be a formidable figure in the 1992 Presidential campaign.
But even after the collapse of his candidacy, concern over his appeal lingers.
So tonight's hourlong documentary is by no means out of date.
Clips from speeches and interviews show that Mr.
Duke has tidied up his prose since the days when he wore the sheet and peddled Nazi pamphlets.
But you don't have to be a historian to detect the nativist strains meant to incite white working-class Americans who have been hurt by the recession.


House Panel Urges Special Counsel for Iraq Inquiry
The House Judiciary Committee today requested the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate whether the Bush Administration broke Federal laws in executing and defending its policy toward Iraq.
Today's decision challenges President Bush's contention that his policy toward Iraq before it invaded Kuwait in August 1990 was flawed, but not criminal, and focuses more attention on an issue that has already been used effectively by Democrats in the Presidential campaign.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Hatalsky Leads on a 65  Morris Hatalsky, long known as one of the best putters on the PGA Tour, outdid himself in yesterday's opening round of the Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic in Williamsburg, Va.
Hatalsky, who got the last of his four victories in 1990, one-putted the first 12 holes en route to a six-under-par 65 and a one-shot lead over Ed Dougherty, Frank Conner, Ed Humenik, David Peoples and Peter Persons.
Hatalsky finished with 16 one-putts and a pair of two-putts.
His total of 20 was two off the tour's one-round record, shared by Kenny Knox, Andy North, Mike McGee and Sam Trahan. (AP) Englishman Shoots a 60: Paul Curry of England shot a 10-under-par 60 yesterday, the lowest round ever in a professional event in Britain, and earned a share of the lead at the halfway point of the Scottish Open in Gleneagles.
Curry had two eagles, seven birdies and one bogey and became only the sixth player -- but third in eight days -- to shoot 60 on the European tour.
Darren Clarke of Northern Ireland and Johan Rystrom of Sweden both did it in Monte Carlo last week.
Mark Brooks of the United States shot a seven-under 63 in his second trip over the 6,739-yard King's course and was tied with Curry at 12-under 128. (AP) TENNIS  Ivanisevic Wins Twice  Top-seeded Petr Korda was upset yesterday at the Swiss Open, but Goran Ivanisevic showed his versatility by winning two matches in one day on the clay courts in Gstaad less than a week after serving his way into the Wimbledon final.
Ivanisevic, seeded third, eliminated Claudio Mezzadri, 6-4, 7-6 (7-3), in a first-round match and then beat a qualifier, Girts Dzelde, 6-3, 6-3.
Fabrice Santoro upset Korda, 1-6, 7-5, 6-2, in the second round.
Second-seeded Michael Chang struggled past Cedric Pioline, 3-6, 7-6 (7-4), 7-5. (AP) Shelton Rallies: The defending champion, Bryan Shelton, saved a match point in the second set and went on to defeat Arne Thoms, 4-6, 7-6 (7-3), 6-2, in the second round of the Hall of Fame Championships, being played on grass courts in Newport, R.I.
Sandon Stolle beat No. 2 Gianluca Pozzi, 6-1, 4-6, 6-3, and Javier Frana, the runner-up last year, defeated No. 8 Simon Youl, 3-6, 6-4, 7-5. (AP)


House Votes to Breach 1990 Budget Act
Trying to crack the barriers of the 1990 budget law that have curbed domestic spending, the House voted today to take $400 million in foreign aid savings and spend it instead on transportation.
The Bush Administration threatened a veto, saying the measure would trouble financial markets and cause interest rates to rise, thus undercutting the job-creating purpose behind the transportation legislation.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on April 28 with an article about the outlook for Peru's copper industry misidentified the equipment shown.
It is a converter furnace, not a crusher.
The Southern Peru Copper Corporation wrote to The Times about the error on May 11, but the letter was misplaced through an editing lapse.


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
Brazil and its creditor banks including Citibank, Chase and Chemical agreed to steps that would reduce the country's $44 billion debt and provide new loans at lower interest rates.
The agreement capped three years of negotiations with Latin American countries under the Brady Plan and will shift the focus to debtor nations elsewhere, especially Africa.  [ Page A1. ]
Saudi Arabia's largest bank characterized as political Federal charges that its top executive acted illegally in acquiring a Washington bank as part of a plan to take over B.C.C.I.  [ D2. ]


Sports of The Times; The Name Of the Game Is Freeman
THE GOAL POSTS are up, the artificial field has been rolled out like linoleum and the blocking dummies, hunched in the shade nearby, await attack.
"All the toys are in place," said Dick Steinberg, the general manager of the Jets, seated yesterday in his office beside the practice area here.
"We just need the bodies."
Next Tuesday he shall be granted his 80 or so bodies as camp opens for his team and the rest of the National Football League.
One of those players he expects is Freeman McNeil, a veteran running back, who was seen two weeks ago in Minneapolis testifying in a Federal court regarding an antitrust suit that he and seven other players have brought against the league.


A Costly Show
Three days before the Democratic National Convention opens, the financial reality of gathering in New York City has sunk in.
Page B1.


Protesters On Abortion To Be Stifled
In a sweeping injunction intended to block attempts by the anti-abortion group Operation Rescue to either disrupt the Democratic National Convention or cut off access to New York City abortion clinics, a Federal District Court yesterday imposed restrictions that promise to cripple the group's efforts here.
The injunction, written in response to a request by Attorney General Robert Abrams and similar to another injunction that hampered the group's protests in Buffalo in April, prohibits abortion protesters from interfering with clinic operation or access to the convention at Madison Square Garden.


Barcelona or Bust: Stockton Gets Clearance
JOHN STOCKTON was cleared by Utah Jazz doctors yesterday to resume play with the United States Olympic basketball team.
The All-Star point guard went to Salt Lake City on Wednesday to be examined by the team's orthopedic surgeon, Dr.
LYLE MASON.
He said Stockton's injury, an undisplaced fracture of the right proximal fibula, is healing well.
X-rays show that the fracture line appears to be disappearing.


Dining Nominees: Something for Everyone
Restaurants around New York City have been shoring up their vessels for the invasion of conventioneers that begins this weekend.
For weeks, city residents have been hearing dire reports of daily gridlock, overflowing sidewalks and dining rooms that make Gov.
Bill Clinton's headquarters look like a gentlemen's chess club.
Most likely, however, all these predictions are overblown.
New York City has a way of biting off and swallowing the grandest events, be they conventions, parades, visits from foreign dignitaries, even tall ships.
In the city next week, chances are that unless you happen to wander by Madison Square Garden or get invited to one of the countless political cocktail parties, the Democratic National Convention will be a television event.


Chinese Workers Demonstrate for Better Jobs


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind the Scenes; The Other Albert Gore Watches Proudly From Tennessee
After a lunch of clam chowder and crackers today Albert Gore Sr. sat at his kitchen table and watched the television in proud silence as his son and namesake accepted an invitation to become the Democratic nominee for Vice President.
But when Senator Al Gore, who does not use the "Jr." after his name, proclaimed that the Democratic ticket represented a new generation of leadership in American politics, the white-haired man erupted, "Now that's a powerful statement." His wife, Pauline, 79 years old, patted him on the back.


Books of The Times; Exploring the Most Ethnic of New York's Enclaves
Chinatown  A Portrait of a Closed Society  By Gwen Kinkead  Illustrated. 211 pages.
HarperCollins. $23.
For immigrant Chinese, New York is their city of choice.
Half of New York's 300,000 Chinese live in Chinatown, the venerable quarter, the bottom of the Lower East Side, where the very street names like Pell and Mott seem to be Chinese in origin although they are in fact not remotely related to the population that settled there.


BUSH VOWS TO GET SUPPLIES TO BOSNIA
President Bush vowed today to bring food and medicine to Bosnia and Herzegovina "no matter what it takes," but rebuffed an appeal from the Bosnian President for international military intervention in his country's war against Serbian attackers.
As the 52-member Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe began a summit meeting here, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Western European Union, a nine-nation military alliance, scheduled meetings on Friday.
American, British and French officials said the meetings were expected to authorize the use of warships in the Adriatic Sea to enforce the United Nations embargo against the Serbian-dominated Government of Yugoslavia but would refrain from overt intervention in the conflict.


America's Mixed Neighborhoods Need Support; Everything Changed
To the Editor:
I feel compelled to comment on "Two Neighborhoods, and a Wall Called Race" (front page, June 21), about the two South Side Chicago neighorhoods of Roseland and Mount Greenwood.


Review/Film; The Afterlife Of Muscular Automatons
We recycle soda cans, so why not dead handsome hunks?
That seems to have been the thinking behind "Universal Soldier," a film whose other objective is to team Jean-Claude Van Damme, the Belgian martial-arts dynamo, with the equally muscle-bound Dolph Lundgren.
Mr.
Lundgren, who glowers his way all too convincingly through the role of a rabid bully, may well be the only man in the universe who can make Mr.
Van Damme look like an actor.
Mr.
Van Damme's job here is to feign blankness and speak in a monotone (not exactly a stretch).
Beginning in Vietnam in 1969, "Universal Soldier" traces the hostile relationship between Luc (Mr. Van Damme) and Scott (Mr. Lundgren), which does not change much even after they kill each other off and are turned into automatons.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Perot Shifts on Homosexuals in Military
Under continuing pressure from homosexual political activist groups, the campaign of undeclared Presidential candidate Ross Perot today made it clear that Mr.
Perot, as President, would unequivocally favor an end to the Government policy that bars homosexuals from serving in the United States military.
While refusing to make a flat commitment that a President Perot would order the reversal of the current Department of Defense policy barring homosexuals from service in the armed forces, Perot campaign officials clearly indicated that Mr.
Perot intended to see that this occurred if he is elected President.


Thompson Retires
DALEY THOMPSON retired from track and field yesterday after his last-minute bid to gain a place on Britain's team for the Barcelona Games ended in failure.
The two-time gold medalist and world record-holder pulled up injured in the first event of a decathlon set up specially for him.


Chip Maker's Net Higher
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. today reported increased sales and earnings for its second quarter, compared with a year earlier, although its results were down from the previous quarter.
It attributed the decline to fierce competition and price-cutting by its chief rival, the Intel Corporation.
For its second quarter, which ended on June 28, Advanced Micro had earnings of $41.1 million, or 43 cents a share, more than twice the $17.3 million, or 17 cents a share, it reported in the period a year earlier.
Sales rose 17.99 percent, to $350.2 million, from $296.8 million in the 1991 quarter.


CBS Knows Bo Knows Its Viewers
BO knew football, alas.
Bo has known baseball, and vows to know it again.
And, of course, Bo knows advertising.
Now, CBS is audaciously trying to convince viewers that Bo also knows enough about television to serve as a sort of critic.
"Bo Knows Shows" is the theme of what CBS executives say is their first on-the-air promotional campaign featuring a celebrity spokesman who endorses the network's programming.
The campaign, which will be introduced with teaser commercials tomorrow, stars Bo Jackson, the professional athlete who has been sidelined in his dual-sport career by a serious hip injury.


Next Stop, Boston


Review/Music; Tchaikovsky Warhorses Are Spurred by Masur
For years, those associated with the New York Philharmonic complained that the orchestra was unfairly judged.
It had to play week in and week out in a problematic hall, the argument went, while other orchestras would hit and run, rehearsing a program to a fare-thee-well and trotting it out in the acoustic luxury of Carnegie Hall to inevitable acclaim.
Yet when the Philharmonic did get a crack at Carnegie under festival conditions, for the reopening of the hall after renovation in 1986 or the centennial celebration in 1991, the result was Philharmonic business as usual.
Philharmonic business has changed drastically over the last year under Kurt Masur.
At the first concert of the orchestra's Tchaikovsky celebration at Carnegie, on Wednesday evening, it was possible for long stretches to shed bad memories and hear the Philharmonic on a par with the great international ensembles that regularly visit the hall.


The Council's Garbage Test
New York's City Council, ever demanding to be taken seriously, has six more weeks to meet a major responsibility or duck.
If it ducks, it will be jeopardizing the city's health and future through cowardice.
The issue is garbage -- what to do with it in a city that produces 26,000 tons every day and is running out of disposal sites.
City Hall has a good, if belated, answer: a long-term plan that includes recycling and construction of a safe waste-to-energy incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard.


Yanks Slam Mariners Early, Then Tremble at the End
Yankee batters were uncertain if they should drool or shudder when facing Randy Johnson of Seattle at the Stadium last night.
Should they be anxious or afraid against the tall Mariners left-hander?
His pitches seemed hittable, but some were headed who knows where.
Swing or duck?
Johnson made it easier on the batters by helping them cobble together a six-run first inning that propelled the Yankees to a 7-6 victory.
There were just two Yankee hits in the inning, four walks, a hit batsman and one huge infield error.
The messy inning was highlghted by catcher Mike Stanley's grand slam and enabled the Yankees to erase a 3-0 deficit.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Looking Back; '88 Campaign Provided Hard Lessons for Gore
He won seven primaries and caucuses.
He was one of only three Democratic contenders still standing after the major Southern contests.
But the most memorable moments from Senator Al Gore's failed bid for President in 1988 were also his most humiliating.
Campaigning before the New York primary, Mr.
Gore aligned himself with then-Mayor Edward I. Koch, but everywhere he went he would cringe as he was overshadowed and overwhelmed by Mr.
Koch's attacks on the other two candidates, Michael S. Dukakis and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.


Art in Review
Group Show Mathew Barney, Sam Reveles, Nancy Rubins  SteinGladstone Gallery 99 Wooster Street SoHo Through July 31
Nancy Rubins, fresh from a well-received sculptural installation in the "Helter Skelter" exhibition at the Temporary Contemporary annex of the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles, is represented here by a huge heap of rusted and dented cylindrical metal heaters bound by wires.
Over the pile are draped long sheets of paper so completely rubbed with pencil that they have a dark metallic sheen.
The piece could be a metaphor for the kind of incandescence art is supposed to generate, and in Ms.
Rubins's case the heat is really there.
The sculpture has the kind of rangy, beetling, powerful presence one associates with Mark di Suvero's work of 20 years ago.


The Art Market
A Rembrandt Leads
The priciest painting in this summer's round of Impressionist, modern, contemporary and Old Master sales in London may be Rembrandt's "Portrait of Johannes Uytten bogaert," which was sold at Sotheby's on Wednesday for $7.94 million to Alfred Bader, a collector from Milwaukee.
That an Old Master painting fetched significantly more than any Impressionist work is not surprising these days.
In fact, compared with Canaletto's "Old Horse Guards, London, From St. James's Park," which was sold at Christie's in April to the composer Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber for $17.7 million, and Titian's "Venus and Adonis," which fetched $13.4 million at Christie's in London in December, the sum is quite small.
Nonetheless, it exceeded Sotheby's $5 million estimate.
"We were very happy," said Julian Stock, who heads Sotheby's Old Masters department in London.
The painting belonged to the Earl of Rosebery, whose family had owned it since the 1860's.


Lifetime Ban for Nilsen?
Shot-putter LARS NILSEN of Norway, a bronze medalist last year at the world championships, faces a lifetime ban from track and field after testing positive for use of banned drugs for a second time, it was reported yesterday.
Nilsen, 27 years old, was suspended from 1987 to 1989 after a doping test showed traces of anabolic steroids.


Not Tuition Rise, a $500 'Quality Fee'
Trenton State College wants to claim its $1 million share of a state fund set up to reward colleges that keep tuition increases low.
But the state says the college is trying to get around tuition guidelines by instituting a new $500 "fee for quality" that will be paid by all full-time students.


New Jersey Trivia Exits the Turnpike
RONALD MAYER and Gerald Tomlinson are tackling a beast that many have failed to conquer: the New Jersey image.
The mild-mannered suburbanites admit it's no small job.
The image -- belching smokestacks, congested highways and toxic dumps -- may rattle New Jerseyans, but it has long tickled the national fancy. (It even grabs the kids. The animated "Toxic Crusaders" defend the citizens of the "last unpolluted town in New Jersey" every Saturday morning.)


Topics of The Times; Footenote
He was a giant of the advertising industry, who helped build one of the world's largest advertising agencies and then went on to lead another.
But Emerson Foote, who died this week at the age of 85, stood tallest on the occasions he risked that career to protect public health.
In 1948, when he was president of the Foote, Cone &amp; Belding agency -- and years before the landmark Surgeon General's report that confirmed the link between smoking and lung cancer -- the outspoken Mr.
Foote terminated the American Tobacco account.
The bold move cost the firm about $12 million, or about a fifth of its total billings.


Review/Film; Bergman's Family Story Of Life Before Ingmar
"The Best Intentions," the epic-length story of a Swedish couple's courtship and marriage, is dominated by an unborn child.
The baby whose arrival is imminent as the film concludes will be Ingmar Bergman, whose screenplay looks back at the social, economic and personal forces that turned his parents' early years together into a tug of war.
Mr.
Bergman's long shadow must be reckoned with in every frame of "The Best Intentions," sometimes because his style exerts so strong an influence over Bille August ("Pelle the Conqueror"), the film's Danish director.
At other times, Mr.
Bergman's fearless vision of the human spirit becomes conspicuous simply because it is missing.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; CLINTON SELECTS SENATOR GORE OF TENNESSEE AS RUNNING MATE
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas today selected Senator Al Gore of Tennessee to join him as his Vice-Presidential running mate when he receives the Democratic nomination for President in New York next week.
In making the much-anticipated announcement on the lawn of the Governor's mansion here, Mr.
Clinton emphasized Mr.
Gore's experience in foreign policy and the environment.
And with their wives and children arrayed behind them in the baking noonday sun, both men spoke of their commitment to family values.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Man in the News; A Man Who Was Raised to Be the President: Albert Arnold Gore Jr.
When he announced last summer that he would not run for President this year, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee said he had too many family responsibilities.
But Mr.
Gore left no doubt about his ultimate ambition.
"I would like to be President," he said.


Big Saudi Bank Assails Fed's Moves Against It
Saudi Arabia's largest bank, the National Commercial Bank, today characterized Federal regulators' moves against it as "devoid of any substance."
On Wednesday the Federal Reserve Board accused the bank and its former head, Sheik Khalid bin Mahfouz, of acting together illegally in buying shares of the First American banks based in Washington, part of what the Fed said had begun as a billion-dollar plan by Sheik Khalid to ultimately gain control of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International and First American.


Mugabe's Aura Fades as Drought Sears Zimbabwe
After enjoying more than a decade of respect at home and abroad, President Robert G. Mugabe is beginning to fit a common profile on the continent: the African leader under fire.
One of the few African countries with a semi-modern economy, Zimbabwe now has an unemployment rate of more than 40 percent, inflation of nearly 40 percent, interest rates of 36 percent and critical food shortages caused as much by bad Government policies as by a devastating drought.


For the People, Kennedy; for Jurors, Kennedy!
It had been 10 minutes, perhaps 20, since Justice Carol Berkman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan began a lecture she had given many times before: Trial by Jury 101.
The bulk of her audience sat in the gallery, about 35 potential jurors, including this reporter, summoned to 100 Centre Street in Manhattan by the Clerk of New York County.
The judge explained such phrases as "fair and impartial" and "beyond a reasonable doubt." Then she introduced the players.
For the people, John F. Kennedy Jr.


Frederic Matys Thursz, Abstract Painter, 62
Frederic Matys Thursz, an abstract painter of monochromatic canvases, died last Saturday at University Hospital in Cologne, Germany.
He was 62 years old and lived in Paris.
He also had a studio in Ossining, N.Y.
He died of complications after heart surgery, said Lilly Wei, an art critic and friend.


Boy Wins Right to Sue Parents for Separation
In a decision that could significantly broaden children's rights if upheld, a juvenile court judge in Orlando ruled today that an 11-year-old boy has the legal right to sue for separation from his parents.
Judge Thomas S. Kirk held that the boy, identified in court papers only as Gregory K., has standing to request that all legal ties to his parents be severed.
He accuses them of abandonment and neglect.
Though a minor, the boy has the same constitutional right to protect his fundamental interests as an adult, Judge Kirk ruled.


Social Comment on Film
Here is a sampling of political films to be shown in the New York metropolitan area during the convention.
Today
INTERNATIONAL FILM FESTIVAL, Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, midtown Manhattan.
A specially programmed series of films with social and political commentary from past Cannes International Film Festivals.
Today: "Hawks and Sparrows," a 1965 comedy about Marxism and the Catholic Church, by Pier Paolo Pasolini, at 2:30 P.M., and "The Fireman's Ball," a 1967 comic film by Milos Forman about universal human insensitivity and stupidity that provoked protests from thousands of Czechoslavak firemen upon its release, at 6 P.M..
Tomorrow: "Maria Candelaria," a 1943 Spanish film by Emilio Fernandez about the misuse of power in a small village, at 2 P.M.
Sunday: "Mother Joan of the Angels," Jerzy Kawlerowicz's 1961 film about religious orthodoxy and liberalism in a Polish convent, at 2 P.M., and "Araya," a 1959 documentary by Margot Benacerraf about a poor community of salt gatherers in Venezeula, at 5 P.M.
All films have English subtitles.
Screenings are included in museum admission: $7.50; $4.50 for students and the elderly; free for children under the age of 16 accompanied by an adult.
The film series runs through July 16.
For the rest of the film schedule, call (212) 708-9480.
Tomorrow


Susie Tompkins Is Leaving A Top Esprit de Corps Post
Esprit de Corps, a leading sportswear company based here, said Wednesday that Susie Tompkins, the co-founder, would step down as creative director, possibly as soon as next month.
Esprit said that Ms.
Tompkins, who is 50 years old, would remain with the company in an undetermined position, and that it was looking for a new creative director.
Esprit is known mostly for its colorful and casual clothes for teen-agers.


Jordan Starts Enforcing Sanctions On Iraqi Trade and Exports of Oil
The Jordanian Government, which has permitted Iraq to export oil and import goods across its border in violation of the United Nations embargo, appears to have ended this trade in the past week, according to Western officials who monitor the traffic.
The decision by Jordan to stop the flow of oil and other goods across the border will further isolate President Saddam Hussein of Iraq and increase the strains on the Iraqi economy.


Texas Gives Harrah One to Remember
Rangers 14, Indians 4
ARLINGTON, Tex., July 9 (AP) -- The Texas Rangers backed Nolan Ryan with a pair of five-run innings tonight in their first game under their interim manager, Toby Harrah.
The result was a 14-4 victory over the Cleveland Indians.
Harrah was named interim manager today after Bobby Valentine was dismissed.
He got off on the right foot as Ryan won his third straight game after an 0-3 start.
Ryan struck out eight and walked two while scattering seven hits in seven innings.
Cleveland starter Scott Scudder (6-8) lasted only one and two-third innings.
He walked the first two batters, then gave up a three-run homer to Ruben Sierra and solo shots to Kevin Reimer and Brian Downing.
Sierra's first-inning home run was his 150th career homer, breaking a tie with Larry Parrish for the club record.
Juan Gonzales singled home two more runs in the second, and Dean Palmer's second grand slam of the season capped another five-run outburst in the fifth.
Texas' Jeff Frye had two hits, scored three times and drove in one run in his major league debut.
He was called up to play second base after Julio Franco went back on the disabled list with a bone bruise in his right knee.
Tigers 5, Angels 4
DETROIT (AP) -- Cecil Fielder, denied an All-Star spot earlier in the day, hit a three-run homer in the first inning tonight that helped Detroit hand California its 11th straight loss.
The 11-game streak is the Angels' longest since a 12-game skid to end the 1988 season.
The victory also extended the Tigers' streak to five.
The game matched two of the oldest pitchers in baseball, 39-year-old Frank Tanana and 41-year-old Bert Blyleven, but neither fared well.
Tanana, in his 19th full major league season, had pitched at least seven innings in five straight starts.
He lasted only five and one-third innings tonight, giving up three runs on six hits and two walks.
But he did get the victory, improving to 8-5.
Blyleven (3-3), now in his 22d season in the majors, made his fourth straight poor start, allowing five runs on nine hits in four innings.
White Sox 10, Red Sox 3
BOSTON (AP) -- Frank Thomas went 4 for 4 with a two-run homer, and George Bell hit a three-run shot in a 17-hit attack as Chicago trounced Boston.
Jack McDowell (12-4), named to the All-Star team earlier in the day, pitched a seven-hitter for his sixth complete game and Chicago's 14th victory in 19 games.
Orioles 4, Twins 2
BALTIMORE (AP) -- Arthur Rhodes, helped by successive Orioles homers to open the game, got his first major league victory as Baltimore beat Minnesota.
Rhodes, recalled from Class AAA Rochester on Wednesday, gave up two runs, six hits, struck out four and walked two in seven and two-third innings against the best-hitting team in baseball.
Alan Mills finished for his first career save.
The Orioles gave the 22-year-old left-hander some early support when Brady Anderson, named to the All-Star team earlier in the day, hit the first pitch from Scott Erickson (6-6) for his 15th homer.
Mike Devereaux followed with his 13th homer.
It was only the 17th time in A.L. history that a team has opened the game with consecutive homers.
The last time was in June 1988 by the Orioles.
Royals 3, Brewers 2
MILWAUKEE (AP) -- Wally Joyner doubled home the winning run and Kevin McReynolds hit his 12th homer of the season in powering Kansas City over Milwaukee.
Blue Jays 4, A's 3
TORONTO (AP) -- Candy Maldonado's two-out, ninth-inning single scored Roberto Alomar, lifting Toronto over Oakland for its eighth straight victory.
It was the A's third consecutive loss.


Restaurants
Josephina is Manhattan's newest and most ambitious health-oriented restaurant -- well, sort of.
True, the kitchen does not fry, eschews most dairy products and serves mountains of crunchy greens and grains that act as little snowplows of the arteries.
Yet you can still get a hamburger at lunch, a fatty Long Island duck at dinner and egg-thickened creme brulee anytime.
One of the agreeable aspects of this sprawling restaurant on Broadway at 63d Street, just across from Lincoln Center, is that the owners do not bludgeon customers with the club of nutrition.
The chef, Louis Lanza, tries to keep cardiovascular bogymen away from the door, but not at the expense of flavor.
Moreover, the upbeat, easygoing staff minimizes the perception that you are doing something good for yourself.


Washington Heights Calm Shattered by Disruptions
An uneasy calm that prevailed yesterday in Washington Heights was shattered last night when a powerful firecracker injured two police officers, including a captain.
In a separate incident, 14 demonstrators were arrested when they confronted officers half an hour later, the police said.
Before the incidents, Washington Heights seemed to breathe easier after five days of violence.
Street vendors were out again in force, peddling flowers, broiled meats and merengue tapes.
Men played dominoes on sidewalks while children pranced through spray from open fire hydrants.


Alberta Jacoby, Film Maker, 80; Lecturer at Yale
Alberta Smith Jacoby, a film maker and lecturer on mental health, died on Wednesday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
She was 80 years old and lived in Guilford, Conn.
She died after a brief illness, her family said.


In Senior Open, Stockton Upstages His Elders
In what he knows is his time of year and what he hopes is the time of his life, Dave Stockton shot out of the blocks today in the first round of his first United States Senior Open.
Stockton, a 50-year-old Senior Tour rookie, rode a hot putter to a four-under-par 67 over the tight and tricky Saucon Valley Country Club course to share the lead with a club professional, Jack Kiefer.


On My Mind; Captive Neighborhood
Democrats and Ross Perot talk of the need for change in the way our governments think and act.
All right.
Washington Heights, in New York, gives them a chance to prove they are capable of doing anything about change except talk.


Plant Expansion Project Near Swamp Is Criticized
Morris County conservationists are calling it the Second Battle of the Great Swamp, and as with so many sequels, the issues are not as clear cut as they were the first time around.
The fight, specifically, is over a request by the Township of Chatham to upgrade the capacity of its sewage-treatment plant, a move that would allow a developer to build a million square feet of prime office space, which would in turn generate millions of tax dollars for the township and school district.
Opponents of the plan say it would pour unmanageable amounts of water into the Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge, 8,000 acres of burbling, chirping and croaking nature less than 20 miles from the unnatural chaos of Manhattan.


Town Rejects Subsidy Plan For Housing
When Diane and Mark Bronzo put their two-bedroom condominium here on the market for $120,000 last spring, there were no takers, although there is a critical demand for "affordable" housing in affluent Westchester County.
After about six months, the Bronzos gave up, got a loan to buy a house in White Plains and rented their unit, as a dozen other frustrated residents in the Woodland Hills garden apartment complex have been forced to do.


'Scud' Remark Draws Rebuke
A police officer in Brooklyn was suspended yesterday for transmitting over a department radio frequency what officials said was an insensitive remark regarding Washington Heights.
The police said a supervisor watched the officer, Frank Albergo, make an unauthorized transmission over a citywide frequency being used to relay messages to police details on riot duty in Washington Heights.
The officer was in the parking lot of the 83d Precinct station house when he made the call at 8:38 P.M. on Tuesday, the police said.


CHRONICLE
It was only hours before her name was announced around the world via satellite yesterday that GRACA SIMBINE MACHEL learned she was one of two winners of the 1992 Africa Prize for Leadership for the Sustainable End of Hunger.
Speaking from her home in Maputo, Mozambique, she said: "My first question was, 'Me?' They said yes, so I said, 'Why me?"
Mrs.
Machel was honored for her work as president of the National Organization of Children of Mozambique, which aids the 250,000 children orphaned by the fighting that has gripped the country since 1976.
She is a former Minister of Education and Culture and the widow of Samora Machel, the first President of Mozambique.


Maradona Eyes France
Argentina's idle soccer star, DIEGO MARADONA, said yesterday that he might continue his professional career in France if the Italian club Naples releases him from his contract.
The 31-year-old World Cup hero, banned from the sport for 15 months for failing a drug test, told a local news agency that after a stint in France he would like to finish with the Buenos Aires first division team Boca Juniors, with which he originally made his name. (Reuter)


Humana May Split Insurance and Hospital Parts
Humana Inc., the big hospital and health insurance company, said yesterday that it might split into two separate businesses, signaling the failure of an integrated health-care strategy that analysts said might have been ahead of its time.
The split would separate the hospital chain, based in Louisville, Ky., from Humana's health maintenance organizations and other group-insurance units, which were supposed to provide a steady, dependable supply of hospital patients.


Constellation Prize: Kelly and Cone Named To the All-Star Squads
Roberto Kelly did not expect to be named to the American League All-Star team.
Not after a torturous, monthlong slump dropped his batting average below .290.
Not with the way Mel Hall was hitting and the way Melido Perez was pitching.
But Kelly, the Yankees' center fielder, was pleasantly surprised and richly rewarded yesterday for his early-season production when he was chosen as the Yankees' only representative for Tuesday night's All-Star Game in San Diego.


Review/Film; A Kiss Turns Into the Unexpected
"Prelude to a Kiss," adapted by Craig Lucas from his successful play and directed by Norman Rene, who directed the stage production, is a contemporary romantic comedy with the heart of a very dark fable.
It's "Beauty and the Beast" with a wicked twist, in which Beauty becomes a beast and it's the prince's love, not Beauty's, that is put to the test.
Peter Hoskins (Alec Baldwin) works in a Chicago publishing house.
Rita Boyle (Meg Ryan) is an aspiring graphics designer who makes her living as a bartender.
A product of a broken home, he is self-aware, solid, comparatively conservative.
Rita, whose parents are loving, eccentric and protective, is a determinedly free spirit.
They meet at a party and, after a brief idyllic affair, decide to marry.


The Splendid Sprinters Fail to Answer the Bell
This should have been the first of the days of the sprinters, who have simply hung on during the climbing and time trials of the Tour de France while awaiting their promised land.
Their preferred terrain is mainly flat, sometimes with a rolling hill or two just far enough from the finish line to allow the sprinters to get to the front and prepare to fight it out.


Natural Gas Vehicle Fleets? An Offer of Free Conversion
To help stimulate the market for natural gas as a vehicle fuel, Mesa Inc. said yesterday that it would convert commercial or government vehicle fleets to natural gas at no charge and install fueling stations.
In exchange, the fleets' owners would contract to buy natural gas from Mesa at a price equal to what gasoline would have cost -- about twice the price of natural gas.
After a typical three-year contract, the fleet owners could buy natural gas at lower prices.


At Home Abroad; Hope Turned to Dust
Even a world inured to television pictures of gaunt famine victims should care about the devastation menacing the southern third of Africa.
Eleven countries, with a population of more than 120 million, are living under a drought previously unknown to the region in its sweep and severity.
The rains that should have started falling last October did not come at all in many places.
The corn that is milled into the area's staple meal never grew.
Lakes have dried up.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY OFFICERS CHARGED IN THEFT AND SALE OF FAKE BAGS
Four New York City police officers and two retired officers were charged with stealing and fencing thousands of counterfeit Chanel handbags seized by the Manhattan District Attorney in February.
B3.
S.I.
GETS BETTER THAN IT GIVES


Some Apt Comedy in Cabarets
The Democratic National Convention is sparking a surge of political comedy in New York clubs.
At the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street, Chelsea), Jim Morris, who made his name in the mid-1980's impersonating Ronald Reagan, is portraying a rogues' gallery of familiar political types.
Well informed and superb at ad-libbing, Mr.
Morris is arguably the smartest and subtlest of the Presidential impersonators whose lineage goes back to Vaughn Meader (John F. Kennedy) and David Frye (Richard M. Nixon).


Now a Money Pit Endangers U.S. Open Construction Plans
The United States Tennis Association's controversial plans to construct a modern site for the United States Open adjacent to the current location at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park are once again in jeopardy.
This time it is financing, rather than site selection or political snafus or architectural details, that is causing dissension over a project whose construction was originally scheduled to begin this year but continues to idle.
Although the project was supposed to reach completion in time for the 1995 Open, the latest forecast is that the tournament will be conducted under "as is" conditions possibly until 1997.
That finding is certain to cause displeasure among the players, who toil under hot, noisy and cramped conditions there at the end of every summer.
They have already voted the 15-year-old Flushing Meadows complex the least amenable of the four Grand Slam sites.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Debut; Mrs. Clinton Introduces Mrs. Gore At Children's Hospital Ceremony
In the first "family values" tableau of the Clinton-Gore ticket, Hillary Clinton took Tipper Gore with her to visit the Arkansas Children's Hospital in Little Rock.
After the two couples and their children had lunch at the Governor's mansion, the candidates' wives left their families and spent half an hour together at a ceremony for Dr.
Betty A. Lowe, a pediatrician who had just become vice president-elect of the American Academy of Pediatrics.


A Curmudgeon Plots His Survival
THERE is no sorrier prospect for true New Yorkers than that of 5,000 politically sclerotic Democratic delegates bivouacking on their turf next week to nominate a candidate known to all and to argue about a platform as binding on the party as eels on Teflon.
Couldn't a more useful group of conventioneers be lured here, like teamsters, who could truck produce from the Bronx to Queens, or accountants, who could teach Mayor Dinkins how to file his income tax forms by April 15?
Surely, we could continue the decline of Western civilization on our own without getting any unwelcome help from outsiders.


Quotation of the Day
"I think you can say that the Latin American debt crisis is no longer a crisis." -- PAUL A. VOLCKER.  [ A1:2. ]


If You're Hungry For Still More Politics
Here are some convention-related events, open to the public, in New York City. Today
EMPIRE STATE BUILDING, 34th Street at Fifth Avenue, Manhattan.
The top of the building will be a beacon of red, white and blue light through July 26.
In addition, volunteers from the 34th Street Partnership will be on the 86th floor observatory Monday through Thursday from 6 to 9 P.M. during the convention week to point out spots of interest.
Observatory admission: $3.50; $1.75 for the elderly and children under 12.
Information: (212) 736-3100.


Ex-Envoy Calls Indictment 'a Shock'
Former United States Ambassador Sam H. Zakhem, a native of Lebanon whose wealthy father disinherited him for emigrating to America, often said that he gave up a fortune for the love of his adopted country.
Mr.
Zakhem's patriotism, along, no doubt, with his efforts to raise money for conservative political causes, helped to earn him the appointment as Ambassador to Bahrain by President Reagan in 1986.


Transactions
Baseball American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Claimed Pat Clements, pitcher, on waivers from the San Diego Padres.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed John Orton, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Ken Oberkfell, infielder, from Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Placed Dave Nilsson, catcher, on 15-day disabled list.
Recalled John Jaha, infielder, from Denver of the American Association.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Fired Bobby Valentine, manager.
Named Toby Harrah interim manager.
Placed Julio Franco, infielder, on 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Jeff Frye, infielder, from Oklahoma City of the American Association.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Acquired Tom Bolton, pitcher, from the Boston Red Sox for Billy Hatcher, outfielder.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Placed Francisco Oliveras, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Pat Rapp, pitcher, from Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.
Designated Dave Masters, catcher, for reassignment.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Signed Kevin Lynch, guard. Football  National Football League
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Selected Dave Brown, quarterback, in the NFL supplemental draft.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Agreed to terms with Mark Wheeler, nose tackle.
Arena Football League
CINCINNATI ROCKERS -- Signed Bruce Lasane, wide receiver-defensive back.
TAMPA BAY STORM -- Signed Winfred Bryant, lineman.


Officers Arrested in Theft of Chanel Bags
Four New York City police officers and two retired ones were charged yesterday with stealing and then fencing thousands of counterfeit Chanel handbags that had been seized by the Manhattan District Attorney in February.
The handbags were seized as part of a crackdown on black-market counterfeits of Chanel handbags that, if legitimate, would cost from $100 to more than $1,000 in stores.
The handbags were seized at four Manhattan sites and most of them were destined for street vendors who sold them for $30 to $50.


COMPANY BRIEFS
SEARS, ROEBUCK &amp; CO., Chicago, hired Neil Hartigan, a former Illinois Attorney General, as an adviser on issues relating to Sears Auto Centers.
STOP &amp; SHOP COMPANIES completed the sale of its about 11 million shares of Bradlees Inc. to underwriters led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. and received net proceeds of about $135 million.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Alice Bennett Dunnington, a Government intelligence officer in World War II, identified a daughter incorrectly.
She is Alexandra Whelen Sears of Lima, Peru.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; AGAIN, PEROT ADDS TO PRESS OPERATION
Apologizing to reporters for a second time this week, a top aide to Ross Perot said today that the Presidential campaign organization was beefing up its press operation.
Thomas W. Luce 3d, chairman of the Perot Petition Committee, today announced the hiring as a press liaison of Elizabeth Maas, a public relations specialist who has worked for Republican candidates.
The Perot campaign has been criticized for slow response to reporters' inquiries.
Ms.
Maas's job will be to direct questions to the proper person in the organization.


INSIDE
Breach of Budget Act Voted
The House voted to crack barriers of the 1990 budget law by shifting $400 million in spending from foreign aid to transportation.
Page A12.
Israeli Victor Forms Coalition
Yitzhak Rabin formed a coalition for a new government committed to progress in peace talks.
Page A3.
Eric Sevareid Is Dead
The radio war correspondent who became television's premier commentator was 79 years old.
Page D16.


A New Fight on an Old Environmental Battleground in New Jersey


Why Is Public Transit In New York a Mess?
To the Editor:
"The Subways Need Albany, Too" (editorial, June 19) gives "warm praise" to Peter Stangl, chairman of New York's Metropolitan Transportation Authority, for devising a five-year plan, central to which is monthly discount passes by 1994 for bus and subway riders.
How can this be considered bold when every other major city in the United States and Europe has had such passes for more than 10 years?
And once they decided to act, those cities soon had simple and effective programs functioning, not waiting years to install a high-tech boondoggle, as the M.T.A. is doing.


Continental Takes Offer By Investor
Continental Airlines took a big step in pulling itself out of bankruptcy yesterday by agreeing to accept a $350 million investment from Charles E. Hurwitz, a controversial Houston entrepreneur, in exchange for a majority stake in the company.
Executives familiar with Continental's attempt to reorganize under bankruptcy laws -- and who spoke only on condition that they not be identified -- said that Continental was also close to reaching an agreement with the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation over $700 million in underfunded pension liabilities it inherited from Eastern Airlines, once its sister company under its former parent, the Texas Air Corporation.


At the Bar; By Enabling His Parents to Die at Their Home, a Son is Forced to Fight For His Own
"Come ti senti oggi?" Michael Mattioli asked his father. "How do you feel today?"
But as Joseph Mattioli nears his 104th birthday, he can no longer reply.
His thoughts, if any, are surely on the blessedness of death.
So, too, are his son's.


CYCLING: Biking in the U.S.A. -- Day 31; Riding the Rails
Of all the roadways this bicycle trek has covered so far, the most unusual were the Wisconsin Bike Trails that we sampled this week.
A result of the national "rails-to-trails" movement, these special routes are located on the paths of abandoned railroad lines.
Local volunteers have laid down packed limestone in place of the tracks, making them safe for cycling, hiking or just strolling.


Review/Film; Russian Madame Bovary: Familiar But No Imitation
"The film is the child of literature and not the father. It will never be able to replace the silent and private dialogue between reader and book."
So says Aleksandr Sokurov, the director of the astonishing 1989 Russian film "Save and Protect," inspired by but not slavishly adapted from "Madame Bovary." "Save and Protect," which was shown this year in a Sokurov retrospective at the Walter Reade Theater, opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.


Law Protects Privacy On Cellular Phones
To the Editor:
"Political Eavesdropping Made Easier" (Business Day, June 23) points out that cellular telephone conversations at the Democratic National Convention, which begins in New York's Madison Square Garden on July 13, can be listened in on by certain radio scanners.
You fail to make explicit that intentionally intercepting cellular telephone conversations for any reason is a crime.


British Investment Agency Criticized in Maxwell Case
Britain's Securities and Investments Board severely criticized regulators today for failing to detect irregularities at the investment-management firms accused of having played a central role in the Maxwell scandal.
The serious weaknesses at the Investment Management Regulatory Organization exposed by the scandal show that the British financial-services industry's system of self-regulation must be strengthened significantly, Andrew Large, the securities board's chairman, said at a news conference here.


For Children
'Re-electing George . . . Washington, That Is'
Fraunces Tavern Museum  54 Pearl Street (at Broad Street)  Lower Manhattan  (212) 425-1778  Recommended ages: 7 and up  Through Dec. 4
This mini-exhibition in a corner of the Revolutionary War museum lets visitors consider the Presidential qualities (or lack thereof) of four candidates for a restaged 1792 election: George Washington, George Clinton (the first Governor of New York), King George III of England and John Adams.
The exhibition observes the 200th anniversary of Washington's re-election.
Although he was the popular candidate, he himself was unsure if he wanted to be President again.


A Fitful Pas de Deux; Talks in South Africa, While Stalled, Shift From Table to the Public Arena
Cyril Ramaphosa, the former leader of South Africa's black mine workers, likes to recall the time he showed up for a crucial round of contract talks accompanied by a small platoon of miners and insisted that they be seated as part of his delegation.
Mr.
Ramaphosa's breach of protocol infuriated the white mine owners, he says, but it worked.
Somehow the glower of 50 burly mine workers tended to keep the negotiators' focus on the central issues.
And afterward Mr.
Ramaphosa had 50 extra witnesses to help assure his rank and file that he had extracted the best deal possible.


June Retail Sales Sputtered; Big Chains Posted 3.1% Rise
Retail sales in June continued to limp along at an uninspired pace, failing to give merchants a clear indication of what their prospects will be later this year.
Shoppers punished apparel retailers like Limited Inc. and the Filene's Basement Corporation, spending instead at discounters like the Caldor Corporation and the Dollar General Corporation, which posted double-digit sales increases.


Suffolk Budget Deficit Is Slashed To $50 Million, Gaffney Says
The Suffolk County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, announced today that a re assessment of the county's deficit showed it was not $91 million in the red.
Instead, he said, the hole was around $50 million.
Mr.
Gaffney said that the gap in the county's $1.3 billion budget had been cut nearly in half because the county got more money from the state to cover Department of Social Services payments as well as an advance in sales tax revenue, while its payments to retirees were less than expected.


BRAZIL AND BANKS REACH AGREEMENT ON REDUCING DEBT
Brazil, the largest debtor in the developing world, and its creditor banks agreed yesterday on a series of steps to reduce its $44 billion debt and provide the country with lower interest rates and new longer-term loans.
For Brazil the agreement, which will cut its debt by billions of dollars, is crucial to its Government's effort to liberalize its economy, attract foreign investment and stabilize prices.


As State After State Resumes Executions, U.S. Death-Penalty Law Is Still in Limbo
It may be some small comfort to David Ronald Chandler that when Congress finally passed death penalty legislation in 1988, it neglected to specify just how a Federal execution should be carried out.
Mr.
Chandler, a 39-year-old former construction worker from Piedmont, Ala., was convicted under a Federal law in a murder tied to his marijuana ring and is the only prisoner on Federal death row.
His solitary status, and the legal limbo in which he is caught, have come to stand for the stalemate between the Bush Administration and Congress in approving comprehensive, effective death penalty legislation.


Art in Review
'National Showcase'  Alternative Museum 594 Broadway, (near Houston Street) SoHo Through Aug. 1
Although the works of the 46 artists chosen for this "National Showcase" have their ups and downs, they make for an absorbing exhibition in which politically oriented art predominates.
Images of nature under threat recur.
John Wells's "Terravision" has a tiny video of whales set in a home aquarium.
Andrev Veljkovic's "Remember Alaska" consists of hundreds of oranges painted with a black oil varnish and illuminated by votive candles as a reminder of the fouling of Prince William Sound by the oil spill from the Exxon Valdez tanker.
Steven Rotter's photographic close-ups of mollusks extracted from their shells creates monsters out of these harmless creatures.
Their vulnerable forms are pointedly balanced by Clifford LeCuyer's "Demons," dangerous-looking insect shapes cut out of photos of body builders' torsos.


Private-Sector Grants Given For a New Breed of Schools
Grants were awarded today by a private foundation set up by business leaders last year at the request of President Bush to finance a "new generation" of American schools.
Awards went to 11 design teams, including two New York-based groups.
The number was far fewer than the 20 to 30 grants the group had originally anticipated giving out by spring 1992, although officials denied that this was the result of the foundation's raising less money than anticipated.


Music in Clubs: African, Brazilian, Caribbean and On Through the Alphabet
In New York City, a music club can mean a soapbox and a microphone or a million-dollar sound-and-light setup; there's something for every taste, constituency, pocketbook and haircut.
For residents, summer tourists and conventioneers, here's a list of clubs that could exist only in New York City -- some where communities gather, some where worlds collide.
Rock and More
S.O.B.'s , 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, SoHo (212) 243-4940.
With tropical greenery painted on the walls and pillars, African instruments mounted above the stage, and garlicky food emerging from the kitchen, S.O.B.'s (originally Sounds of Brazil) announces its loyalty to music from Africa, the Caribbean, Brazil and their New York kin.
It's a place where preppy lawyers dance alongside Senegalese entrepreneurs and ex-hippies.
Tonight, the South African trumpeter Hugh Masekela leads a group that moves between light pop-jazz and pieces that pick up the rolling rhythms of South African mbaqanga.
Shows are at 11 P.M. and 1 A.M; tickets are $16.
Tomorrow night brings Arrow, the soca singer from Montserrat whose skill at fusing soca with salsa, reggae, funk and other rhythms has made him an international hit maker ("Hot Hot Hot").
Shows are at 11 P.M. and 1 A.M.; admission is $16.


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
"Burning Tongue," poetry by Adrian Castro, a Cuban poet from Miami, followed by Steve Cannon, Pedro Pietri, Dennis Jiron, John Farris and Ed Lehman, with Bob Holman as host.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
LECTURES AND WALKS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"The Streets Where We Lived," a multi-ethnic heritage walking tour of the lower East Side, including Little Italy and Chinatown, Sunday at noon, followed at 2 P.M. by "Vaudeville Vagabonds," a walking tour concentrating on the neighborhood's theatrical heritage.
Separate admission is required for each event.
Lecture tickets: $4.
Walking tours: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 431-0233.


F.C.C. Devising Plan to License Future Phones
In a step toward authorizing a new generation of pocket-sized telephones and hand-held computers that communicate over the air, the Federal Communications Commission is drawing up a plan to award a handful of nationwide and regional radio licenses for "personal communication services."
The plan, drafted by agency staff and expected to be considered by the full commission next Thursday, would essentially establish the ground rules for companies seeking to relay voice and data signals for advanced portable telephones, two-way paging devices, palm-sized computers and electronic organizers.
Wide- Ranging Advances
The new phones are expected to be similar to the smallest cellular phones in use today, which weigh about half a pound.
But they would need much less power, freeing them from the need to be recharged every two hours, and they are expected to be less expensive.
Also, the new networks are expected to offer much greater capacity for transmitting substantial amounts of data in many different forms.


Executive Changes
ANN TAYLOR INC., New York, appointed Andrea Weiss senior vice president and director of stores.
COLEMAN WATER SPORTS GROUP, New York, a unit of MacAndrews &amp; Forbes Holdings Inc. involved in the recreation business, named George Napier president and chief executive.


Reds-Red Sox Trade
The Cincinnati Reds acquired left-hander TOM BOLTON yesterday from the Boston Red Sox for outfielder BILLY HATCHER.


Maxwell M. Small, 76, Brookhaven Manager
Maxwell M. Small, a retired administrator at Brookhaven National Laboratory, died on July 1 at his home in Bellport, L.I.
He was 76 years old and died of congestive heart failure, his family said.
In his 19 years at Brookhaven, Mr.
Small held a number of posts, including assistant to the director, construction manager for the three-billion-electron-volt proton accelerator, business manager, plant engineering and planning manager, and special projects manager.


Pirates Still Can't Solve Reds
Reds 5, Pirates 2
CINCINNATI, July 9 (AP) -- Barry Larkin's two-run double broke an eighth-inning tie tonight and let the Cincinnati Reds extend their mastery of Pittsburgh with a 5-2 victory over the slumping Pirates.
The Reds have won the last five games between the division leaders, including a four-game sweep in Pittsburgh last weekend, to take a 6-3 lead in the season series.
Scott Bankhead (9-2) pitched out of a scoring threat in the eighth to get his team-high ninth victory, and Norm Charlton pitched the ninth for his 21st save.
Cincinnati has won seven of eight over all and 12 of 16 to strengthen its six-week grip on first place in the National League West.
Pittsburgh has lost six of eight.
Before the game, Reds reliever Rob Dibble dropped the appeal of his latest suspension and will sit out the four-game series.
Dibble and outfielder Glenn Braggs were suspended for four games for charging on to the field to fight the Houston Astros on June 24.
Braggs' suspension is on hold pending his appeal to the National League president, Bill White.
Braves 2, Cubs 0
CHICAGO (AP) -- Mark Lemke's two-run triple in the 12th inning broke a scoreless tie as Atlanta beat Chicago.
David Justice walked leading off the 12th and Brian Hunter sacrificed him to second.
Greg Olson also walked before Lemke lined a triple into the right-field corner off reliever Jim Bullinger (0-2).
Expos 6, Giants 5
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) -- Marquis Grissom scored on third baseman Matt Williams's error in the 12th inning as Montreal beat San Francisco, snapping the Giants' five-game winning streak.
It was the Expos' seventh game in four days, following three consecutive doubleheaders in Los Angeles.
Dodgers 2, Cardinals 1
LOS ANGELES (AP) -- Ramon Martinez blanked St.
Louis on three hits over eight innings as the Dodgers beat Cardinals pitcher Bob Tewksbury (9-3).
Martinez (5-6) limited the Cardinals to singles by Tim Jones in the fifth, Tom Pagnozzi in the seventh and Ray Lankford in the eighth.
The Dodgers broke a scoreless tie in the sixth after Tewksbury had retired the first two batters.
Brett Butler reached base with his 23d bunt single of the season and scored on singles by Lenny Harris and Eric Davis.
The Dodgers got the winning run in the seventh when Dave Hansen singled, took third on a single by Mike Scioscia and scored when Felix Jose fumbled the ball.
Padres 3, Phillies 1
SAN DIEGO (AP) -- Left-hander Jim Deshaies joined the Padres in time to end their five-game losing streak, and Dan Walters and Jerald Clark hit consecutive homers in the second inning as San Diego beat Philadelphia.
Deshaies (1-0) had his contract purchased from Class AAA Las Vegas earlier in the day to fill in for the injured Dave Eiland.


Festival Featuring Hip-Hop Dancing
When the hip-hop choreographer Jamale Graves brings his troupe of dancers to the stage of Alice Tully Hall tomorrow night as part of Lincoln Center's Serious Fun festival, it will be a turning point in the evolution of urban street dance.
Break dancing, a genre that is struggling for respectability after having nearly been exploited to death as a commercial fad, is being officially blessed by Lincoln Center, which has commissioned Mr.
Graves's newest work.
Sharing the bill with his dancers on a program titled "Mo' Moves," are the Rhythm Technicians and Rock Steady Crew, two groups of young hip-hop dancers that joined forces last year to put on a musical, "So! What Happens Now," which won favorable notice when it was performed at Performance Space 122 in the East Village.


Market Place; Reading the Candidates And Reading the Dow
Buy stocks, unless you think Ross Perot is going to be so strong as to upset the apple cart and significantly affect the election.
Or unless you think a new recession will have begun by Election Day.
That, at any rate, is one way to read the history of the stock market and Presidential election campaigns.
In this country, there has been no better time to own stocks than in the last half of an election year.
On average since 1900, the Dow Jones industrial average has risen 10.4 percent during such periods.


A Legislator Is Challenging Sen. Marino
Days after the legislative session in Albany ended in discord and disarray, the Republican Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, got some more bad news, at home: He is facing his first significant Democratic challenger in years.
At a news conference yesterday in his campaign headquarters in Huntington, L.I., a popular three-term Suffolk County Legislator, James F. Gaughran, announced he was taking on Mr.
Marino, one of the most powerful officials in the state, in a campaign against "clubhouse politics."


Don't Liken Us to Serbs, Say the Uneasy Croats
The Croatian Government is laboring to shore up what has been the country's main line of defense: an international image of being an outgunned David struggling against a Serbian Goliath.
The impression of Croatia as a victim of aggression with no territorial designs on anyone has been energetically and for the most part convincingly projected here.


CHRONICLE
Sir IAN McKELLEN, who has taken his Richard III from New York to the Kennedy Center in Washington, crawled out of a sick bed on Wednesday to address members of the National Press Club at a luncheon at the group's headquarters.
He skipped the reception in his honor and the roast lamb that followed.
But with the bravura of a pro, the actor kept his audience enthralled for an hour as he perched on a stool and commented on everything from gay rights in Britain to Shakespeare and method acting.


New Airline Goes To Gianettino
Gianettino &amp; Meredith Advertising has been named by Kiwi International Air Lines to provide the start-up airline with consumer and trade advertising and marketing campaigns.
In a telephone interview yesterday, Ron Gianettino Sr., the agency's chairman and chief executive in Short Hills, N.J., said his agency had been awarded the account without a formal review.
He declined to disclose billings, but said the campaigns for the Newark-based airline would carry the theme "More experience for a better experience."


East Side, West Side, History Abounds
WASHINGTON, the city, has the Lincoln Bedroom, the Jefferson Memorial and the Theodore Roosevelt Bridge.
But New York is where Washington, the man, was sworn in for his first term, where Thomas Jefferson brainstormed what would become the Democratic Party and where not one but two Oval Office Roosevelts came from.
New York, where the Democratic National Convention begins on Monday at Madison Square Garden, has seen the bandwagons come and go.
It has seen smoke-filled rooms come and go, too: nowadays the only places where smoking is legal inside the Garden are by the escalators.
The history books show that this is the fifth Democratic conclave to be held here.
The first was in 1868 at Tammany Hall -- in those days a place, not just a machine-politics mentality -- and the standard-bearer was Horatio Seymour.
The last was in 1980, when President Jimmy Carter was running for a second term.
Both times, the nominated-in-New-York candidates lost.


Art in Review
Regina Silveira LedisFlam Gallery B584 Broadway (near Houston Street) SoHo Through Sept. 13
The first New York gallery show of Regina Silveira, a Brazilian artist who has exhibited widely in South America, traces the evolution of an installation piece titled "Simile: Office 2." It starts with a series of rough drawings in which the artist progressively distorts the forms of office furniture -- a desk, a cabinet, some chairs, a couch -- giving them an exaggerated perspectival effect that converts them into nearly unrecognizable forms.
These forms are then outlined, much enlarged, on a wall-size sheet of paper, where they create a dizzying spatial warp.
The viewer may search for the point from which the room and its contents resume a logical perspective, but it's more fun to enjoy the image as is, which means giving in to the illusion that one is floating far above the scene, looking down.


Leading Executive Resigns From Subaru of America
Thomas R. Gibson, the president and chief operating officer of Subaru of America Inc., resigned unexpectedly today to head a Philadelphia company that manages arenas, stadiums and convention centers.
Until two years ago, Mr.
Gibson, who is 49 years old, had been the No. 2 executive at Subaru of America.
But the chairman and chief executive officer, Harvey H. Lamm, was asked to resign in September 1990 in a reorganization by Subaru's parent company, Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd. of Japan.


Bangkok Journal; A Tall Order: To March the Soldiers Out of Politics
The phone started ringing in the Bangkok home of Anand Panyarachun minutes after the shooting began.
Mr.
Anand, then a private citizen, now the caretaker Prime Minister, said he listened as callers told him how soldiers had opened fire on democracy demonstrators on the streets of the Thai capital.


Gooden and Mets Feel Chill of Shutout No. 11
The season of shutouts stretches on for the Mets.
The total is 11, and it includes the strange, the heartbreaking, the predictable, the embarrassing and the back-to-back.
Labels for tonight's addition?
Call it inexcusable.
Call it pathetic.
Call it, if the fatalism has become too much, inevitable.


Review/Theater; Shakespeare In the Park, Funny, Free But a Bit Wet
In the Forest of Arden, it is love that flowers above all else.
But when the New York Shakespeare Festival opened its 30th-anniversary season on Wednesday night with "As You Like It" as the 20th presentation of its Shakespeare Marathon, love -- like the trees and greenery of Central Park that frame the Delacorte Theater -- bloomed in the rain.
The steady downpour that began shortly before the intermission and continued through the evening could dampen neither the spirit of the comedy nor of a cast determined to give the work at hand and the huddled audience their due.
This was an occasion when the decision was surely made: The play must go on.


A Torch Passes in Little Rock
When Gov.
Bill Clinton introduced Senator Al Gore as his running mate yesterday, Mr.
Gore stressed that it was time for a new generation of leaders to replace those he said had run out of energy and ideas.
The Democratic candidates, both in their mid-40's, do indeed present a youthful contrast to George Bush and Ross Perot, both in their 60's.
But more important than any age difference are the historical forces that have shaped this younger generation of political leaders, the first to be born and grow to maturity after World War II.
Certainly, people become who they are through unique, individual experiences.
But it's also clear that Governor Clinton and Senator Gore are a cohort apart from previous political generations, just as those in the Kennedy Administration stood apart from the men who dominated politics before them.
They came of age through the same nation-shaping events.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon.
Closing This Weekend


Secession Study Finds Cost High For Staten I.
Staten Island gets more in city services than it pays in taxes and would face a $170 million budget shortfall if it seceded from New York City, a state commission found in a report released yesterday.
And residents of an independent Staten Island would face a 60 percent rise in property taxes to offset the budget gap, city officials said after the report was released.


Newest Storm in Nicaragua: Anti-Gay Law
Nicaragua's largely traditional Catholicism has clashed with secular, modern reality after the National Assembly, as part of a reform of the penal code, strengthened the existing law against engaging in homosexuality in a "scandalous" manner.
Gay rights groups, in Nicaragua and abroad, have condemned the legislation and demanded that President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro veto it.


Convention Costs Keep Going Up and Away
Three days before the Democratic National Convention opens, the costly reality of putting on a show in New York City has sunk in.
The bid for blowing up the balloons that will be dropped from the ceiling in Madison Square Garden was $30,000 -- 50 cents a balloon -- so the Democrats recruited 50 volunteers to get the job done for nothing.


Regards From Broadway
Here is the maddening quandary of the would-be Broadway playgoer at the Democratic National Convention: how to attend delegates' sessions every night while managing to conduct a democratic sampling of plays and musicals?
Broadway itself has mounted the largest collaborative theatrical event in its history to solve this problem.
On Wednesday Times Square will be closed to traffic starting at 11:30 A.M. for the presentation of a free, hour-and-a-quarter-long theatrical extravaganza, "Broadway on Broadway."


Gay Pride Parents
To the Editor:
My wife and I marched in our Gay Pride parade in New York City on Sunday, June 28.
We had intended to be only spectators, but when we saw a few elderly people walking behind a banner that said "Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays," we decided to join them although we are not members of their organization.


Gunmen in Flatbush Wound 3 at Corner
Two men climbed out of a car and began firing on a Brooklyn street corner where more than a dozen children were playing double dutch and cooling off in an open fire hydrant about 8 P.M. yesterday, the police and witnesses said.
By the time the shooting stopped, a 19-year-old youth, the gunmen's apparent target, had been critically wounded by a gunshot to the head, a 5-year-old girl had been hit in the leg and a 30-year-old man had been hit in the arm, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


Mexican Observers Say State Elections Are Unfair
On the eve of two important state elections, a coalition of Mexican observer groups said today that the process would be neither free nor fair.
The charge, made in a statement published in Mexico City newspapers, follows opposition complaints that the voting scheduled for Sunday will again be marred by irregularities.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days: President Bush
TODAY: 7 P.M., PBS,interview on the "MacNeil-Lehrer News Hour." (Channel 13 in New York.)  Vice President Quayle
TODAY: 5-6:30 P.M., C-Span, interview with Rush Limbaugh on "Road to the White House."


Immune Cells Are Taught to Kill a Virus
In a remarkable manipulation of the human immune system, researchers have trained white blood cells to protect patients against a particular viral infection.
The investigators transfused the white cells into five patients with bone-marrow transplants and found that the cells remained alive and able to kill virus-infected cells for at least 12 weeks.
The cells came from the donors of the bone marrow, so they were compatible with each recipient's newly acquired immune system, which is derived from the cells of the bone marrow.


Treasury Securities Prices Turn Up
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher yesterday, after being down for much of a fairly active session.
Rumors that a report from the Federal Reserve would show greater weakness in money supply than had been expected seemed to spark the market's turn, traders said.
But other factors were also at work.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; POLL SHOWS 3 PRESIDENTIAL CONTENDERS CLOSE
The Presidential contest remains a three-way dead heat, according to the latest NBC News/Wall Street Journal Poll.
Thirty-three percent of 1,105 registered voters nationwide preferred Ross Perot, while 31 percent favored President Bush, and 28 percent backed Gov.
Bill Clinton.
The telephone poll, taken Sunday through Tuesday, had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis; Behind Clinton's Choice
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas has set himself a mighty task: nothing less than the rejuvenation of the Democratic Party.
That was confirmed today by his choice of a running mate.
For more than a decade, Mr.
Clinton has been arguing that his party must change or die, because the country has changed.
His selection of Senator Al Gore of Tennessee is designed to exemplify that change and to help banish the crippling image of the Democrats as a tired collection of squabbling special-interest groups.


Council Postpones Action on Garbage Plan
With a majority of New York City Council members pledged to oppose the Dinkins administration's long-range plan for garbage disposal, Council leaders yesterday pushed through a monthlong extension of a deadline to give them time to reach a compromise with the administration.
In effect, the 48-to-0 vote for the extension sent the city's carefully crafted plan for disposing of the city's garbage over the next 20 years back to the drawing board.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about Sean O'Keefe, the new Acting Navy Secretary, misstated the date of the picture.
It was taken in March.


PITNEY BOWES ESTIMATES FIRST-YEAR SALES OF SYSTEM
Pitney Bowes Inc., which began selling its new Paragon mail handling system in the United States last week, said it expected the mail processor to generate $100 million in revenues during its first year.
The system, priced at $19,995, is designed to be used in tandem with the company's $23,295 addressing and printing unit, introduced last fall, and a new unit for stuffing envelopes and other mail-handling tasks that will reach market later this year.
Together, the three units will automate 96 percent of the most common mailroom activities, the company said.


Diner's Journal
A Partner Leaves
Wayne Nish, the chef and owner of March at 405 East 58th Street in Manhattan, has severed his ties with the Supper Club, a nightclub in the Edison Hotel, 240 West 47th Street.
Mr.
Nish, who was in charge of the food there, was the partner of Jean de Noyer, who also owns Le Comptoir on the Upper East Side.
"It just wasn't working the way we had planned," Mr.
Nish said.
"There were so many cutbacks in the kitchen that there was little left." Mr. de Noyer said the club had been designed to feed up to 1,000 patrons nightly.
"Obviously, that hasn't happened," he said.
"We need a chef who feels comfortable serving 100 meals a night and then doing big banquets on occasion." The new chef is Patricia Williams, who worked with Mr.
Nish at the Supper Club and before that as executive chef at the Hotel Macklowe in Manhattan.
The Changing Scene
OPEN: Carmine's, 200 West 44th Street, Manhattan, (212) 221-3800, an Italian restaurant specializing in lumberjack portions of Italian food.
It is a branch of the standing-room-only original at 2450 Broadway, near 90th Street.
Reservations are accepted only for groups of six or more. . . .
Trio's Forbidden Bar and Grill, 936 Second Avenue, at 50th Street, mid-Manhattan, (212) 888-6677, owned by Wally and Jimmy Chin, who own the Chinese restaurant Chin Chin on East 49th Street, and their nephew Ming Chin.
Trio's, which serves until 2:30 A.M. daily except Sunday night (1 A.M.), has a 40-foot green marble cold food bar as well as a wide range of Chinese barbecue entrees. . . .
Snaps, 230 Park Avenue, at 46th Street, in the Helmsley Building, (212) 949-7878, a Scandinavian restaurant owned by Aquavit on West 54th Street..
CLOSED: Maurice, the 11-year-old restaurant in the Parker Meridien Hotel, at 118 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
"Some new food-and-beverage outlet will probably go in there, but we don't yet know what it would be," said the hotel's public-relations director, Rachel Spasser.


Hunger Ebbs in Sarajevo, but Fear of Serbs Rises
As the United States and other Western nations continue to debate ways of protecting and expanding the United Nations relief effort to this besieged city, Sarajevans are thinking less about their hunger than about the risk that the city will be captured by the Serbian forces attacking it.
President Bush's meeting today in Helsinki with Alija Izetbegovic, the Bosnian President, followed a stiff statement from the Group of Seven summit meeting in Munich, in which Mr.
Bush and other leaders vowed to take whatever military action necessary to protect the United Nations relief effort here.  [ Page A6. ]


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Wednesday about a Manhattan parade of participants in Op Sail misidentified the marchers shown.
They were Chileans from the training ship Esmeralda, not Argentines.


European Envoy to Ask Balkan Leaders to Talks
The European Community's chief negotiator for Yugoslavia said today that he would invite the leaders of the three competing sides from Bosnia and Herzegovina for a fresh round of peace talks in London.
Offering a gloomy assessment of the civil war that has besieged Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, Lord Carrington warned after meeting with the Security Council that he was not optimistic about finding an easy and lasting solution for the divided country.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; Where the 'Soft Money' Comes From
Wall Street and the oil and gas industries have been the largest contributors to the Democratic and Republican parties in the current election cycle, followed by the insurance, tobacco and real estate industries, according to a new study published today.
The study, by the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonpartisan research group based in Washington, provides the first detailed breakdown of the sources of more than $43 million -- $31.7 million for the Republicans and $11.5 million for the Democrats -- in contributions that have flowed to the parties from January 1991 through the end of May this year.
Its conclusions confirmed an axiom of American politics: The most heavily regulated corporations are the most generous.


Restaurant Tipping: Many Fingers Make Light Pockets
Visitors to New York City -- and many residents alike -- at times find restaurant tipping as baffling as trying to read a subway map on a lurching train.
In the city's finer (read expensive) establishments, diners may have to take into account a maitres d'hotel, captains, waiters and busboys, as well as sommeliers and the person at the coat check.
The system is not as complicated as it appears, though.
For one thing, establishments with highly stratified service systems are increasingly rare in this era of belt tightening and shrinking profit margins.
Most common today are dining rooms with waiters, captains and busboys, with perhaps the owner in attendance.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The South; New Southern Strategy: Democrats Want It Back
Even with two Southerners on the national ticket, it is not at all clear whether the Democrats can break the Republican stranglehold on a South that has dominated Presidential politics for the past two decades.
But by naming Senator Al Gore of Tennessee as his running mate on Thursday, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas has raised the stakes throughout the region where the Democrats have been trounced every year since 1968, except when Jimmy Carter won the Presidency in 1976.


Dr. Joanna Sher, 59, A Neuropathologist
Dr.
Joanna Hollenberg Sher, a professor of clinical pathology at the State University of New York Health Science Center in Brooklyn, died on July 4 at Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn.
She was 59 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
Dr. Sher died of cancer, said her son, Jonathan.


Lunches at $19.92 Put 4 Stars In Eyes of New York Diners
Restaurant fever struck New York with a vengeance this week, leaving maitres d'hotel, owners and chefs breathless in a deluge of requests for reservations.
"It is bordering on hysteria," Barry Wine, owner of the four-star Quilted Giraffe, said yesterday as he contemplated the sudden demand that resulted from announcements that his restaurant, along with some 100 others in New York City, would offer lunch for $19.92 next week during the Democratic National Convention.
The restaurant normally charges $45.


Homosexuality to Be a Burning Catholic Issue; Orthodox Deaconesses
To the Editor:
I read "As Bishops Meet, Catholics Voice Differences With Church's Doctrines" (news article, June 19), on the debate over women clergy in the Roman Catholic Church, with great interest and some glee.


Executive Changes
ARKLA INC., Little Rock, Ark., a natural gas company, appointed Dan Dienstbier president, chief operating officer and board member.
FUNDAMENTAL BROKERS INC., New York, appointed James M. Avena chief executive.
LIGGETT GROUP, Durham, N.C., a tobacco company, named Marc S. Lymbery senior vice president for international operations.
He will be based in London.


Murray, Staring at Defeat, Preserves a Shred of the Mets' Pride
The experiment worked early.
Experience came through late.
The Mets, for a night, crafted inspiration and character into triumph.
They got three early runs via the energy of raw rookie Pat Howell, then scored three of their more dramatic ones in the ninth inning tonight to pull off a 7-6 victory over Houston at the Astrodome.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Perot Struggles to Refocus on 'Core Issues'
Ross Perot brushed aside questions today about friction inside his campaign operation and tried to deflect requests to be more specific on whether he would reverse the military's policy against homosexuals.
Instead he sought to keep his focus on the issues of jobs and the economy.
Speaking briefly to reporters here after a rally on the steps of the State Capitol, Mr.
Perot, an undeclared independent candidate for President, said he wanted to stick to the "core issues" of the election.


3 Killed in Shooting On a Harlem Block
Three people were killed and two injured yesterday afternoon in a shooting spree that began in a Harlem apartment and spilled out onto the street, the police said.
The police had no suspects in the shootings yesterday, but believed they were drug-related, said Sgt.
Tina Morhmann, a police spokeswoman.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Racial Politics; Perot Brings Mixed Record To His First Black Audience
Having appeared at rallies so far that have been overwhelmingly attended by whites, Ross Perot is scheduled Saturday to address the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, his first appearance before a predominantly black audience since considering a run for President.
His speech to the civil rights group comes at a time when some black strategists view the Texas billionaire as a fulcrum to increase their leverage in a Democratic Party they feel has paid them too little attention.
It also comes when a number of younger black voters have expressed tentative support for Mr.
Perot's possible candidacy.


Up to 5,000 Job Cuts Set By Douglas
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation, the aviation and military contracting giant, told employees yesterday that it would cut as many as 5,000 jobs, or about 15 percent of its work force, by the end of the year at its struggling commercial aviation division.
The announcement is the latest in a flurry of employment cutbacks in recent months, including the Amoco Corporation's decision this week to eliminate 8,500 jobs, or more than 15 percent of its work force.
The cutbacks of thousands of jobs have raised concerns among economists and could hobble the current tepid recovery.


Review/Dance; Dedicated To Glory Of Women
Theatrical artists from Estonia and the United States collaborated to produce "Emapolv" ("Mother's Knee"), the elaborate mixed-media work that was offered Thursday night at the Pace Downtown Theater.
A union of painting, music and movement, it paid tribute to the creative power of women and featured images of goddesses, priestesses and mothers in scenes evoking life, love, death and rebirth.
The presentation was part of Esto '92, a festival celebrating Estonian culture that is held every four years in a different country.


Edward Hymoff Dies; Media Executive, 67
Edward Hymoff, an award-winning journalist who became a media executive and security consultant, died on Thursday at his home in Belmont, Mass.
He was 67 years old.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Massachusetts Festival
The Aston Magna Festival in Great Barrington, Mass., opens its 20th-anniversary season tonight at 6 with a concert titled "Double Apotheosis" at St.
James's Church, Main Street and Taconic Avenue.
Stanley Ritchie and Daniel Stepner, violinists, Laura Jeppesen, a violist da gamba, and Elisabeth Wright, a harpsichordist, are to perform two of Francois Couperin's works, "Apotheosis of Corelli" and "Apotheosis of Lully." The program also includes works by Corelli and Lully.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (413) 528-3595.


Review/Television; Seeing AIDS Patients As People Next Door
Like the Reagan Administration, commercial television is stuck with a sorry record as far as the early years of AIDS are concerned.
While the grim statistics of infections and deaths mounted, official neglect and programming timidity became not just scandalous, but tragic as well.
Now, like the politicians, television is showing signs of catching up with entrenched reality.
This weekend's encouraging evidence, combining information about AIDS with big-name entertainment, is "In a New Light," a two-hour special at 8 tonight on ABC.
Why the turnaround?
One reason, certainly, is that what was once thought to be exclusively a disease of homosexuals and drug addicts has been spreading, slowly but inexorably, into heterosexual and proper middle-class communities.
Another, and far more significant, is the nationwide realization that people with AIDS do not exist in a vacuum.
They are American citizens with families and friends, many of whom care deeply about them.
That's the point hammered home throughout this program.
As Judith Light of "Who's the Boss?" puts it, "Don't ever think for one moment that it's somebody else's problem."


Classical Music in Review
'The Marriage of Figaro' New York Grand Opera Central Park


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4 VERDICT AGAINST PAN AM
A Federal jury in Brooklyn decided that Pan Am was liable for damages because it failed to prevent a 1988 blast aboard Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
The verdict opens the way for claims for damages in the bombing, which killed 270.  1  AN ALLIED REPROACH TO BELGRADE
Citing fighting that has killed more than 50,000 people, nine West European nations and NATO decided to tighten trade sanctions against the Yugoslav Government through surveillance of the Adriatic Sea.  1  ONE-WAY VISAS FROM BOSNIA
Removed from trains because they lack Austrian visas, many Bosnian deportees are stranded in Hungary, camping out on straw mattresses in army tents.  4  DREAM FADES FOR ETHIOPIAN JEWS
Hulda Journal: More than a year after they were brought to Israel, many Ethiopian Jews feel growing resentment about their isolation and failure to find housing or jobs.  2  PREDICTIONS OF ISRAEL LOAN AID
American Jewish groups predict the Bush Administration will seek negotiations on loan guarantees for Israel now that Yitzhak Rabin has formed a Labor-led Government.  3  NIGERIA'S STEEL ALBATROSS
A steel complex that will open soon in Nigeria is viewed as a relic from another era, when third-world nations built vast prestige projects that proved to be financial flops.  3  National 5-8  NORIEGA IS SENTENCED TO 40 YEARS
Two and a half years after the American invasion that toppled his military regime in Panama, General Noriega was sentenced by a Federal judge in Miami to 40 years in prison on eight counts related to drug trafficking.  1  'I WANT HIM TO BREAK THE LOGJAM'
Governor Clinton said Senator Gore would not be "the kind of Vice President that sits in the United States Senate waiting to vote to break a tie." Rather, the Governor said, Mr.
The new Los Angeles Police Chief sealed the offices of a police intelligence unit and undertook an investigation into accusations that it had spied for years on local politicians and celebrities.  5  EXXON VALDEZ CONVICTION VOIDED
An Alaska appeals court threw out the misdemeanor conviction of the Exxon Valdez's skipper, saying a Federal statute gave him immunity from prosecution for the worst oil spill in the nation's history.  5  STALEMATE IN HOUSE INQUIRY
After a week of negotiations, a badly split Congressional panel investigating the House post office has been unable to agree on whether to make public the names of lawmakers who abused the service.  5  FADED GLORY
Boston Journal: In the shadow of the tall ships that moved on from New York to Boston this week, the boatyard that produced some of America's first and fastest clipper ships stands abandoned, its place in history all but forgotten.
Now one New England sea captain is trying to change that.  5  RECIPIENT OF BABOON LIVER GAINS
No sign of rejection was found when doctors at the University of Pittsburgh performed a biopsy on the baboon liver implanted in a 35-year-old man last month.  8  Metropolitan Digest, 21  GOOD TIME SERVED UPSTATE
Rikers Island inmates transferred to Cape Vincent and Riverview, New York City's prisons on the Canadian border, celebrate their shift from the city pen's unpredictable dangers.
But the two prisons are to be vacated because of an unexpected decline in the city's prison population.  1  TRADING RED FOR BLACK INK
A year after Connecticut's first income tax was adopted against a backdrop of bitter public opposition and huge budget deficits, Gov.
Open.  29  Olympics: Dispute over gymnastics selection.  29  Barcelona's tight security.  29  Sports People 30  Obituaries 9  Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19 Editorials  A proven plan to subvert Hussein.
Mr.
D'Amato's credibility gap.
The electoral vote, splintered.
Bush to L.A.: Sell the silverware.
Letters  Russell Baker: Uncle Pete?
Perot?
Reuven Frank: Opium for the (dwindling) masses.
May Berenbaum: Invaded by insects.
Charles Gati: New Russia, old lies.
H.
Keith H. Brodie: Campus idealism made easy.


A School Board Adjusts to Being Bilingual
One of the quirkier chapters in the national debate over multiculturalism -- a recent executive session of Community School Board 15 in Brooklyn -- was moving along at a brisk clip when the board's newest member, Carlos Salamanca, lifted two fingers in the air.
"Una pregunta," he said, then launched into a lengthy question in Spanish about teacher evaluations.
When a principal sitting nearby answered in Spanish, several board members were left staring blankly at their folders.


INSIDE
Inquiry on Los Angeles Police
Willie L. Williams, the new Los Angeles Police Chief, sealed the offices of a police intelligence unit and opened an inquiry into accusations that it had spied for years on local politicians and celebrities.
Page 5.
Hazelwood Wins on Appeal
An Alaskan appeals court threw out the conviction of the Exxon Valdez's skipper, saying a Federal statute protected him from prosecution for the nation's worst oil spill.
Page 5.
New Limits on Car Renters
Budget Rent a Car, in an attempt to avoid liability suits, will start screening some renters by quizzing them about their driving records, and then turning some people away.
Page 33.
Louvre Painting Damaged
A huge artwork by the Italian Renaissance master Veronese was ripped in five places while undergoing restoration at the Louvre in Paris.
Page 11.
Doubts Plague N.A.A.C.P.
After a bitter internal battle last winter, the N.A.A.C.P. begins its annual convention tomorrow nagged by uncertainty about its leadership and questions about its relevance.
Page 8.


Keeping Terrorism at Bay in Barcelona
If the Spanish authorities in charge of security for the Summer Olympics were tempted to become complacent by the easing of international terrorism, they have their own home-grown Basque separatist movement to remind them that the unthinkable can happen.
The movement, known as E.T.A. -- the initials for "Basque Homeland and Freedom" in the region's language -- has been active since the late 1960's and, as recently as a few months ago, was still carrying out car bombings and assassinations in Spanish cities, including Barcelona.


Bicycling in the Rain: A Clothing Line Geared to a Drier Trip
The Burley Design Cooperative, a maker of cycling equipment in Eugene, Ore., developed rain gear for bicycle riders five years ago.
But it was mainly for use by cooperative members.
The designs have been refined since then and are now being marketed nationally.
The cooperative, which is made up of 60 worker-owners, produces tandem bicycles and bike trailers.
Its clothing line, which was available mostly through word of mouth until about a year ago, includes rain gear: jackets, pants, hoods, helmet covers and shoe covers.


A Bas Anglais! From Now On, It's the Law!
With all the solemnity that only France can muster for such occasions, a joint session of the French Parliament held in the gilded chambers of the Palace of Versailles last month added a phrase to the Constitution that reads: "The language of the republic is French."
A statement of the obvious?
An example of France's obsession with legalistic detail?
Not so, cried alarmed intellectuals.
It is a minimal instrument of defense.
The way things are going, they said, the language of France will soon be English.


Panel Divided Over Naming Abusers of House Post Office
After a week of fruitless negotiations, a badly split House panel investigating the House post office has been unable to agree on whether to make public the names of lawmakers who abused the service.
The three Democrats on the panel sought to delete the names from the committee's final report, but the panel's three Republicans resisted, said people who support the Republican position.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST
FAR FROM RIKERS, EASY TIME
New York City has retreated somewhat from the sweeping narcotics arrests that had made two upstate prisons serve as costly emergency relief.
Vacating the prisons might mean a saving of $45 million.
But for tens of thousands of city prisoners, abandoning country confinement will end the pleasure of being safely away from the madding world of Rikers Island.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY CONVENTION RATES PORTEND FEEDING FRENZY
Restaurant fever hit New York after the announcement that more than 100 restaurants, including some of the city's toniest establishments, would offer lunch for $19.92 during the convention.
Phones haven't stopped ringing.
Page 1.
CONVENTION PROTESTERS REST EASIER
After 10 days of negotiations about where hundreds of demonstrators may sleep during the Democratic National Convention, the New York City Parks Department agreed yesterday to take them to recreation centers rather than have them camp out in Central Park.
A similar arrangement was worked out for homeless people in Chelsea Park.
Page 23.
New leadership for Washington Heights.
Page 23.
The pigeons are dead, but was it murder?
Page 23.
Challenge to condom distribution is dismissed.
Page 23.
REGION
TURNAROUND FOR CONNECTICUT FINANCES
A year after Connecticut's first income tax was adopted against a backdrop of bitter public opposition and huge budget deficits, Governor Weicker said that the state's finances had made a dramatic turnaround.
Page 1.
A LEGISLATIVE SCORECARD
Before recessing for the summer, New York State's Democratic-led Assembly approved 1,748 bills and the Republican-controlled Senate 1,661.
Of these, 910 passed both houses.
A summary of the session's major actions.
Page 24.
LAYOFF PLANS REJECTED IN TRENTON
The New Jersey State Personnel Commissioner, Anthony J. Cimino, said he was rejecting the layoff plans of eight departments because they would unduly hurt the rank and file.
Page 25.
A LONG ISLAND MURDER MYSTERY
In Rocky Point, L.I., people are putting up money to find out who killed Wayne Belliveau, a 6-foot-6-inch, 310-pound weight lifter remembered as the strongest man in town.
Mr.
Belliveau was shot to death during a melee at a local beach just before 2 A.M. on July 5, and the police have made no arrests.
Page 25.
NO LOWER BAIL IN STRANGLING CASE
A State Superior Court judge refused for the second time to lower the $750,000 bail of a Clifton teen-ager accused of strangling a youth who was supposed to be his friend while the victim prayed in his car.
Page 25.
System is at fault in prison suicides, report says.
Page 25.
About New York by Douglas Martin 22


Bonds Fall Despite Subdued Inflation
Prices of most Treasury notes and bonds fell yesterday, as traders chose to sell securities despite an exceptionally good inflation reading.
Wholesale prices rose just two-tenths of 1 percent in June, the Government reported yesterday.
And for the first time in five years, the Producer Price Index excluding food and energy fell, by one-tenth of a percentage point.
The Government report illustrated the weak level of economic demand.  [ Page 34. ]


Rikers Guard Charged With Smuggling Gun
A 35-year-old guard was arrested on Thursday and charged with smuggling a gun into a maximum security jail on Rikers Island, where three inmates were shot with it last month, law-enforcement officials said.
Mario Sepulveda Jr., a corrections officer since 1984, was also charged with smuggling what he mistakenly believed was cocaine to inmates on two occasions, charging them $500 each time, law enforcement officials said.
He was taken into custody after he finished his shift on Thursday night, said Peter Benjaminson, a spokesman for the New York City Department of Investigation.
The guard faces a maximum sentence of 15 years.


Warren V. Huber, 86, Veterans' Neurologist
Warren V. Huber, a former head of neurology for the Veterans Administration, died on Monday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 86 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.
Dr.
Huber worked for the agency for about 30 years and was its director of neurology for almost 20.
He later worked for the National Institutes of Health and the American Neurological Association, where he was the director of the Joint Committee for Stroke Facilities.


Hubbub Over Dead Birds Leads to Arrest, Jail and a Lawsuit
Renee Solomon never envisioned being arrested, handcuffed, paraded as a criminal before colleagues and students at Columbia University and tossed into a frigid jail cell.
Nor, as a member of the Audubon Society, did she expect to be branded a bird killer.
But that fate befell Professor Solomon.
And now her experience has produced a lawsuit that tells a tale of pigeons and bird feeders, and alienation and survival, in Manhattan apartment towers.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; ONE REPORTER GETS THE SCOOP ON GORE, SORT OF
When Gov.
Bill Clinton announced his running mate Thursday, many reporters covering him breathed a sigh of relief: they were not scooped.
Though the word of Mr.
Clinton's choice of Senator Al Gore was all over television and on the wire services before breakfast, no one leaked it to the morning papers.
Or did they?
Mitchell Locin, who reports on Mr.
Clinton for The Chicago Tribune, contends that while few may have noticed, he got the story.
He said he learned of the Gore choice about an hour after Mr.
Clinton offered the job to the Tennessee Senator, which was just before midnight on Wednesday.
He got the article into The Tribune for some of its press run, but too late to get on the front page.


Weicker Projects A Budget Surplus
A year after Connecticut's first income tax was adopted against a backdrop of bitter public opposition and huge budget deficits, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. said today that the state's finances have made a dramatic turnaround, with this year's budget showing a modest surplus of $30 million.
"The income tax has done exactly what was predicted for it," Mr.
Weicker said, addressing about 50 state senators and representatives who supported his budget at a breakfast in the Capitol's ornate Old Judiciary Room.


Your Taxes; Compliance Costs Of Disabilities Act
AS the second phase of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 takes effect this month, requiring that workplaces with 25 or more employees be made accessible to the handicapped, tax advisers are mulling over its implications.
It can be costly to install elevators and other modifications to meet the law's demands.
Congress recognized this and built some tax breaks into the law.
But depending on how they elect to treat their compliance costs when they file their tax returns, some businesses might get more of a tax break than others.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about proposed changes in New York City's antipoverty system referred incorrectly to Crown Heights, Brooklyn, in some editions.
Under the proposed rules, the community board district that includes Crown Heights would not be eligible to receive Federal antipoverty money.
But poorer sections within the district, including black and Hasidic neighborhoods, would continue to receive grants.


Patents; Developing Foods That Also Cure
IT looks and tastes like ordinary milk, comes straight from a cow and might someday be sold in supermarkets alongside cottage cheese and yogurt.
But this is a dairy product with a difference.
Besides the usual compliment of protein, calcium and vitamins, it is also loaded with human antibodies that its inventors say can be tailored to fight tooth decay, strep throat, stomach bugs and other ailments.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Budd's Race Interrupted Anti-apartheid demonstrators yesterday in London attempted to interfere with Zola Budd Pieterse's first track appearance in Britain since protests forced her to return to South Africa in 1987.
At least six people ran onto the track after Budd Pieterse led an international field into the final lap of a 2,000-meter race at the Crystal Palace.
Security officials and police grabbed the six -- three men and three women -- and dragged them from the stadium.
Budd Pieterse became a British citizen in 1984 to compete at the Los Angeles Olympics.
She pulled up 250 meters from the finish today as Britain's top 3,000-meter hope for the Barcelona Olympics, Yvonne Murray, won in 5 minutes 43.49 seconds.
Michael Johnson, ranked No. 1 in the world each of the past two years in the 400, ran the 10th-fastest time ever, setting a British all-comers' record of 43.99. (AP) TENNIS  Chang Is Upset  Unseeded Gabriel Markus of Argentina, who is ranked 58th in the world, upset second-seeded Michael Chang, 7-6 (7-3), 7-6 (7-1), yesterday and reached the semifinals of the Swiss Open in Gstaad.
In the second set, Chang wasted four break points.
The defending champion and fifth-seeded player, Emilio Sanchez of Spain, was also was upset, 7-5, 7-5, by an unseeded countryman, Francisco Clavet.
In other matches, sixth-seeded Sergi Bruguera of Spain, a finalist last year, beat No. 3-seeded Goran Ivanisevic of Croatia, the losing Wimbledon finalist, 6-3, 6-2, and Fabrice Santoro of France was a 6-4, 5-7, 6-4 winner over eighth-seeded Karel Novacek of Czechoslovakia. (AP) Wiesner Ousted: Unseeded Florencia Labat of Argentina upset third-seeded Judith Wiesner of Austria, 6-2, 6-1, and advanced to the semifinals of the Austrian Open in Kitzbuhel.
The other quarterfinal matches saw top-seeded Conchita Martinez of Spain beat Alexia Dechaume of France, 6-2, 6-2, second-seeded Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere of Switzerland defeat sixth-seeded Sandra Cecchini of Italy, 6-2, 6-3, and No. 4 Amanda Coetzer of South Africa down Wiltrud Probst of Germany, 7-5, 6-2. (AP) Patrick McEnroe Eliminated: Shuzo Matsuoka of Japan beat an American, Patrick McEnroe, 7-6 (7-1), 6-4, in a first-round match at the Gunze World tournament in Tokyo.
No other men's singles matches were scheduled. (AP) GOLF  Hatalsky Takes Lead  Morris Hatalsky, 203d on the earn- ings list this year with less than $12,000, increased his lead to three shots with a five-under-par 66 yesterday in the second round of the Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic in Williamsburg, Va.
He was at 11-under 131 after a muggy day at Kingsmill Golf Club, and his 26 putts in the second round were 6 more than he needed in his opening round.
But his two-day total put him on track to challenge Kenny Knox's tour record of 93 putts in one tournament.
Peter Persons, Hatalsky's playing partner for the first two rounds, is his closest pursuer after a 68 for 134 that included seven birdies and four bogeys today. (AP) Baldwin Starts Fast: Denise Baldwin, a 30-year-old rookie, overcame a triple bogey on the first hole and shot a four-under-par 68 for a one-stroke lead in the weather-delayed L.P.G.A.'s Phar-Mor in Youngstown tournament in Vienna, Ohio.
Nancy Lopez, Meg Mallon, Brandie Burton and Amy Benz were one shot back at three-under-par 69 after rounds over the 6,297-yard Squaw Creek Country Club course.
Ann Walsh was also three under but had completed only 13 holes when play was suspended for the day because of rain. (AP) Cowell Wins New Jersey Open: Charlie Cowell played the final nine holes in three-under-par and captured his first major title in winning the New Jersey Open by three strokes.
Cowell, a 29-year-old assistant pro at Suburban in Union, N.J., had two rounds of two-under-par 70 in the 36-hole finale at the Navesink Country Club in Middletown Township and finished the 72-hole tournament with a three-under-par total of 285. (AP)


An Opera on Faith
Hell's Kitchen Opera is to present the New York premiere of Murray Boren's "Emma" at 8 tonight and tomorrow night and next weekend on Friday, Saturday and Sunday nights at St.
Paul the Apostle Church, 415 West 59th Street, Manhattan.
The opera tells the story of Emma Smith, the wife of Joseph Smith, the founder of the Mormon Church, and her struggle to remain committed to the faith after her husband's murder.
Mr.
Boren conducts, with Susan Alexander and Mary Kay McGarvey alternating in the title role.
Tickets are $10 and $15.
Information: (212) 752-2887.


In Upset, Carlsbad Cam Takes The Pace
Carslbad Cam, who had only 2 victories in 10 starts this season, rallied down the stretch and posted an upset victory in tonight's $1 million Meadowlands Pace.
Driven by Rod Allen, Carlsbad Cam parked himself behind one of the favorites, Direct Flight, for most of the way before taking the lead.


More Mozart
The Mostly Mozart Festival continues this weekend at Lincoln Center with a concert tonight at 8 in Avery Fisher Hall.
The program includes Mozart's Symphonies Nos. 24 and 41 and four arias, and Beethoven's Piano Concerto No. 4 in G. Gerard Schwarz conducts; the pianist Shura Cherkassky and the soprano Sumi Jo are soloists.
A pre-concert recital by Mr.
Cherkassky at 7 is to include a suite of pieces by Lully and Busoni's arrangement of Bach's Chaconne in D minor.
Tickets are $13 to $25.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Free Opera at Trade Center
Singers from the New York City Opera are to be featured in Opera Mondays, a series of free concerts on Mondays at 12:15 and 1:15 P.M. at Austin J. Tobin Plaza, World Trade Center, Church Street between Liberty and Vesey Streets, lower Manhattan.
The series is to open on Monday with highlights from "La Boheme," sung by Elizabeth Hynes, soprano, and Martin Thompson, tenor, accompanied by William Barto Jones at the piano.
The series is also to present selections from "Pagliacci" on July 20, "110 in the Shade" on July 27, "Cavalleria Rusticana" on Aug. 3, "Carmen" on Aug. 10 and "The Barber of Seville" on Aug. 17.
Information: (212) 435-4170.


N.A.A.C.P. Is Assembling, Wondering About Its Future
The pre-convention profile sounds familiar: a venerable pillar of the nation's politics that is buffeted by generational change, uncertainty about its leadership, questions about its relevance and nagging doubts as to whether it can still serve the interests of its traditional constituents.
This weekend, just before the Democrats open for business in New York, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People begins its annual convention here amid many of the same questions the Democrats face.


Court Overturns Conviction Of Exxon Valdez's Captain
An Alaska appeals court today threw out the misdemeanor conviction of the skipper of the Exxon Valdez, saying that a Federal statute gave him immunity from prosecution for the worst oil spill in the nation's history.
The statute, part of the Clean Water Act of 1972, grants immunity to those who report oil spills to the authorities.
In the past, it has generally been applied to operators of small vessels that spill oil out at sea that might not be discovered if they did not report it.


NATO AND EUROPE TIGHTEN SANCTIONS AGAINST YUGOSLAVS
As leaders from 52 countries condemned the Serbian-dominated Government of Yugoslavia for a war that has killed more than 50,000 people, nine Western European nations and the NATO alliance decided today to tighten trade sanctions with naval surveillance of the Adriatic Sea and debated even stronger military moves.
Coordinated operations by the nine-nation Western European Union and NATO will involve participation of ships from the United States Sixth Fleet and at least five European naval vessels, according to separate resolutions.
They were adopted by both organizations before the close of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.


COMPANY NEWS: Breeding a Better Ketchup; Tomato Tinkerers Plan Gene-Altered Condiments
The tomato, its reputation for tastiness shriveled by modern agriculture, is a leading target for biotechnology researchers eager to prove that their skills can translate into something that consumers and food processors want.
A glimpse of progress came this week in the form of an announcement from the seed division of Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C. of Britain, which announced that Hunt-Wesson Inc. planned to use I.C.I.'s genetically improved tomatoes in products by 1995.
That is two years later than Calgene, a start-up company in Davis, Calif., plans to reach market with its genetically improved Flavr-Savr tomatoes.
But I.C.I. says it has figured out more ways to alter the fruit.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
West Fourth Street between the Avenue of the Americas and Washington Square East will be closed from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the West Fourth Street fair.
West 42d and West 40th streets between Fifth Avenue and the Avenue of the Americas will be closed until 3 A.M. tomorrow for a media welcoming party for the Democratic National Convention.
TOMORROW
Second Avenue between Second and 14th streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Lower East Side Second Avenue fair.


Homosexuality to Be a Burning Catholic Issue; Orthodox Deaconesses
To the Editor:
I read "As Bishops Meet, Catholics Voice Differences With Church's Doctrines" (news article, June 19), on the debate over women clergy in the Roman Catholic Church, with great interest and some glee.


Hulda Journal; Exodus to Isolation: Ethiopians Endure Hardships
Emerging from his mobile home after a sweltering summer night, Kassaw Lakew said he wanted to leave this sprawling trailer lot built by the Government for new Jewish immigrants from Ethiopia.
"The trailers are hot in summer and cold in winter," he said.
"We want a home. If I had one, I would leave tomorrow."


Bridge
There is no way to prove it, but it can be safely asserted that the number of home bridge games has declined in the last six decades.
This is partly due to the increasing number of attractions: In the days of Ely Culbertson a bridge game with the neighbors was both convenient and economical, a consideration in the years of Depression.
A player from the 30's who was transported to the 90's would be surprised to find that the form of the game has changed.
The standard rubber bridge game has given way in North America -- though not in Britain -- to Chicago or four-deal bridge.
One of the few surviving regular rubber-bridge games is in East Norwalk, Conn., where the diagramed deal was played recently at the home of Dorothy Greenberg, who reported the episode.


Restaurant Tipping: Many Fingers Make Light Pockets
Visitors to New York City -- and many residents alike -- at times find restaurant tipping as baffling as trying to read a subway map on a lurching train.
In the city's finer (read expensive) establishments, diners may have to take into account a maitres d'hotel, captains, waiters and busboys, as well as sommeliers and the person at the coat check.
The system is not as complicated as it appears, though.
For one thing, establishments with highly stratified service systems are increasingly rare in this era of belt tightening and shrinking profit margins.
Most common today are dining rooms with waiters, captains and busboys, with perhaps the owner in attendance.


Federal Jury Orders Keating To Pay Investors $3.3 Billion
A Federal jury in Tucson, Ariz., yesterday awarded $3.3 billion in damage claims against Charles H. Keating Jr. for swindling thousands of savings and loan investors.
More than $5 billion in awards were also levied against three co-defendants, including an Arizona developer.
Although it seems unlikely that investors will recover anything from Mr.
Keating himself, their lawyers hope to recoup at least some money from the others.


Sidney D. Braun, Author and French Professor, 80
Dr.
Sidney D. Braun, an author on French literature and professor emeritus of the City University of New York, died on Wednesday at his Manhattan home.
He was 80 years old and also kept a home in Newport, R.I.
He died after a brief illness, a university statement said.


Nike's Olympian Trademark Fight
Imagine the following live broadcast during the Olympic Games this month: The Spanish police interrupt a basketball game and ask American athletes to strip.
The officers then confiscate any shirts or shorts carrying Nike Inc.'s logo.
Although such a scene is a worst-case scenario, it could happen as a result of a dispute over trademark rights between the Beaverton, Ore., maker of athletic wear and Juan Amigo, a lawyer and associate of Nike's former distributor in Spain.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about Japanese companies in Hollywood rendered the name of the president of the Sony Corporation incorrectly.
He is Norio Ohga.


Excerpts From Noriega's Statement Before His Sentencing in Federal Court
Following are excerpts translated from Spanish from a statement read in Federal District Court in Miami today by Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the former Panamanian leader, before he was sentenced to 40 years in Federal prison on charges of cocaine trafficking, racketeering and money laundering.
The excerpts include sections that Judge William M. Hoeveler would not allow to be read in open court.
STATEMENT BY GENERAL NORIEGA
My prosecution was orchestrated by those who fear me, men who sought to discredit me through accusations or kill me by means of an invasion.
Since they were unable to kill me previously, not with the commando group that was trained in the Caribbean, not with two military coup attempts, not with the invasion, when 15,000 American soldiers were looking for me and a price of $1 million was offered for me dead or alive, since they were unable to kill me yesterday, they bring me here today so that you can do them the favor of killing me alive.
. . .
Panama was not invaded because its canal was threatened.
Panama was not invaded because the lives of American citizens were in danger.
Panama was invaded because I was an obstacle and damaged the historical souvenirs of your President George Bush, who preferred me dead!
. . .
Yes, your honor, there is a strong political odor that can be felt in the development of this case.
The Chinese Wall of the Government, the national security hearings, the conferences and permanent consultations with Washington, these are "political overtones" before, during and after.
. . .
How can you explain that among the 250,000 photographs captured in the invasion there exists not a single one of me with the heads of the Medellin cartel in the supposed meetings that have been spoken of so much in this chamber?
. . .
Of the mysterious trip to Cuba, it was not permitted to say that this included a request for a visit by a high emissary of the Reagan-Bush Administration, and that after my visit he went to Cuba to open a channel of conversation.
But it is not convenient to the Administration that this be known, because the Cubans in exile would criticize it.
And here it was not permitted to say the name of this high official sent by Reagan and Bush and received by Castro after my intervention.
. . .
Did you know, Your Honor, that from the beginning of May 1988 until October of 1989, these two Administrations were prepared to agree to the cancellation of all the criminal charges against me in exchange for my handing the country over to them so they could impose their government, courts and administrator of the Panama Canal?
The question is: Why weren't the real drug traffickers offered this?
The answer is simple.
Besides being criminals, they weren't Panamanians and couldn't offer anything of interest in exchange.
They couldn't offer territory for military bases, nor could they offer the canal beyond the year 2000.
[ The following was not allowed to be read in open court. ]
The agreements that were addressed in a very detailed way involved the development of events.
And the elements are these: suspension of sanctions on our part, in anticipation that General Noriega would give a speech in which he would make a series of declarations, among them the announcement of his intention to step down as Commander in Chief of the Panama Defense Forces on Aug. 12 and the summoning of the Legislative Assembly to immediately approve legislation that would limit the term of any Commander in Chief of the P.D.F. to five years, retroactive to Aug. 12, 1983.
In summary, your term should end on Aug. 12 as a result of a change in the law.
. . .
It is contemplated that you would go on a trip.
It is expected that you would finish off some small personal affairs during the period immediately following your retirement, but in September you would leave the country until the period of the elections in May 1989, except for a short visit to your family at Christmas time.
. . .
[ The following is a continuation of General Noriega's statement in open court. ]
For my part, I accuse George Herbert Walker Bush of exercising his power and authority to influence and subvert the American judicial system in order to convict me.
I accuse George Herbert Walker Bush of genocide for having ordered the massive bombardment of the civilian population of Panama and causing the deaths of more than 5,000 people.


James McKim Symington, Smithsonian Official, 72
James McKim Symington, chief fund-raiser for the Smithsonian Institution for more than a decade beginning in the mid-1970's, died on Wednesday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 72 years old.
The cause of death was lung cancer, his wife, Mary Theresa Symington, said.


Taystee Bakery Closes in Bitterness; Manufacturing Shift Leaves Flushing Workers Feeling Deserted, Betrayed and Afraid
For 20 years, Leroy Morgan rose early each morning to weigh and mix the dough at the Taystee Bakery plant in Queens.
It was hard work, but he made a decent living, raised a family, bought his own house in Jamaica.
Now it is over.
Just after 4 o'clock yesterday afternoon, the last packages of hamburger and hot dog buns rolled off the assembly lines at Taystee, ending more than three decades of production at the hulking plant in Flushing and leaving the last of more than 500 employees without jobs, and with dim prospects for new ones.


Corrections
An article on June 15 about the selection of Mona Van Duyn as poet laureate of the United States misstated the sequence of her books.
Her latest book is "Near Changes" (Alfred A. Knopf), which won the 1991 Pulitzer Prize for poetry; "Letters From a Father and Other Poems" was published in 1982.
The article also quoted a verse from the 1982 book incorrectly, as did an article on April 10, 1991.
The verse should read:
The world's perverse  but it could be worse.


300 Miles From Rikers, a Place for Easy Time
Kevin White smiled like a boy far younger than his 19 years and shifted shyly in his seat belt, manacles and leg shackles.
The Manhattan teen-ager was taking the first airplane ride of his life in a busy year that included his first felony arrest, first conviction, first imprisonment on Rikers Island and his first visit upstate, to reside here in Gotham's distant prison on the Canadian border, a modernistic pen quite surreal for its bucolic contrasts with the urban limbo of Rikers.


GUIDEPOST: WELCOME TO NEW YORK. PROCEED WITH CAUTION.
The following safety tips have been compiled to cover some common hazards for New York visitors.
PROTECTING YOUR VALUABLES:
Leave real valuables -- anything worth more than $500 -- at home.
If it is necessary to travel with them, place them in the hotel's safe.
Under state law, hotel liability is limited to $500 unless there is a previous written agreement to the contrary.
A hotel is exempt from liability for valuables stolen from individual rooms.
But the $500 limit and the exemption do not apply if the hotel is found negligent.


Nigeria's Monumental Steel Plant: Nationalist Mission or Colossal Mistake?
With its sprawling network of pipes and cylinders and immense exhaust towers, the 60,000-acre Ajaokuta steel complex, the biggest industrial project in sub-Saharan Africa, poses a striking contrast to the villages of straw-roofed huts that surround it.
Officials hope that once the plant begins pouring metal as scheduled this month, this remote town in the heart of southern Nigeria will stand as a symbol of this developing country's dream of greatness and a monument to engineering tenacity.


Fast Action Foreseen on Israel Loan Aid
Officials of American Jewish organizations predicted today that the Bush Administration would move quickly to resume negotiations on billions of dollars in United States loan guarantees for Israel now that Yitzhak Rabin has formed a new Labor-led Government.
Mr.
Rabin, who is expected to take over as Prime Minister on Monday, may not get the full $10 billion in guarantees that Israel has sought for the last year to help resettle recent immigrants from the former Soviet Union, the officials said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Running Mates; On Environment Issues, Quayle Curbed the Rules and Gore Wrote the Book
On environmental issues, Vice President Dan Quayle and Senator Al Gore are almost always at opposite poles, and this is likely to be the main battleground when they tangle in the fall election campaign.
Mr.
Quayle and his staff have worked overtime this year to cut environmental regulations and open natural resources to development.


Bicycling in the Rain: A Clothing Line Geared to a Drier Trip
The Burley Design Cooperative, a maker of cycling equipment in Eugene, Ore., developed rain gear for bicycle riders five years ago.
But it was mainly for use by cooperative members.
The designs have been refined since then and are now being marketed nationally.
The cooperative, which is made up of 60 worker-owners, produces tandem bicycles and bike trailers.
Its clothing line, which was available mostly through word of mouth until about a year ago, includes rain gear: jackets, pants, hoods, helmet covers and shoe covers.


Pan Am Is Held Liable by Jury In '88 Explosion
A jury decided yesterday that Pan American World Airways was liable for damages because its security procedures failed to protect passengers in the 1988 explosion of Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, a bombing that took 270 lives.
The verdict, in a civil case in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, opened the way for trials on individual claims for damages that legal experts estimated could total about $300 million.
Pan Am is bankrupt, but its insurance companies are responsible for paying damages to the families of victims.


Review/Jazz; Kenny Barron's Summer Sound
Summer is traditionally the time when American jazz musicians go off to Europe, hitting the festival circuit and picking up the paychecks.
The exodus means that groups often dissolve, or temporarily draft new members.
This can be a good thing, giving audiences a chance to hear new combinations of musicians or to be introduced to younger players.
At Fat Tuesday's (190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Manhattan) the pianist Kenny Barron has brought in a quintet that has two young new members -- Terell Stafford on trumpet and Don Braydon on tenor saxophone -- replacing his standard front line, the saxophonist John Stubblefield and the trumpeter Eddie Henderson.
The changes have worked out.
Mr.
Barron writes challenging material, and on Tuesday night the two new players, in the high-level company of Mr.
Barron, the bassist David Williams and the drummer Victor Lewis, turned in a series of solos that rarely fell into cliche.
On "Voyage," the opening tune of the set, Mr.
Braydon, played familiar lines that suddenly veered away to follow the movement of the chords as the harmony changed.
And Mr.
Stafford, mixing melody lines with runs, navigated his way thoughtfully through the harmonies; the two egged each other on like a mutual admiration society.


CHRONICLE
When teen-agers from Covenant House residences nationwide give speeches tomorrow describing what it is like to grow up amid poverty and violence -- at what is billed as a national youth convention -- there will probably be no one more empathetic than Representative MATTHEW G. MARTINEZ, Democrat of California.
The Congressman, who is on the panel that will hear the testimony, grew up in East Los Angeles, ran with a gang called White Fence and left home at age 12 because, he said the other day, his mother beat him.


A School Board Adjusts to Being Bilingual
One of the quirkier chapters in the national debate over multiculturalism -- a recent executive session of Community School Board 15 in Brooklyn -- was moving along at a brisk clip when the board's newest member, Carlos Salamanca, lifted two fingers in the air.
"Una pregunta," he said, then launched into a lengthy question in Spanish about teacher evaluations.
When a principal sitting nearby answered in Spanish, several board members were left staring blankly at their folders.


Condom Plan For Schools Is Upheld
A challenge to New York City's pioneering condom distribution program and its AIDS curriculum was thrown out yesterday by the state's Education Commissioner, largely on technicalities.
The ruling on an administrative complaint was a temporary victory for Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez against his two peskiest critics on the seven-member Board of Education.
It means his programs to combat AIDS will survive for the foreseeable future.





Bush to L.A.: Sell the Silverware
The City of Los Angeles was struggling with a $180 million deficit even before the Rodney King riots.
Then Washington scrambled to provide some emergency assistance and urban aid -- and the White House came up with a grandstanding stunt.
Why don't you, the White House suggests to the city, sell your airport?
If you do, you can keep the profits to help restore burned-out neighborhoods.


Nap Time


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Olympia &amp; York reported a $1.76 billion loss that should have been much higher, its auditor said, if the company had followed standard accounting rules.
Price Waterhouse, the auditor, criticized the real estate developer for not taking a markdown on the value of the bankrupt Canary Wharf project.  [ Page 33. ]
Budget Rent a Car will start screening some renters by quizzing them about their driving records, in hopes of avoiding liability suits.  [ 33. ]


Corrections
An article yesterday about the selection of Senator Al Gore as Gov.
Bill Clinton's running mate misstated his age and President Bush's in some copies.
Mr.
Clinton is 45 years old, not 46; Mr.
Bush is 68, not 67.


8 Departments' Proposals For Layoffs Are Rejected
The state's Personnel Commissioner, Anthony J. Cimino, said today that he had rejected the layoff plans of eight departments because they unduly hurt rank-and-file workers.
"The plans appear to be bottom heavy," said Mr.
Cimino.
"They should be fair, they should be equitable and they should be across the board."


Request for Lower Bail Refuse In Case of Strangled Teen-Ager
A State Superior Court judge today refused for the second time to lower the $750,000 bail of a Clifton teen-ager accused of strangling a supposed friend while the victim prayed in his car.
Judge Sidney H. Reiss rejected defense arguments that the teen-ager, James Wanger, now 18 years old, would not pose a danger to the community.
The judge noted that Mr.
Wanger had been indicted as an adult on charges of strangling Robert A. Solimine Jr., 17, of North Haledon.


New Leadership Forms In a Crucible of Violence
A week of fires, bottle-throwing and other disturbances in the streets of Washington Heights after the July 3 shooting of Jose Garcia has produced a new political leadership in New York City's Dominican community.
Armed with walkie-talkies and wearing yellow ribbons, a cadre of Dominicans, from homemakers to lawyers to ministers, have constantly been on the streets in these days of rage, mediating between angry crowds of demonstrators and police officers in riot gear who have been posted throughout the Manhattan neighborhood.


Au Pair Trial Is Not the End of Arson Case
Local officials said today that they would appoint an independent investigator to re-examine the arson murder for which a Swiss au pair was acquitted Tuesday.
The lawyer for the au pair, Olivia Riner, commended the decision to reopen the investigation but said Miss Riner had been hurt by continuing assertions by the family of the murdered infant and others that she committed the crime.


Senator D'Amato's Credibility Gap
Senator Alfonse D'Amato's re-election campaign faces a new hurdle: a last-minute Republican challenge from Laurance Rockefeller, a moderate political novice with a big political name.
Meanwhile, questions continue to reverberate about whether the Senator used his clout at the Department of Housing and Urban Development to reward campaign contributors.
The prospect of a contested primary only magnifies the need for further inquiry by the Senate Ethics Committee.
Did Mr.
D'Amato steer fat subsidies to a San Juan project in which his chief fund-raiser in Puerto Rico, Eduardo Lopez Ballori, had a big financial stake?
And how forthcoming was the Senator when he testified before the Ethics Committee?


Company Briefs
ANALYSIS AND TECHNOLOGY INC., North Stonington, Conn., an engineering concern, was awarded a five-year, $15.1 million contract by the Naval Undersea Warfare Center, New London, Conn., to provide engineering and analytical services to develop surface ship antisubmarine warfare training programs.
AEL INDUSTRIES, Lansdale, Pa., an electronic defense systems design and manufacturing concern, was awarded a $12 million contract from the Warner Robbins Air Logistics Center, for prototype production of a transmitter.
This is a follow-on to the contract awarded last year and increases the current contract value to more than $18 million


NORIEGA SENTENCED TO 40 YEARS IN JAIL ON DRUG CHARGES
Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega was sentenced today to 40 years in prison on eight counts of drug trafficking, money laundering and racketeering after he gave a defiant two-hour courtroom speech in which he berated President Bush and the American military force that invaded Panama and toppled him from power.
In handing down the sentence, Judge William M. Hoeveler rejected arguments by defense lawyers that the deposed Panamanian leader was a prisoner of war and therefore not subject to American legal actions.
The judge said his decision was based solely on the evidence presented in the seven-month trial that ended in April.


The Giants Introduce Their Summer Surprise
All around him, Dave Brown's friends at Duke University were graduating this spring and getting good jobs.
"They were getting jobs with the big banks in Chicago and New York," the quarterback explained today at Giants Stadium.
"I thought it was time for me to get on with it."


HARTMARX REPORTS A LOSS FOR SECOND QUARTER
The Hartmarx Corporation, a manufacturer and retailer of men's and women's clothing, reported a loss for the second quarter, reflecting weak business in its stores.
In the second quarter, which ended May 31, Hartmarx lost $5.7 million, compared with a $5.9 million deficit in the period last year.
The company benefited from the adoption of new accounting standards, which enabled it to recognize a $3.1 million tax benefit.


Get Up and Go: LeMond Finds It In a Breakaway
A frisky Greg LeMond backed up his pronouncements of his well-being today as he helped power a four-man breakaway that finished 1 minute 22 seconds ahead of the rest of the Tour de France pack.
The performance vaulted the American rider into fifth place in the overall standing.
"I planned to be in the break today," said LeMond, who moved ahead of the favorite and last year's winner, Miguel Indurain of Spain, after the sixth stage of the three-week race.
"I feel a lot stronger."


David S. Epstein, 73, A Film Director, Dies
David Schaffer Epstein, a film director and screenwriter, died on Tuesday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 73 years old and lived in Greenwich.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Homosexuality to Be a Burning Catholic Issue; Clerical Celibacy
To the Editor:
The Rev.
Vic Hummert, attacking the Roman Catholic institution of clerical celibacy (letter, June 6), repeats a myth cherished by advocates of a married priesthood: "The laws on celibacy in the church were established in the 12th century to prevent children of priests from laying claim to church properties."


Abortion Protests, and Arrests, Continue in Louisiana


A Proven Plan to Subvert Hussein
Last week's foiled military coup only underscores Saddam Hussein's continuing control of Iraq.
That's causing anguish in the White House.
But instead of giving up this losing game, coup-pushers there and in Congress are redoubling efforts to dislodge the Iraqi dictator.
Their misguided shadow war threatens to undercut a far better way to undermine his rule -- United Nations enforcement of the cease-fire resolution.
Despite the Iraqi dictator's defiance, the U.N. is disarming Iraq and provisioning and protecting the Kurds.
Its very presence demonstrates the limits of his control.
The U.N. effort deserves Washington's undivided support.
Coup attempts that go awry will only undercut that effort.


Adirondacks Will Remain a Wilderness Without More Rules; Stop the Encroachment
To the Editor:
The June 19 Op-Ed article by John B. Oakes is a beacon in the debate about the future of the Adirondacks.
The intransigence of State Senator Ronald Stafford is familiar to those who know his record of kowtowing to real estate speculators and forest products interests.
He and Assemblyman Chris Ortloff seem to vie with each other in opposition to the Adirondack Park Agency or any proposal that appears to limit the real estate developers and big timber owners.


Further Limits on Car Renters
In yet another attempt by a car rental company to avoid liability suits, Budget Rent a Car, the industry's third-largest company, will start screening some renters by quizzing them about their driving records.
Starting Monday, Budget will ask renters at its 800 American locations away from airports whether they have had their driver's licenses revoked or suspended in the last three years, have been convicted of reckless or drunken driving or have had more than two accidents for which they or their insurance companies had to pay.


Fatal Arson Fire in Philadelphia


In Inner Cities, They're Eager for Work
To the Editor:
The successful experience of the Walt Disney Company in recruiting for jobs in Disneyland among black and Hispanic teen-agers in South-Central Los Angeles ("Challenging a Myth in Los Angeles," editorial, June 29) is no surprise to us.
We are familiar with the results of the Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot Projects, a national, federally funded demonstration program that operated between 1978 and 1980, and was evaluated by the Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.


Review/Film; When 2 Worlds Collide: The Cartoon vs. the Human
Long-awaited is not the way to describe "Cool World," which brings back Ralph Bakshi and the raunchy cartoon style of his "Fritz the Cat" and "Heavy Traffic." This time, Mr.
Bakshi also incorporates live actors, foremost among them Kim Basinger as a bombshell named Holli Would.
Ms.
Basinger plays this role as if wondering what Marilyn Monroe might have been like as an inflatable party doll.
Mr.
Bakshi, who has centered the film on Holli, appears to have devoted intense interest to studying the body language of streetwalkers and go-go dancers, which is indeed captured in loving detail.
Accordingly, the film's minor animated characters favor drooling, eye-popping mannerisms whenever Holli is around.
Even the hormone-crazed heavy metal fans who constitute this film's likeliest audience may find it to be in iffy taste.


Olympia's '91 Loss Is $1.76 Billion
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. reported a $1.76 billion loss for its 1991 fiscal year yesterday, more than five times its loss of a year earlier.
But the company's own auditors indicated that based on standard accounting rules the loss should have been much greater.
The numbers for the 1991 fiscal year, which closed on Jan. 31, 1992, include a reduction of $1.2 billion in some of the company's assets.


Turkey Faces Moral Crisis Over Bosnia
As the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina has unfolded, and many Muslims are counted among the dead, a frayed and fatigued myth has perished, too.
The notion that the Islamic world might come to the defense of Bosnia's beleaguered Muslims has foundered on the same calculation that has made European countries shy away from military intervention -- that the Balkans produce no winners, only perils beyond the forecasting.
But nowhere is the collision of conscience and Realpolitik more acute than in Turkey.


For a Special Number, Dial (800) VANITY
Howard Stern, the radio personality in New York, suggested not long ago that as a joke, his listeners call an "800" number that spelled out the word "man" preceded by another word suggestive of flatulence.
Within hours, the telephones at an Eastman Kodak office that uses (800) EASTMAN as its toll-free number started ringing off the hook.
"We got those calls and couldn't believe at first that it was for real," said Rod Irvin, a spokesman for Eastern Chemical Company in Kingsport, Tenn.
"Then we figured it out and saw that it was."


Richard R. Hough of Bell System Dies at 74 With Wife in a Crash
Richard R. Hough, who retired as an executive of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in 1982 after a 42-year career with the Bell System, died with his wife on Thursday when their plane crashed at Concord, N.H.
The couple, formerly of Madison, N.J., lived in Dunbarton, N.H.
Mr.
Hough was 74, and his wife, Jane, was 73.
An A.T.&amp; T. spokesman, Walter Murphy, said that Mr.
Hough had just taken off from Concord Airport en route to New Jersey when their twin-engine turboprop Mitsubishi MU-2 experienced trouble and fell in an open field.
No other injuries were reported.


Loan Penalties Deter Small-Business Expansion
A growing number of small-business owners are accusing the Small Business Administration -- and the Bush Administration -- of stifling their growth through its lending practices.
Some even equate the Government with a loan shark.
Consider the case of Jim Owens, owner of Lauks Testing Laboratories Inc. in Seattle, which specializes in environmental testing.
An S.B.A. loan in 1981 allowed his company to expand, creating jobs.
Now, Mr.
Owens says his employees "are packed in like sardines," but paying off his $336,000, 25-year S.B.A. loan early to clear the way to move into a new building would cost him a $123,123 prepayment penalty.
Penalties 'Extraordinarily High'
Mr.
Owens's laboratory is one of 3,913 companies that in February were still paying off loans taken out in the early 1980's under the small-business agency's 503 loan program.
The loans, financed through the Federal Financing Bank, an arm of the Treasury, are at rates as high as 15.7 percent, high now but comparatively low at the time.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Sound Bites Grow at CBS, Then Vanish
The crusade by "The CBS Evening News" to stretch the diminishing sound bite has had an unintended consequence: the disappearing sound bite.
The "Evening News," the network's showcase news program, responded recently to complaints that politicians do not get enough time to be heard on the evening newscasts by beginning an experiment.
It is now requiring that snippets of sound from a Presidential candidate's mouth run at least 30 seconds.


Observer; Uncle Pete? Perot?
Mountain Music:
If you love the Grand Ole Opry you're going to like the Clinton and Gore act.
It's the first Presidential ticket with an all-hillbilly accent in the annals of tape-recorded politicians.
When it comes to making music, though, Clinton and Gore are not Roy Acuff and Hank Williams, nor even Uncle Pete and Louise.
A few years ago Clinton gave what connoisseurs of the leaden hour still rate as the dullest convention speech ever delivered.
Gore is legendary for his power to make audiences beg for mercy from the earnest solemnities of his jaw music.


Local Hero Is a Star, but It's for the Other Team
Frustration was etched across the faces of Yankee players.
Frustrating outs had sprung from their timid bats.
Give Dave Fleming and Jay Buhner the credit for making Yankee Stadium a fun place for Seattle last night and a frustrating home for the Yankees.
Fleming (11-3) continued his glorious rookie season by stifling the Yankees on five hits into the ninth inning and Buhner haunted his team with two prodigious home runs that powered the Mariners to a 5-2 victory.


Quotation of the Day
It's been like American Airlines at Thanksgiving here.
We have added a whole second seating to accommodate the demand, starting at 2:30 P.M.
That's 27 tables five days for the overflow.
The amazing thing is how many people are willing to eat lunch at 2:30. -- MARY BETH FLYNN, a manager of Bouley.  [ 23:4. ]


Review/Opera; Kirov's National Style, Before Homogenization
It is hard to know how to judge musical performing groups from Russia and Eastern Europe these days.
Although distinctive national vocal and instrumental styles have already largely disappeared in the West (and how might the earlymusickers bring
those
back?), much variety of coloration and accent still survives in the former Soviet bloc. But it probably cannot long endure in an era of heightened interchange with the West, despite the frenzied nationalism of the moment.
Under the circumstances, with so many venerable traditions in danger, it becomes too easy to adopt a skewed esthetic for a company like the Kirov Opera, setting aside relatively bland international standards of excellence and seeking Russian-ness for its own sake (though not mere provincialism of the sort displayed this year in New York by the St. Petersburg National Opera).
But of course, the Kirov and other companies are entitled to their international aspirations as well and can only be judged accordingly.
So there is little for the traditionalist to do but luxuriate in the remnants of the great national sounds where they can still be heard.


CHRONICLE
INGO THOURET, the coordinator of the sixth annual Sunday by the Bay, an AIDS benefit that has become a highlight of the Long Island summer social swirl, thought he had everything ready months ago.
And then, as they say, disaster struck -- in the form of the Democratic National Convention.
"About six weeks ago," he said, "KEVIN KRIER and BILL MARTIN, who produced the fashion show for us for the last two years, said they couldn't do it. They were doing the fashion show for the convention and would have not one nail, nor worker, left."


Gymnast's Coaches Dispute Vote
A private evaluation camp to determine the United States Olympic women's gymnastics team has ended with seven athletes earning spots on the team through a vote by coaches and an eighth contemplating a challenge to the selection system.
Bill and Donna Strauss of Allentown, Pa., the coaches of the gymnast Kim Kelly, said yesterday they are soliciting legal advice that could lead to filing for an arbitration hearing with the United States Olympic Committee.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Says Gore Will Help Push His Domestic Agenda in Congress
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas said today that his newly named running mate, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee, would play a "strong role" as Vice President and would take the lead in winning Congressional approval for domestic policy proposals he plans to present in the first 100 days of a Clinton Presidency.
"I don't want Al Gore to be the kind of Vice President that sits in the United States Senate waiting to vote to break a tie," Mr.
Clinton said at a news conference at a hotel here.
"I want him to break the logjam in Washington, to give us a government that works for all the people again, and I believe he can."


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days: Senator Al Gore  SUNDAY: 10:30-11 A.M., CBS, "Face the Nation." -- (Channel 2 in New York) 11:30 A.M.-12:30 P.M., ABC, "This Week" with David Brinkley. -- (Channel 7 in New York) MONDAY: 7-7:30 A.M., NBC, "Today." -- (Channel 4 in New York)


LIVER TRANSPLANT PASSES A KEY TEST
The world's first recipient of a baboon liver underwent a procedure yesterday to determine how well his body and the new organ are adapting, and no sign of rejection of the organ was found, his doctors at the University of Pittsburgh said.
The procedure is a biopsy in which a small piece of liver is removed through a needle.
In transplant patients who receive human livers, it is routinely carried out about one to two weeks after the operation, said Dr.
Thomas E. Starzl, the transplant pioneer who performed the surgery.


No Answers in Killing of a Beloved Athlete
People here are putting up money to find out who killed Wayne Belliveau, a six-foot, six-inch tall, 310-pound weight lifter remembered as the strongest man in town.
Mr.
Belliveau, 23 years old, a college football player and a legend in the weight room among his friends in this eastern Long Island town, was shot to death during a melee at a local beach just before 2 A.M. on July 5.


The Electoral Vote, Splintered
Changing the way America picks its President calls for national consensus.
It deserves serious thought, not just partisan, state-by-state wrestling in the heat of a campaign year.
That's reason enough for a sigh of relief that Florida's flirtation with a proposal to split its electoral vote seems to have ended, at least for the moment.
Under the Constitution, each state has as many electors as it has representatives and senators; a majority of the national total is needed to win.
Florida currently gives all its electoral votes to the Presidential candidate who wins the most popular votes statewide.
The new plan gives candidates one vote for each Congressional district they carry; the statewide winner would get the other two.


Jackson Won't Say Which Democrat
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson traveled the length and breadth of Manhattan yesterday talking about the need to elect a Democratic President in the fall.
But he doggedly dodged every opportunity offered him to endorse the Clinton-Gore ticket.
When the ticket was formally announced on Thursday, Mr.
Jackson said he had "deep concerns" about it but pulled up shy of rejecting it.
Yesterday, in a series of interviews and at a rally in Washington Heights, he said that a Jackson endorsement should not be an issue.


Convention Compromise On Sleeping in the Parks
After 10 days of negotiations about where hundreds of demonstrators may sleep during the Democratic National Convention, the New York City Parks Department agreed yesterday to take them to recreation centers rather than let them camp out in Central Park.
A similar arrangement was worked out for homeless people in Chelsea Park.


Summary of Action in New York State Legislature's 215th Session
The 211 members of the State Legislature began their summer recess at 7:46 A.M. on July 3 in an atmosphere of considerable tension, after all-night negotiations on an $800 million bond act for jobs and a fiscal bailout plan for Suffolk and Nassau counties collapsed.
But the session was nonetheless notable for a budget produced almost on time: after several years of weeks-long delays, lawmakers missed the April 1 deadline this year by a single day.
And the final few days of the session last week rush of important legislation, including a measure to revamp health insurance by banning discrimination in setting rates.


Corrections
An article yesterday about 11 grants awarded by the New American Schools Development Corporation to groups proposing to design new kinds of public schools identified one winner incompletely.
The Boston-based project known as Expeditionary Learning is sponsored and organized by Outward Bound USA.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.46
5.80
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.21
3.19
5.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.26
3.26
5.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.42
6.41
8.12
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.62
7.59
8.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.60
8.53
9.46
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.28
6.28
7.15
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Latest Circus in Town


N.H.L. Forms Broadcast Unit
The National Hockey League announced the formation of a new committee, whose focus will be on increasing television exposure of the league in the United States.
GIL STEIN, president-elect of the N.H.L., and BRUCE McNALL, chairman of the league's board of governors and owner of the Los Angeles Kings, jointly approved the creation of the panel, called the Broadcast Negotiating Committee-U.S.


Polish Lawmakers Confirm First Female Premier


Baseball Again Shows It Means Business
To the Editor:
In "Unbolting Baseball's Door" (Topics of The Times, June 12), you credit both Nintendo USA, purchaser of a majority share of the Seattle Mariners, and the owners of most major-league teams, for opening up the big business of professional baseball.
Without this action, you state, Seattle would have lost its franchise to another city.


Veronese Masterpiece Damaged at the Louvre
A celebrated painting of the Italian Renaissance, "Marriage at Cana," by Veronese, has been severely damaged while undergoing restoration at the Louvre.
The painting fell while workers were trying to raise it, museum officials said.
Metal tubes of the support system ripped through the canvas in five places, officials said.
They said the largest tear was four feet long.


Religion Notes
Prayers for Democrats
While there will be speeches and parties galore as the Democrats meet in New York in the coming days, tomorrow there will be a chance for them to gather in prayer.
A special service in honor of the Democratic National Convention will be held at 10:30 A.M. at Marble Collegiate Church, at Fifth Avenue and 29th Street in Manhattan.


For a Special Number, Dial (800) VANITY
Howard Stern, the radio personality in New York, suggested not long ago that as a joke, his listeners call an "800" number that spelled out the word "man" preceded by another word suggestive of flatulence.
Within hours, the telephones at an Eastman Kodak office that uses (800) EASTMAN as its toll-free number started ringing off the hook.
"We got those calls and couldn't believe at first that it was for real," said Rod Irvin, a spokesman for Eastern Chemical Company in Kingsport, Tenn.
"Then we figured it out and saw that it was."


Closed-End Funds
Beginning next week, a new list of closed-end funds, including funds that specialize in both stocks and bonds, will be published on Mondays.
The partial tables of such funds, which have been published on Saturday and Wednesday, are being discontinued.


Boston Journal; Captain With a Mission: Making a Yankee Clipper
In the shadow of the procession of tall ships that moved on from New York to Boston this week, the boat yard that produced some of America's first and fastest clipper ships stands abandoned today, its place in history all but forgotten.
Donald McKay of the Atlantic Works Shipyard was the most prominent builder of wooden ships in the 19th century.
Yet city tours and harbor cruises will not stop at his old shipyard overlooking Boston Harbor -- now an overgrown, 4.5-acre lot littered with rusted ship parts -- even as two million visitors gather along the waterfront this weekend to watch the parade of more than 200 ships.


Police Spying Charges Prompt Los Angeles Inquiry
In his first strong step as Los Angeles Police Chief, Willie L. Williams said today that he had sealed the offices of a departmental intelligence unit and opened an investigation into accusations that it had spied for years on local politicians and celebrities.
Just 10 days after taking office with a pledge to reform the department, Chief Williams said uniformed guards would be stationed outside the offices of the unit, the Organized Crime Intelligence Division, while an investigation of its operations was under way.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Rejects 'Sleaze' TV Ad That Assails Clinton
President Bush today repudiated an independent group's advertisement about Gov.
Bill Clinton's relationship with Gennifer Flowers as "the kind of sleaze that diminishes the political process." But the advertisement, which was to began appearing tonight on cable television in New York, was pulled at the last minute by the Time Warner New York City Cable Group.
The advertisement was created by Floyd G. Brown, the Republican who is responsible for the Willie Horton commercial, perhaps the most enduring image of the 1988 campaign.
The advertisement, advises voters, for $4.99 a call, to phone "our Bill Clinton fact line and learn first-hand about Clinton's womanizing, drug use, draft dodging and other lies."


When a Wise Guy Is the Principal
Brian Coyle, the principal of St.
Joseph's School in the Tremont section of the Bronx, is a mischief maker, 305 pounds worth to be specific.
One of the big fellow's practices is to forgo haircuts for the entire school year, meaning that his locks hang well past mid-back by the annual June shearing.
He started doing this when a nun, an administrator for the Archdiocese of New York, complimented him on the progress he was making at his troubled elementary school, but questioned his hirsute appearance.


Corrections
A picture caption in some editions yesterday about an anti-abortion demonstration in Baton Rouge, La., omitted the viewpoints of the people shown arguing.
Supporters of abortion rights were at the left and the center; an anti-abortion protester was at the right.


Review/Music; Rhythm With a Message From a South African Poet
Mzwakhe Mbuli has three assets that more agitprop poets could use: an imposing bass voice, the agility to dance with head-high kicks and the backing of a superb band, the Equals.
Mr.
Mbuli, who is from South Africa, denounces apartheid, and he calls for resistance and black unity.
At S.O.B.'s on Wednesday night, his serious messages took flight on the Equals' catchy guitar lines and lickety-split polyrhythms.
Mr.
Mbuli's words praise heroes (from Marcus Garvey to Nelson Mandela to Gandhi), mourn the dead and warn that South Africa could turn into a battleground like Yugoslavia.
Behind them, the band plays bouncy mbaqanga, adding its own kinds of three-against-two syncopations and melodic twists.
The Equals' guitarist, Floyd Manana, peals out one supple line after another, sometimes with the clicking crispness of mbaqanga, sometimes with a jazzy elasticity.
In a typical song, Mr.
Mbuli might harmonize an unaccompanied introduction with the Equals' two female backup singers, recite while the band vamps, play conga drums in pattering cross-rhythms, share an exuberant dance with the women and sing a tuneful chorus.


Adirondacks Will Remain a Wilderness Without More Rules
To the Editor:
Re "Last Stand for the Adirondacks?" by John B. Oakes (Op-Ed, June 19): As the editor of Adirondack Life magazine for more than three years, and owner of a camp in the Adirondacks, I can testify that regulations galore exist to protect and preserve the Adirondacks.
The sole purpose of the large and hard-working Adirondack Park Agency is to administer those regulations.


Sports of The Times; A Native Son's Hopeful Return
APPROXIMATELY 15 minutes into Rolando Blackman's first official interview as a New York Knick, someone produced a newspaper clipping from 1977 that showed pictures of a group of New York city high school basketball stars.
In the middle, with the biggest picture, was Albert King, the star of Alexander Hamilton High School who was being billed as the greatest high school player in New York City history.
There were also pictures of Riley Clarida, Joe Foster, Larry Washington.
Not recognizable names now, but high school megastars then.


Classical Music in Review
Mostly Mozart Festival Cleveland Quartet Avery Fisher Hall


Stockton, Up By 3, Uses Direct Approach
Playing more like a consummate shotmaker than a self-proclaimed scrambler, Dave Stockton collected five birdies today and took a commanding three-stroke lead after two rounds of the United States Senior Open.
Stockton's relatively flawless 66 over the par-71 Saucon Valley Country Club not only gave him a two-round total of nine-under-par 133, but also broke the tournament record for 36 holes by two shots.
He finished three shots ahead of Gibby Gilbert and four up on Jim Colbert, Simon Hobday and Al Geiberger on a day in which five players in the field failed to complete the round this evening because of lightning and darkness.


Homosexuality to Be a Burning Catholic Issue
To the Editor:
Roman Catholics are at odds with their bishops on a host of sexual and gender issues, according to a May Gallup survey you report June 19.


Helen I. Sanders, Julian C. M. Gray
Mr. and Mrs.
Cameron H. Sanders Jr. of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter Helen Ingersoll Sanders to Julian Charles Michael Gray, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Simon Gray of Lymington, Hampshire, England.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Sanders, 28 years old, is a doctoral candidate in anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in paleolithic archeology from Cambridge University.
Her father is a retired Foreign Service officer.
Her mother, Mary Elizabeth Sanders, is a teacher at the St.
Albans Day Care Center in Washington.


Ideas on Births Are Hardly New
I am disconcerted at the inference in "Slowly Midwives Gain a Niche in the County" that a happy, natural and healthy labor and delivery cannot be provided by those of us who are highly trained medical specialists in obstetrics but solely by midwives or other non-M.D. providers.
The article presents natural childbirth, vaginal birth after Cesarean (VBAC) and a comfortable environment as new concepts specific to midwife care.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
FANNY BRICE The Original Funny Girl. By Herbert G. Goldman. Oxford University, $24.95.


Liberte, Egalite And a Sale
ALLONS, enfants!
As if the Fourth of July wasn't enough, Tuesday is Bastille Day.
Galeries Lafayette, on 57th Street between Fifth and Madison avenues, New York's smaller version of the Paris department store, plans to have cancan dancing and a crepe stand.
And even better than fireworks, the store is having its first extended sale since opening last September.


The Age of the Alto Remembered
The age of the alto has passed.
The dark-toned, deepest female voice seems to have gone the way of the Irish tenor and the tap dancer.
Most of the alto literature is to be found in the concert repertory and in song, and nowadays, when as a rule a voice must have some success on the opera stage to attain prominence, deep-voiced women are routinely trained as mezzo-sopranos.
Yet in the first half of this century, the alto held an honorable place in the vocal world.
Marian Anderson, who became the first black soloist to perform at the Met, was one of the most beloved vocalists this country ever produced.


Creating Postcards Not Just for Tourists
WHILE the Pebble Beach Golf Club in California was the host of this year's United States Open, Bill Scheller looked over the rough at the site of the 1993 Open, which is in New Jersey: the Baltusrol Golf Club in Springfield.
He walked around the sand trap and scanned the distant trees that silhouetted the hole ahead, its flag fluttering in the breeze.
To further insure the soundness of his approach shot, he lay down on the grass, never taking his eyes off the green.
Ready, he took aim, not with an 8 iron but a camera.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Delegates; Below the Podium, Democratic Nobodies Are a Kaleidoscope of Somebodies
Everyone knows the superstars of the Democratic National Convention: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York, who will nominate Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas for President; Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, the keynote speaker, and the other political celebrities, Bob Kerrey, Doug Wilder, Jim Florio, all of whom are delegates and will play prominent roles at the convention.
But what of Ava Foxman of Linwood, N.J., who says it has been her lifelong goal to attend a convention as a delegate, and who says her hobbies are wrestling, roller skating, hot-air ballooning, quilting, swimming, theater, art collecting and shopping.


From Juilliard to Shakespeare at a Pond
TWENTY years ago come September, in a Manhattan church near Lincoln Center, 12 young actors fresh out of drama school made a historic professional theater debut.
They constituted the first graduating class of the Juilliard School of the Performing Arts's drama division.
To form them into a repertory troupe was the vision of their mentor, who didn't want them to split up after years of intensive training.
That's how the Acting Company, the brainchild of the late John Houseman, was born.
Over the years, its objective changed.
Co-founded by Margot Harley, still its executive producer, the Acting Company became a touring organization independent of Juilliard, open to admissions from programs in other acting schools.


Cross-Country, On One Train
Amtrak is working on a new route to connect Los Angeles and Miami by train.
The service, which will start on April 4, 1993, will traverse eight states in about two and a half days (58 hours).
There will be three trains a week in each direction.
The new Sunset Limited, Amtrak said, will be the first transcontinental train in the United States.
In the age before automobiles and planes, individual cars on passenger trains were shuttled from one line to another, but no single train has ever traveled a regular cross-country route.
Passengers had to change at either Chicago or New Orleans.


Spare the Shears and Spoil the Yard
THOSE untidy looking sprouts that appear at the bases of many trees should be pruned away -- now!
These unwanted growths, called suckers, add nothing to the tree's ornamental appearance.
What's more, suckers are extraneous and can sap energy from the tree.
They distract from its appearance and use vital nutrients and moisture when they are not removed.
Suckers can become woody and strong; untended, the base of the tree eventually has the look of a shrub growing at its base.
These suckers are quite easy to remove.
Just take sharp pruning shears and cut them off flush with the trunk.
Be sure the shears are sharp and make the cuts flush with the trunk.
Add these clippings to compost, as they decompose readily.
If the suckers are small and succulent, as they often are when growing on the tree's trunk, snap them off between thumb and forefinger.


Traffic Alert
Because of traffic congestion expected from the Democratic National Convention, New York City transportation officials issued a gridlock alert for tomorrow through Thursday and urged motorists to take public transportation.
The Department of Transportation said these will be the most congested areas:


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended June 27 MANHATTAN Fort Washington 85,000
116 Pinehurst Avenue  (Hudson View Gardens)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 880-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; windowed kitchen, terrace, common gardens; maintenance $561, 21% tax-deductible (Broker: Stein-Perry Real Estate)  Greenwich Village 435,000
31-33 West 12th Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,650-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; maid's room, 12-ft. ceilings, balcony, 4 exposures; maintenance $770, 42% tax-deductible (Broker: Coleman-Neary Real Estate)  Upper East Side 485,000
30 East 65th Street  (Colony House)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, windowed kitchen, terrace, 3 exposures; maintenance $2,300, 47% tax-deductible (Broker: David Day Realty)  Upper West Side 535,000
50 Riverside Drive (77th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, remodeled kitchen, new windows; maintenance $1,283, 45% tax-deductible (Brokers: Wendy Walters &amp; Associates/Charles H. Greenthal)  Upper West Side 367,500
340 Riverside Drive (106th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, renovated kitchen and bath, 2 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $925, 39% tax-deductible (Broker: A.J. Clark)  BRONX  Riverdale 330,000
5920 Fieldston Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, cedar-framed contemporary; dining room, den, fireplace, semi-finished basement, rear deck, 3-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Trebach Realty)  Wakefield 320,000
4065 Duryea Avenue  3-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, terrace in two units; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; dining area in each; 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $600 (Broker: Albert R. Bryan Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Ditmas Park West 261,000
560 Marlborough Road  2-family, detached, frame house; 4 bedrooms, balcony in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, 1 bath in each; 68- by 109-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  Midwood 365,000
3107 Bedford Avenue  6-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, rear deck, 2-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,900 (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful)  Park Slope 180,000
103 Berkeley Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining room, fireplace, pine-plank floors, common garden and roof rights, original moldings and details; maintenance $550, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS  Elmhurst 171,000
94-52 46th Avenue  5-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, wood-frame house; dining room, full basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $750 (Broker: Veterans Realty)  Rego Park 200,000
67-57 Alderton Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining area, full basement, 1-car garage, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  STATEN ISLAND  Great Kills 74,000
4193-2A Amboy Road  (Avon)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. condo in a 7-year-old building; dining area, enclosed patio; common charge $108, taxes $508 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  St.
George 57,000
350 Richmond Terrace  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 880-sq.-ft. postwar condo; entry foyer, dining el, harbor view; maintenance $479, 35% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Arms Corp.)


The Finer Points Of Crossed Legs
To the Editor:
Because I was delighted to have done some consulting work on Martin Scorsese's film of the Edith Wharton novel "The Age of Innocence," I read with interest the article "Scorsese, From the Mean Streets to Charm School"  [ June 28 ] .
And I was honored to have been quoted by Mr.
Scorsese in the article, whom the writer Alessandra Stanley described as sitting ramrod straight during the interview, his legs uncrossed.
Mr.
Scorsese explained to her, smilingly, that "Letitia told me a gentleman
never
crosses his legs."


Making a Difference; Playing Hardball in Oil's Big Leagues
When H. Laurance Fuller graduated from Cornell University three decades ago, he had offers to join the Pittsburgh Pirates farm system as a pitcher or the Amoco Corporation as a chemical engineer.
Riding team buses and subsisting on greasy food was not for him, so he joined Amoco.
He has been running that company for more than a year now, and last week he made his mark.
Amoco, the nation's fifth-largest oil company, announced that it would eliminate 8,500 jobs, or 15.7 percent of its employees, by the end of the year and take an $800 million charge against earnings.


Corrections
An article on June 7 about puffin-watching off Maine misstated the number and status of puffins on Seal Island.
A total of 113 immature puffins -- not 100 nesting pairs -- have returned to Seal Island since the National Audubon Society's Puffin Project, intended to re-establish breeding colonies in islands off Maine, began at Seal Island in 1984.


Chloe Andriveau Drake, Christopher H. Martin
Chloe Andriveau Drake and Christopher Harper Martin were married yesterday at the Katharine Thayer Cate Memorial Chapel at the Cate School in Carpinteria, Calif.
The Rev.
Donald J. Hannan 3d performed the Episcopal ceremony.


A la Carte; A Diner With a Difference
I KNOW an 82-year-old woman who thinks that the food served in diners is the best around.
Some of my Manhattan and Hamptons friends would not be caught dead in one.
At the new Honest Diner, 74 Montauk Highway, in Amagansett, traditional, conservative grandmothers, sophisticated city types and blue-collar locals all chomp happily in adjoining booths.
Even without asign to identify the place.
Mercedes convertibles, pickup trucks and old clunkers fill the parking lot.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
OUTDOOR CANVASES
Everett Longley Warner was an artist who worked strictly from nature.
In fact, he was such a stickler for accuracy that he left his painting "Snowfall in the Woods" on its easel in the woods, returning each day to brush off the newly fallen snow, and start work again.


Utilitarian Objects, Larger Than Life and in Meaningful Color
ASHER B. DURAND painted this Hudson River village in 1850 and, former engraver that he was, gave every leaf and ripple its due.
He also included a Wordsworthian (or Thoreauvian) figure artfully framed by trees at the water's edge.
When exhibiting "Early Morning at Cold Spring," the artist attached the following couplet by William Cullen Bryant: "O'er clear still water swells/The music of Sabbath bells." His picture now hangs at the Montclair Art Museum in Montclair, N.J.
Cold Spring, which faces Storm King across the Hudson, looks as pretty as ever in the present, neo-romantic era.
But if poets there were, they must have been, on the day of my visit, busying themselves with children, eating at sidewalk cafes or elsewhere out on the river in water sleds, giving the fish headaches.


Removing Stairway Wall
REMOVING floor-to-ceiling walls at the top of a stairway can turn an upstairs hallway or room into a light and airy landing and also bring increased light and openness to the stairwell.
For safety, the floor surrounding the stairway must be partly enclosed.
One solution is to install a railing around the opening.
Another, described here, is to build a low wall around it.
Such a wall costs less than a bannister-style railing and offers more protection in a house with small children.


Jennie Kwon, Albert Kim
Jennie Hae Ran Kwon, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Young Sei Kwon of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Albert Ookun Kim, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jae Ho Kim of West Bloomfield, Mich.
The Rev.
John Elliott conducted the Presbyterian ceremony at the Greenville Community Reformed Church.
Mrs.
Kim, 26 years old, is a brand media manager at Grey Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father is an associate director of rehabilitation at the St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center and an assistant clinical professor at Columbia University in New York.


Darien Gets a New Chinese Restaurant
THE economy may stumble but chances are there will always be a new Chinese restaurant opening.
One of the most attractive to do so in recent months is Li's Brothers Inn in Darien.
The restaurant, which occupies a large space in the Good Wives Shopping Center, is obviously a serious enterprise, not a neighborhood chop suey parlor.
Frosted glass panels at the entrance lead into a spacious dining room with a pale plum patterned wallpaper, Chinese art and lacquered wainscoting.
A green and rose carpet, well-spaced tables with comfortable high-back chairs and tapes of soft Chinese music add to the dining experience, which is enhanced considerably by an unusually considerate and well-trained staff.


3 Ex-Soviet Republics Dominate at Olympiad
LED by Russia, three former Soviet republics swept the medals in the Olympiad, June 7-25 in Manila.
The Russians scored 39 points out of a possible 56 to win the gold medal.
Unheralded Uzbekistan scored 35 points in the 14 rounds to capture the silver and Armenia won the bronze with 34 1/2 points.
Trailing the medalists in the 102-team field was the United States, which took fourth place with 34 points.


Grilled Tuna With a Sauce and Two Salads
THE centerpiece of a summer menu is often food from the grill.
To round out the main course, colorful salads of vegetables or filling starches can be added.
These days, instead of hamburgers, steaks, chicken or butterflied leg of lamb, which were once typical, the ingredients sizzling on the grill are often types of seafood.
For grilling, about the best fish is tuna.


Imaginary Town Is Real Life for Troubled Children
Dameel, a slender boy of 9, says he does not know what it means to dream.
When he walked through the bright red door of Greenburgh Eleven Elementary School here three years ago, he had already given up on himself.
His lifetime is sketched in a caseworker's file.
His young mother, a crack addict, beat him with a plastic baseball bat.
His father is unknown.
Left to fend for himself, Dameel stole from classrooms, stores and cars.
He stayed briefly with a grandmother, then in a group home in Brooklyn.


Anne Fendrich, Gregory Stevens
Anne Caroline Fendrich, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Welles Fendrich Jr. of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Gregory Blaisdell Stevens, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Stevens of Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Patrick Connor performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel.
Mrs.
Stevens, 25 years old, is the manager of the Banana Republic store in Grosse Pointe, Mich.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father is the president of Princeton Growth Management, investment consultants.
Her mother, Roberta Fendrich, is a sales associate with John T. Henderson Inc., a Princeton real-estate agency.


Wrong Numbers
Tonight's the night, Howard Johnson was saying, his reddish beard sparkling with sweat.
Tonight.
In white T-shirt and blue shorts he had undertaken a half-hour of batting practice in the cage under the stands of the Astrodome, five hours before Friday night's game.
The crack, crack, crack of his batted balls echoed insistently through the bowels of the ball park.
Tonight's the night, he said, that he breaks out of his batting slump.


Police, and Fence, Blunt Louisiana Abortion Protest
It looked as if it might be the most favorable territory yet for the national anti-abortion group Operation Rescue.
But a 6-foot-high chain-link fence, a brutal Louisiana summer heat and a heavy police presence took the edge off the group's protests this week at the Delta Women's Clinic here.
Operation Rescue chose Louisiana for its effort in part because of the state's strong anti-abortion reputation.
But despite some angry predawn confrontations and jeering demonstrators massed at the fence's gates, the doctor at the clinic said he was able to perform abortions throughout the protests.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The City; A City Welcome, Palm Up, To Democratic Delegates
John Mooney is one of the few New Yorkers who can rub his hands in certain anticipation of fresh spoils from the political machinations of the nation's Democrats this week as they pour into the city to certify their Presidential ticket and spin out dreams and warnings in four nights of convention oratory.
"I figure Madison Square Garden will be good for 500 pounds of leftover food a night," said Mr.
Mooney, a logistics official for City Harvest, a nonprofit trucking concern that funnels excess victuals from well-larded public events to 130 of the city's soup kitchens, flophouses and cardboard-box towns tucked away along the urban tenderloin.


Sometimes It's Like Being a Dodger Fan
SAVING REMNANTS
Feeling Jewish in America.
By Sara Bershtel and Allen Graubard. 333 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $24.95.


Midsummer Melodies
Lincoln Center offered music lovers Russian opera, Mozart and good ole country and western.


Perri Cartledge, Jeffrey E. Roe
R.
Eugene and Gale Cartledge of Saddle River, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Perri Ann Cartledge to Jeffrey Edward Roe, a son of Robert Roe and A. Nikola Roe, both of Seattle.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cartledge, 27 years old, is an assistant account executive in Washington at Burson-Marsteller, the public-relations company.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Union Camp Corporation in Wayne, N.J., the paper manufacturer.


Husbands, Wives, Friends and Lovers
DURING one of the moments of identity mix-up and bedroom switching that propels "Don't Dress for Dinner," a sex farce at the Westport Country Playhouse, one frenzied participant stops for breath and declares, "This is not remotely funny; it's a disaster."
Not quite. "Don't Dress for Dinner" is
remotely
funny, not a disaster, and that's as praiseworthy as it gets.
One of those infernal British diversions about a cheating husband, his cheating wife and their inverted sense of morality, this one happens to have been originally written in French.


INSIDE
Scrutiny of Reagan Aides
Iran-Contra prosecutors are re-examining Edwin Meese, Donald Regan, George Shultz and other top Reagan Administration officials.
Page 17.
The Cairo Experiment
Egypt's global ascendancy is being undercut by a faltering economy, growing dissent and violence.
Page 6.
Mexicans Brace for Vote
Two Mexican states hold elections today after a campaign that tested how democracy -- and strategic spending -- have evolved.
Page 3.


BUGS IN THE ELECTRONIC VILLAGE
James Gleick's article "Chasing Bugs in the Electronic Village" (June 14) can be read as the most cogent argument against throwing additional billions of dollars down that celestial sinkhole affectionately called S.D.I. by its advocates, but known as Star Wars to the rest of us.
Star Wars, driven by the most complicated computer program ever attempted (which will not be "beta tested"), is expected to run smoothly the first time through, although the consequences of a failure may be somewhat more serious than the indiscriminate transposing of em- and en-dashes.
GEORGE CHIEN
Emerson, N.J.


Those Payton Wheels
WALTER PAYTON will drive a Ford Mustang in today's Trans-Am race, the feature event in the Des Moines Grand Prix running this weekend on a twisting, two-mile street circuit.


Mass Media Don't Create the Political Fiascos; Who Is This Elite?
To the Editor:
Any woman could tell Richard Brookhiser, author of "Quayle Is Serious. Why Aren't We?" (Op-Ed, June 18), why Dan Quayle isn't taken seriously.
He's being judged by his appearance.
Young, attractive blonds have a hard time being taken seriously.
However, I agree with Mr.
Brookhiser that Mr.
Quayle is raising serious questions.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Wilson Beebe Jr.; Funerals and Government Regulations
ON Route 35 here, a mile inland from Sea Girt's beaches, many of the businesses -- motels, restaurants, shopping centers -- cater to the pleasure-bent tourist.
Wilson Beebe Jr., the executive director of the New Jersey State Funeral Directors Association, sits at a desk on Route 35 engulfed in neat piles of letters and memorandums concerned with life's final ceremony.
The association's 766 members, representing 500 funeral establishments, comprise 90 percent of those engaged in conducting funerals in New Jersey.
And since the 38-year-old Mr.
Beebe became executive director seven years ago, the organization has steadily expanded, in large measure to help members cope with the growing number of rules and regulations imposed by the Federal and state governments.


Suzanne Lobo, Michael Maguire
Mr. and Mrs.
Walter R. Lobo of Rumson, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Suzanne Louise Lobo, to Michael Gerard Maguire, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Maguire of Short Hills, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.


Tenants Seek Black Muslim Guards at Project in Queens
With stories of drugs and shootings and fearful complaints of inadequate police protection, residents of the Queensbridge Houses development in Queens are demanding that the Housing Authority hire Black Muslim security guards to patrol the project, but the agency is refusing.
At an emotional meeting in the community center of the Long Island City development last week, nearly 100 tenants overwhelmingly backed the proposal, saying that the Housing Authority police at Queensbridge needed to be augmented by the guards if the 3,100 families living in the complex -- the city's largest low-income public housing project -- were to have genuine security.


BUGS IN THE ELECTRONIC VILLAGE
Gleick's complaints are misdirected.
Counterproductive design goals, not poor craftsmanship, should be blamed for Microsoft's difficulties.
Bugs happen.
Word for Windows, in particular, is a system devised to try to make tedious tasks seem a little less so by entertaining the operators with a variety of video claptrap that diverts them from the real work of deciding what to do and getting on with it.
If all worked perfectly, a small productivity gain from improved operator morale might be a subject for analysis, but all doesn't, so it isn't.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Convention; Hoops Gone, Hoopla Begins: Democrats Are Given a Party
Standing on a steamy platform -- the railroad kind, not the political kind -- Mayor David N. Dinkins welcomed the chairman of the Democratic Party to town yesterday as New York City kicked off what it hopes will be a financial and public-relations bonanza: the Democratic National Convention at Madison Square Garden.
With convention business giving hotels their best July in four years, the police spending $6 million, including overtime pay, and caterers whipping up hors d'oeuvres for hundreds of parties, city officials are upbeat about the prospect of an immediate psychological lift, with economic benefits to follow.
Just how successful the convention is for the city will not be known until long after out-of-town delegates pack up and head home at the end of the week.


Showdown Looms on Sports Betting
LIKE a tied ball game in the closing minutes of play, the battle over sports betting in New Jersey's casinos has intensified in recent weeks as each side in the debate goes all out against its opponent.
With time running out to place on the November ballot a state constitutional-amendment referendum on sports betting, the opposing sides have stepped up their efforts to highlight either the economic advantages or the moral pitfalls of permitting gambling on sporting events.


Ithaca Pursues Frat-House Code Violators
LAST May, this city notified Cornell University's fraternities that it would begin a crackdown on the long-festering problem of building-code violations in chapter houses, which one Cornell official says are "in terrible condition."
Late last month, four of the city's five building inspectors began the task.
Richard L. Eckstrom, the city's Buildings Commissioner, said he might move as soon as next month to close or fine chapter houses that fail to make necessary repairs and renovations required by housing codes.


Green Space
To the Editor:
New Yorkers should be concerned about the destruction of green space that will result from plans to construct a new building for New York State Psychiatric Institute on the west side of Riverside Drive just north of West 165th Street ("Columbia's Big Medical Center Plans Expansion," March 29).


Wall Street; Is There a Future for Dissidents?
When the outside directors of the General Motors Corporation reprimanded the management of the troubled car maker in April, pundits predicted that the uprising would embolden the directors of other sleeping giants and improve the chances that investors will benefit.
But one interesting test of how far such muscle-flexing will spread is whether the G.M. dissidents are being offered positions on other corporate boards, and the early indication is that the careers of the G.M. directors are not being cut short.


Huntington
To the Editor:
Your article about Huntington on June 7, while both interesting and informative, omitted mention of several Roman Catholic schools that serve the community.
One of them is St.
Patrick School in Huntington, which opened in 1922, and now educates children from pre-k through the eighth grade.


Business Diary/July 5-10
THE ECONOMY The World's Richest Nations Are Too Poor to Party at Munich


Three Cheers for Microsoft's Millionaires . . .
To the Editor:
What?
You can get rich by being hardworking, unassuming and brainy? ("Microsoft's Unlikely Millionaires," June 28.) And you can still make it by dreaming about things loftier than your portfolio?
Hopefully, the Microsoft millionaires are a portent of things to come in the business world, rather than an aberration.
I, for one, could not wait for the "geniuses" of the 1980's to be exposed as the bluff artists and posturing schemers many of them were.


India Hart Wood, Paul S. Mandel
India Hart Wood, a daughter of Myron Wood of Colorado Springs and Nancy Wood of Santa Fe, N.M., was married last night in Beverly, Mass., to Paul Stephen Mandel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice S. Mandel of Port Washington, L.I.
Anne L. Holland, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at Long Hill, a historic mansion.
Ms.
Wood, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Dartmouth College, as did her husband.
She is an international markets specialist for the Riverside Publishing Company, which prepares educational tests, in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father is a photographer in Colorado Springs.


Fuzzy Finish at Yonkers Is Declared a Dead Heat
The Yonkers Trot, the first leg of the Triple Crown for trotters, produced the first dead heat in its 38-year history tonight when Mc Cluckey and Magic Lobell were declared co-winners.
There was a 15-minute delay in the decision by the judges because of an objection against Magic Lobell by Jan Johnson, the driver of Pleasure Prince, who finished third.


Revealed at Last: Why People Hate TV
If there's one thing a misanthrope can't stand, it's a closet misanthrope.
And according to Florence King, a columnist for National Review and the author of a new book on the subject, the classic example of a closet misanthrope is a person who claims to disdain television.
In this excerpt from her eighth book, "With Charity Toward None," subtitled "A Fond Look at Misanthropy," she reveals what the members of the anti-television set are really afraid of.
The widespread hatred of television is a form of closet misanthropy of special interest to anyone who grew up in the radio era.
We didn't hate radio and blame it for all sorts of ills.
We didn't worry about how many hours a day our radios were on; we didn't lie about our radio habits ("I never listen to it").
We didn't claim that radio invaded our privacy, and our newspapers did not contain self-help pieces entitled "Turning Off the Radio Habit."


Survival of the Loudest
Politically, the lesson of the Presidential campaign so far is that anger trumps.
The candidates who have done better than expected have been best at striking an indignant-outsider pose: Pat Buchanan, Paul Tsongas, Jerry Brown and, finally and most dramatically, Ross Perot.
Even the Bush-Quayle ticket is trying to appear as fed up with Washington as it plausibly can.


French Police End Truckers' Protest


Soaring to the Stars on Another Burst of K's
The question of credentials lingered in David Cone's consciousness.
His selection to the All-Star Game was official, his airline reservations for San Diego confirmed, his basic belief in his worthiness undoubted.
But there remained a bit of baseball business -- tonight's start against the Astros -- and with it a chance not so much to justify his selection as to emphasize its appropriateness.
Suffice it to say, National League Manager Bobby Cox won't be making any apology for his choice next week.


Pursued by Nazis and Other Demons
DESTINY'S JOURNEY
By Alfred Doblin.
Edited by Edgar Passler Translated by Edna McCown. 338 pp.
New York: Paragon House. $24.95.


Julia Wright, Peter Ziv
Julia Jennings Wright, a daughter of Mrs.
Norton Stevens of New York and the late Philip C. Wright, was married yesterday in Ridgefield, Conn., to Peter Gordon Ziv, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard G. Ziv Jr. of Northfield, Ill.
The Rev.
John R. Gilchrist performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Ziv, 32 years old, is a teacher-therapist for the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Vassar College and received master's degrees in special education from the Bank Street College of Education and social work from Columbia University.
Her stepfather, a former chairman of the Norlin Corporation, is an investor and management consultant in New York.
Her grandfather the late George H. Love was a chairman of the Chrysler Corporation.


The Coaxing Continues
The Atlanta Falcons, trying desperately to coax DEION SANDERS out of his baseball uniform and into shorts for the start of training camp, have extended the deadline of their $800,000 bonus offer to Aug. 1.
Two weeks ago, the Falcons offered Sanders $1 million to report for the start of a pre-training camp on Monday, or $800,000 to be there for the first day of regular workouts on July 25.


Spare the Shears and Spoil the Yard
THOSE untidy looking sprouts that appear at the bases of many trees should be pruned away -- now!
These unwanted growths, called suckers, add nothing to the tree's ornamental appearance.
What's more, suckers are extraneous and can sap energy from the tree.
They distract from its appearance and use vital nutrients and moisture when they are not removed.
Suckers can become woody and strong; untended, the base of the tree eventually has the look of a shrub growing at its base.
These suckers are quite easy to remove.
Just take sharp pruning shears and cut them off flush with the trunk.
Be sure the shears are sharp and make the cuts flush with the trunk.
Add these clippings to compost, as they decompose readily.
If the suckers are small and succulent, as they often are when growing on the tree's trunk, snap them off between thumb and forefinger.


WASHING BUDDHA'S FACE
Philip Shenon's report on the restoration of Angkor Wat by the Archeological Survey of India was informative ("Washing Buddha's Face," June 21).
However, he might have mentioned that this is not the first restoration of Angkor Wat to be undertaken; the French, who are so scandalized by what the Indians are doing, had the run of the place for nearly 100 years and perpetrated some ghastly "improvements" of their own.
A French engineer in the story laments the Indians' extensive use of cement, but the French poured a great deal of cement in their day as well, adding ugly struts and pillars, completely inauthentic coffered ceilings, and, worst of all, mock-Gothic flying buttresses to hold up some walls.
JAMIE JAMES
New York, N.Y.


Mandela Heads for Convention
Nelson Mandela will attend the Democratic National Convention on Wednesday as the guest of the Democratic National Chairman, Ronald H. Brown, a party spokeswoman said last night.


Serbs Assaulting Last Stronghold In Bosnia's East
Four days after the leaders of seven major industrial democracies demanded an end to Serbian military offensives in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbian nationalist forces today began a major assault on the last big Muslim-controlled town in eastern Bosnia.
The attack on Gorazde, southeast of Sarajevo, threw the Bosnian Government into further desperation.


RECORD BRIEFS
Prokofiev: Symphonies Nos. 2, 7
Berlin Philharmonic conducted by Seiji Ozawa. Deutsche Grammophon 435 027-2; CD.


Public &amp; Private; The Standard Bearers
I once wrote a column called "Life in the 30's." The title, a reference to my age, was a problem.
Some readers thought it referred to the Depression and some thought it referred to the Murray Hill section of Manhattan.
But the worst part was that it was exclusionary: readers who were over 40 felt disinvited from the audience, which is the last thing any writer wants.


JULY 5-11;
"When someone offers you a gift, the polite thing to do is to say, 'Thank you,' " said Herman D. James, president of New Jersey's Glassboro State College.
"But when that gift amounts to $100 million dollars, a simple thank you hardly seems enough."
So, when Henry M. Rowan, a 68-year-old engineer who made a fortune producing industrial furnaces, announced last week that he and his wife, Betty, were giving such a gift to Glassboro State, Mr.
James reciprocated by announcing that the college would be renamed Rowan College of New Jersey.


Short Cuts: Easy Does It
NEW YORK
Roger Thompson, Barneys New York, Seventh Avenue at 17th Street.
Cost: $57 to $150 "It's relatively short, extremely untidy, very, very soft and uncomplicated, as if you just got out of bed," said Roger Thompson, owner.
"The easy look hasn't been an editorial trend, but personally, we've never drifted away from the easy look."
SEATTLE
Gene Juarez Salon, Four Seasons Olympic Hotel, 411 University Street. Cost: $25 to $75
"It's a shorter, rounded, layered length with a full crown that can focus on the eyes, the cheekbones or the jawline," said Marco, creative director.
"The layers promote movement. In Seattle, life is outdoorsy, so natural, easy-to-wear hair is still beautiful." HOUSTON
The Beauty Salon, Neiman Marcus, 2600 South Post Oak Road. Cost: $60
"All one length," said Lois Shirley, artistic director.
"A long, layered bob. Instead of cutting it off at the bottom, bluntly, we hold each strand of hair at 90 degrees to the scalp and cut it off, so it has a lift in it and movement. But it looks as if it was the same length."  ATLANTA
Rich's Beauty Salon, 4300 Ashford Dunwoody Road. Cost: $35
"The short, cropped, soft, contoured look," said Paul Blackstone, creative styles director.
"It's very easy maintenance, and you can scrunch-dry it with your hands. Can be blown out with a round brush for a softer look." SAN FRANCISCO
Yosh for Hair, 173 Maiden Lane.  Cost: $33 to $65
"The best seller is a chin-length bob, with a rounded shape, not a super-blunt cut," said Gina Khan, floor manager.
"By using texturizing shears and making the edges diffused, the hair has a lot of movement and is very, very soft. You can blow it dry or set it on Velcro rollers and get a fuller, softer look, or you can slick it back and get another different look."


At Work; When the Subject Is Harassment
IT may have seemed at some point last fall that the Anita Hill-Clarence Thomas hearings, though riveting, would have only an evanescent effect, as happens with many events that engage the public imagination.
Yet the fallout is still widely apparent, and every time calm begins to reign on the harassment front itself, something makes it roar back to life: most recently the Tailhook scandal, involving hundreds of naval aviators, and testimony before Congress late last month that harassment of women in occupations dominated by men -- among those who gave testimony were a garbage-truck driver and a math professor -- is endemic.
Just enough time has elapsed since the hearings to allow the publishing industry -- itself a notorious domain of sexual predation -- to crank out the first post-hearings wave of books on sexual harassment.
The books noted here vary in quality but they have a unified message: the easiest way to avoid problems in the workplace is to prevent them by having strong, unambivalent and prominently posted policies.
Some of the books are oriented more toward managers than employees, but all could be used by either side to learn more about harassment and its consequences.


Study in South Texas Finds High Birth-Defect Rate
State and Federal officials who have been investigating neurological deformities among newborns in South Texas over the last six years said they had found elevated levels of such conditions but had not identified a cause.
After more than a year of investigating, the officials said that the rate of babies born with incomplete or missing brains, a condition called anencephaly, or other neurological disorders was more than double the national average.
They added that such conditions had increased from 1986 to 1991, the period studied.


On the Road


Removing Stairway Wall
REMOVING floor-to-ceiling walls at the top of a stairway can turn an upstairs hallway or room into a light and airy landing and also bring increased light and openness to the stairwell.
For safety, the floor surrounding the stairway must be partly enclosed.
One solution is to install a railing around the opening.
Another, described here, is to build a low wall around it.
Such a wall costs less than a bannister-style railing and offers more protection in a house with small children.


Hooray for Courier
To the Sports Editor:
It is unfortunate that your reporter chose to use the words "automaton" and a player "with an attitude that's just short of belligerent" to describe Jim Courier ("Courier Can't Stop Cranking Victories," The Times, June 8).
In the few matches of his that I have watched on television, he has been a model of sportsmanship, and in his acceptance speech after his victory in Paris, he was generous-spirited and anything but belligerent.
He had the tactfulness and good manners to prepare a speech of several sentences in French -- and spoke it, naturally and easily, in what to my ears sounded like a very good accent.
Then, reverting to English, he praised his two fine coaches, giving them virtually all the credit for his superb tournament.
With obvious emotion, he also warmly praised his opponent in the final, Petr Korda.
GEORGE PITCHER Princeton, N.J.


Lea K. Reams, Andrew C. Emery
Lea Kristin Reams, a daughter of John M. Reams of Kansas City, Mo., and Mary N. Savoca of Ridgefield, Conn., was married yesterday in Concord, N.H., to Andrew Christian Emery, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Emery 3d of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Edmund K. Sherrill performed the Episcopal ceremony at the chapel at St.
Paul's School.
Mrs.
Emery, 25 years old, is a financial analyst at Christie's, a New York auction house.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is a partner in the Kansas City law firm of Bryan, Cave, McPheeters &amp; McRoberts.
Her mother is an operations manager at the Connecticut National Bank in Stamford, Conn.


Marty Stuart Doesn't Need A Big Hat to Be Country
The Island Inn Motel is situated on a strip of highway here that bears the misnomer Old Country Road.
Shoulder to shoulder with fur outlets, tile manufacturers, fast-food joints and muffler shops, the Island Inn leans more toward the motel part of its name: it has a lobby with a fake fireplace and English reproduction furniture, endless corridors lined with nondescript numbered doors, a pool out back with pink and green tables, umbrellas and lawn chairs.
It's neat and clean, but it sure isn't country.
Sitting poolside for an interview, the 33-year-old singer Marty Stuart glances around with the mild confusion of one slightly out of his element.
"Do you ever get the feeling," he says, "that we're at a freshly painted Holiday Inn?"


4th Time Around, and Still Paddling!
Greg Barton was born with club feet, and subsequent surgery to alleviate the deformity did little to help.
Bones were fused and Barton walks on the balls of his feet with a slight limp.
He has almost no calf muscles in his legs.
But no one would call him handicapped.


A 'League' Where Eddie Can't Play
It's well known that a film's historical time frame has absolutely nothing to do with how contemporary that film may feel.
But that point is seldom illustrated as clearly as it was last week with the simultaneous arrival of "Boomerang," a seemingly ultra-modern corporate comedy that actually belongs somewhere back in the mid-1950's, and "A League of Their Own," the 1940's baseball story that couldn't be more charmingly up to date.
"Boomerang" incorporates present-day elements like the vision of a slick, prosperous black middle class and the insistence on obnoxious sexual candor (the film includes no real nudity, but Grace Jones makes a point of dropping her underwear on two different occasions).
Despite those timely touches, "Boomerang" summons up a quaintly idealized world of swanky offices, cavalier bachelors and admiring females, with only one brief shot of a condom wrapper to suggest that life is no longer so carefree.


Exhuming a Dirty Joke
A NUMBER of years ago, in a magazine or book, I ran across the information that Napoleon Bonaparte's penis had been removed from his body after his death by a relic seeker, who later sold it to a collector.
This germ of a story, once caught, grew.
Over time it transformed itself into that half-organic, half-mechanical phantasm called an Idea for a Novel.
I began looking through books on Napoleon for references to this incident -- skimming accounts of his death, scouring the P's in indexes -- but found nothing in the works of academic historians.
Napoleon, however, is to the world what the Civil War is to the United States: he attracts more buffs, amateur historians, collectors, re-enacters and impersonators than any other figure in world history.
If he had lived in contemporary America he would have made someone a fortune in licensing fees.


For Mazda, the Busy Road to Success
NEXT time you think you have too much to do, consider the course that Mazda has set for itself.
First, it has decided to become the "New Mazda," and to that end it has embarked on a marketing strategy designed to put its products on the map in a big way.
It has stepped up its advertising, and it has decided to do things in a different way.


Rabin, Filling Cabinet, Picks Peres as His Foreign Minister
Former Prime Minister Shimon Peres was chosen today to become Foreign Minister in the new Government that Yitzhak Rabin of the triumphant Labor Party will submit to Parliament on Monday.
Mr.
Peres, a longtime Labor rival of Mr.
Rabin, agreed to take the post, which he held from 1986 to 1988, even though he will not be in charge of the Middle East peace talks.
That responsibility will be kept by Mr.
Rabin himself, Israel television and radio said tonight.


What Hidden Costs in Spreading the Insurance Risk?
SHOULD health insurers be obliged to cover a 50-year-old overweight bartender for the same premium as a 20-year-old secretary who swims a mile each day?
"This is what insurance was designed to do," said Robert Jaffe, a spokesman for the Gay Men's Health Crisis.
The insurers' job, he added, is to "take those who are considered to be risky and blend them with those who are young and healthy." And last month the New York State Legislature agreed, requiring health insurers who write policies for any small group or individual to offer comparable policies to all, and at a uniform price.


Miss Edwards, Henry Tillman 3d
Mary Caroline Edwards, a vice president of corporate finance at the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York, was married yesterday to Henry Theodore Tillman 3d, a director of corporate finance at the Barclays de Zoete Wedd merchant bank in London.
The Rev.
Peter M. Larsen performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Tillman, 30 years old, graduated from the University of Alberta and received an M.B.A. from the University of Western Ontario.
She is a daughter of James and Sheila Edwards of Edmonton, Alberta.
Her father is a member of Canada's House of Commons and is the parliamentary secretary to the House leader.


He Is a Few of His Favorite Things
IMPOSSIBLE VACATION
By Spalding Gray. 228 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
MONSTER IN A BOX
By Spalding Gray. 81 pp. New York: Vintage Books. Paper, $9.


Worried by Ridership Figures, Metro-North Is Trying Harder
METRO-NORTH, the second-largest commuter railroad in the country, is treating passengers like honored guests these days.
Conductors have been attending what the railroad calls charm school.
All personnel who deal with the public are wearing newly designed uniforms, and special customer ambassadors -- dressed in a snappy gray and maroon version of the outfits -- stand waiting in Grand Central Terminal to greet travelers as they disembark in Manhattan.
Ridership figures slipped last year, and the Metropolitan Transit Authority's spending plans for long-range improvements have not been approved by New York State.
As a result, Metro-North, a division of the Metropolitan Transit Authority, is attempting to shore up its customer base, which last year provided close to 55 percent of the company's operating revenue.


Hands Off Mrs. Roosevelt
To the Editor:
I have just finished reading the letter about Eleanor Roosevelt from Nancy Roosevelt Ireland, in which she takes to task the review of Blanche Wiesen Cook's "Eleanor Roosevelt" (April 19), which proposes that Mrs.
Roosevelt might have had some extramarital affairs and mentions the name of Sgt.
Earl Miller of the New York state troopers.


Shore Towns Dread Release of Mentally Ill
Amid complaints that their towns have become warehouses for the mentally ill, residents of several communities along the Jersey Shore are worried about the possible arrival of hundreds of men and women previously considered unprepared for life outside of institutions.
The plan is causing much anxiety in places like Ocean Grove, which has seen many of its aging bed-and-breakfast hotels and boarding houses converted into homes for thousands of mentally ill people who were removed from state hospitals during the last two decades.
Such residents now make up 10 percent of the city's population. 'Mainstreaming' and the Reality
"The state talks about 'mainstreaming' the mentally ill but the reality is these poor people are being put away and forgotten in 19th-century boarding houses used as the poorhouses of the 21st century," said Jennifer Boyd, a documentary film maker who is president of the Ocean Grove Homeowners Association.
She is one of many who hope that the state will successfully relocate 450 patients scheduled for discharge next year and not dump them in Monmouth and Ocean County beachfront towns.


Networking; Documentation? It's Often Better to Go Buy a Book
Training people to handle computer networks is no joke.
It'll cost American industry an estimated $1 billion and more next year.
But wait.
For all the computerized, multimedia training aids available out there, most people still learn about networking the old-fashioned way -- by book.
And books are beginning to look efficient.
A book, as opposed to "documentation" or computer manuals, tends to be clearly written.
Three seem especially helpful to those unfamiliar with local area networks as well as those with more experience who need a reference guide.


SOME U.S. OFFICIALS REMAIN SKEPTICAL ON TRADE PROGRESS
Countering what they perceive as unwarranted optimism after the Munich summit meeting this week, high-ranking Bush Administration officials say the meeting did not produce substantial progress toward a 108-nation agreement aimed at lowering world trade barriers.
Carla A. Hills, the United States Trade Representative, said Friday that the Munich meeting left unchanged the stalemate in farm trade negotiations with the European Community.
"I'm tempted to say they're not affected," she said, "because in effect we still don't have a proposal from the Europeans."


Leslie Livingston, Francis Alfano
Leslie Anne Livingston, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward W. Livingston of Eastchester, N.Y., was married yesterday in Bronxville, N.Y., to Francis John Alfano, a son of Anthony J. Alfano and Elaine Rees, both of Phoenix.
The Rev.
Christopher L. Webber performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Alfano, 27 years old, is a public relations consultant with Armstrong/Stelzer Communications in New York.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father is a senior vice president of Consolidated Edison in New York.


U.N. Observers Delay Visit to Somalia
A United Nations plan to send cease-fire observers to the Somali capital, Mogadishu, this week has been delayed after a local warlord complained that a United Nations plane flew money to his chief opponent.
Somalia has been in a clan-based war since President Mohammed Siad Barre, the leader for 21 years, was ousted in January 1991 by guerrilla forces of the United Somali Congress.


Lauren Latkany, Rastislav Levicky
Lauren Latkany, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Latkany of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday in Longmeadow, Mass., to Rastislav Levicky, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Vladimir Levicky of Los Alamitos, Calif.
The Rev.
Jeddie Brooks performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church.


A Winning Couple, One at a Time
A STRANGE streak is in progress at national championships for Larry Mori of Ballston Lake, N.Y.
In 1990 he won the North American Open Swiss Teams partnering Kitty Bethe of Manhattan.
Last year he won the National Open Pairs with her husband, Henry Bethe.
And in March in Pasadena, Calif., he won the National Mixed Pairs title with Kitty.
The cognoscenti are now wondering which event he will win next year with Henry.
In the Mixed Pairs in Pasadena, Kitty Bethe opened the West hand with one heart.
An optimistic South player leaped to four spades after his partner had used a Michaels cue-bid, showing length in spades and one of the minor suits.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
HONEY AND HARMONY
Sweet Honey in the Rock, the 18-year-old women's a capella quintet, will perform on Friday at the Tarrytown Music Hall.
Using percussion instruments as accompaniment, the singers move musically through the entire black experience, including the congregational choral style, gospel, blues, jazz and close harmony.
Their songs deal with struggle and celebration, love and despair, interpreted by a wide range of voices.


Paul Theroux's Travels
To the Editor:
In his review of "The Happy Isles of Oceania" by Paul Theroux (June 14), Eric Hansen asserts that the primary purpose of Mr.
Theroux's little kayak is "to transport its owner to remote island villages so he can make snide comments about the locals."


For All the Star Power, a Mixed Performance
A friend once joked that Woody Allen exploits New York architecture the way other movie directors exploit women.
Mr.
Allen bathes the city's skyscrapers with mood lighting and music, and the effect is as intoxicating as a dry Manhattan served straight up.
Alas, many architects also treat buildings like starlets.
They fail to grasp that an urban building has more important things to do than stand there and look dreamy.
It must also shoulder the serious job of organizing urban space.
Like Woody Allen, the New York architect Frank Williams delights in the romance of the city's skyline.
Mr.
Williams's design for Trump Palace, a new luxury residential complex on Third Avenue at 68th Street, is a soaring tribute to Irwin Chanin, a supreme stylist of Manhattan's Art Deco architecture.
And it provides a golden opportunity to compare Chanin's work with architecture today.


Alyssa A. Kelly, John A. O'Donnell
Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Kelly of Yorktown Heights, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alyssa Anne Kelly, to John Alan O'Donnell, a son of Thomas N. O'Donnell of Rochester, Mich., and Judith S. Ent of Indianapolis.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kelly, 24 years old, is a sales assistant at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Marymount University in Arlington, Va.
Her father is an investment advisor in New York.


School Panel Rejects Foreign-Accent Curb
A school board subcommittee in this western Massachusetts city has rejected a proposal that would have barred from first-grade or second-grade classrooms any teacher who spoke English with a foreign accent.
By a vote of 3 to 0, the curriculum subcommittee turned back the proposal on Wednesday night after being advised by the board's lawyer, John Teahan, that such a ban would not be legally enforceable.
The office of the State Attorney General had threatened to sue the board on civil rights grounds if the proposal was adopted.


Making a Breakaway With the Yellow Jersey
Now even the man in the yellow jersey is being allowed to join breakaways in the Tour de France.
Pascal Lino, the Frenchman who leads the world's greatest bicycle race, did just that today during the seventh stage, 196.5 kilometers (122 miles) from Brussels to Valkenburg.


Russian Composers Featured in Festival's Opening
SUMMER MUSIC 92's ninth season begins at 8 P.M. on Saturday in Harkness Park in Waterford with Peter Sacco conducting the Connecticut Orchestra in two Russian showpieces: Prokofiev's "Lieutenant Kije" Suite and Moussorgsky's "Pictures at an Exhibition," the latter in the Ravel orchestration; the program also includes Ravel's Piano Concerto for the Left Hand with Leon Fleisher the guest soloist.
The remaining five Saturday night concerts maintain an emphasis on popular favorites, although there are some comparative rarities along the way, including Haydn's Symphony No. 8 (Aug. 15) and the "Pezzo Capriccioso" of Tchaikovsky, with Vagram Saradjian the cello soloist (Aug. 22).
Among the other Saturday night guest artists are Dinah Bryant, singing the "Last Orchestral Songs" of Richard Strauss on Aug. 1, Cho-Liang Lin playing the Brahms Violin Concerto the week following, and the trumpeter Rolf Smedvig, of Empire Brass, featured in the Haydn Concerto on Aug. 15.


A Question of Identity
Laurance Rockefeller has now decided to follow his Uncle Nelson into the political arena, but it is doubtful that anyone will find his style comparable to that of the former Governor and Vice President.
And friends add that it is nearly impossible that the thin, shy political novice will ever be caught in the pose the elder Rockefeller was captured in by a photographer at the 1976 Republican National Convention: finger raised in an obscene gesture as he yelled at hecklers.


Parisian Charms
If you can't get to Paris this summer, you can dangle it from your wrist in the form of this five-charm metal-alloy bracelet by Agatha, a French costume-jewelry designer.
The bracelet covers some architectural high spots: the Eiffel Tower, Notre Dame, Sacre Coeur, the Arc de Triomphe, plus a newspaper kiosk of the type that dot the Champs-Elysees.
It's very 1950's, frankly feminine and tres, tres French.
On the ground floor at Galeries Lafayettes, $50.


Susan Schulte, Kurt Schneider
Patricia W. Schulte and Stephen J. Schulte, both of New York, have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Susan Jean Schulte and Kurt Matthew Schneider, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Schneider Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Miss Schulte, 28 years old, is an account supervisor at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York, where her fiance is an account executive.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.
Her father is a founding partner of the New York law firm of Schulte Roth &amp; Zabel.
Her mother is a registered nurse at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
Miss Schulte's stepmother is Margaret Van D. Cook of New York.


Talk to You Later, Uncle Ted
Maria Shriver probably won't be talking to any Kennedys this week.
As an NBC News correspondent, Ms.
Shriver will be reporting on what's happening on the podium at the Democratic National Convention.
But she has been excused from the assignment when her cousin Joseph P. Kennedy 2d introduces a filmed tribute to the late Robert F. Kennedy on Wednesday.


Genoa Giving Columbus Party
When the port of Genoa, Italy, where Columbus was born, celebrates Columbus Day, Oct. 12, one group of Americans will have a front-row seat.
They will be aboard the Victoria, of Fantasy Cruises of Miami, which arrives at Genoa on Oct. 11 after an around-Italy cruise and will be anchored in the harbor the next day, the 500th anniversary of the landing in the New World.
The trip has been arranged by the United States Power Squadron, a national organization of boating enthusiasts based in Raleigh, N.C.
It includes air travel on Sept. 30 from New York to Venice, where the 12-night cruise begins, and back to New York from Genoa on Oct. 13.
From Venice the 550-passsenger Victoria sails to Corfu, Messina and Palermo in Sicily and Naples, Rome and Leghorn before reaching Genoa.


A Dissent On Dowsing
Paranormal nonsense strikes again!
The article "Dowsing: A New, Ancient Way of Finding Almost Anything" (June 21) has to make one think that there is a leaning to the validity of pseudo-scientific hogwash like dowsing.


Corrections
The jazz listing in the Arts and Leisure Guide today includes an outdated entry for Fat Tuesday's in Manhattan.
The Mingus Dynasty, not Hiram Bullock, will perform there through next Sunday.


Rideau Canal
To the Editor: There is an alternative many readers might find more appealing than piloting a boat through the Rideau Canal as described in "Under Sail on the Rideau" (June 7).
Last summer we cruised the Rideau Canal, from Kingston to Ottawa, aboard the Kawartha Voyageur of Ontario Waterways Cruises.
It is designed to cruise the Rideau and Trent-Severn Canals with 24 passengers.
The experience is suggestive of a floating country inn; very low-key, books, games, puzzles, VCR, card games, etc.
The crew does the locking through, cooking, cleaning, docking, and all things that can create anxiety in the uninitiated.
The passenger activities are the same as on any other cruise ship.
Some options include the sun deck, strolling around the park grounds which surround every lock and visiting towns when it ties up at night.
The crew gave running commentaries on places we passed.
Another big plus for us was the no-smoking rule aboard.


Viewing Puffins
To the Editor: For those who may want to see puffins in Maine this summer, but might not want to drive as far as Corinne Hoexter did in going to Machias for her article "A Puffin Watcher's Pilgrimage" (June 7), may we offer some additional information.
Puffins can be seen on Eastern Egg Rock by boarding tour boats in New Harbor and Boothbay Harbor, Me.
A longer, all-day trip to Matinicus Rock and Seal Island leaves from the Rockland, Me., town dock.


Why Supercollider Project Has to Stop
To the Editor:
On June 17, the House of Representatives voted to stop financing the superconducting supercollider.
Your June 19 and June 20 articles emphasize the claims of contractors, high-energy physicists and the Department of Energy -- all with a stake in the survival of the project.
All predict dire consequences for the country should the project be stopped.
There is another side of the story.


Kate Freedman and Jerry Davis
Kate Freedman, the daughter of Sue Freedman of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Joseph J. Freedman, and Jerry Davis, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
Sanford Davis of Madison, Conn., plan to marry in October.
Ms.
Freedman, 33 years old, is an artist and designer who owns a retail art studio, Katie, in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father was the president of Perfume Originals, a perfume maker in New York.
Her mother is a communications specialist with Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu International, an accounting firm in New York.
The prospective bride's stepfather, Hank Grudberg, is the director of sales for Management Systems Inc., a computer distributor in Stamford, Conn.
Her stepmother, Jean H. Zimmerman of Demarest, N.J., is the senior vice president of marketing and sales at Chanel in New York.


Three Cheers for Microsoft's Millionaires . . . As Opposed to the I.B.M. Experience
To the Editor:
"Microsoft's Unlikely Millionaires" stands in unhappy contrast to the I.B.M. experience.
An employee at the International Business Machines Corporation who owned $10,000 worth of stock of 1974 vintage would have seen it grow to about $19,000 at the recent market price of $98 a share.
True, he or she would have received approximately $12,500 in dividends in the meantime.
But analysis shows that 1974 would have been the "best year" in the last 18 to have made such an investment.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.41
124.41
136.35
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5080
1.5080
1.7895
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2011
1.2011
1.1483
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.9230
1.9230
1.6055
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$348.00
$346.25
$368.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


The Fifth Deadly Sin
"THE American does not drink at meals as a sensible man should. Indeed, he has no meals. He stuffs for 10 minutes thrice a day." -- Rudyard Kipling
This observation, made nearly a century ago, could well apply today in New York City.
In fact, if Kipling were to pull up a chair at Carmine's, a sprawling new restaurant off Times Square, he would probably amend his 10 minutes to two hours.
It may seem paradoxical in this belt-tightening, cholesterol-counting, treadmill-thumping age, but there is a growing movement among many restaurants to serve food portions that could choke a python.
At places like Carmine's, Fishin Eddie, K-Paul's New York, Park Avenue Cafe, Chelsea Central, the Royal Canadian Pancake House, Ernie's and others, patrons sit down to spreads that resemble a New York Giants training table.


Will Truckbox Al Make the Team?
BOX SOCIALS
By W. P. Kinsella. 225 pp. New York: Ballantine Books. $20.


Point of Attack for Mexico's Retooled Party Machine: The Leftist Stronghold
In the same pine forests and poor farm towns from which an insurgent leftist coalition swept across Mexico to nearly take the presidency four years ago, the Government of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has reinvented its political machine.
At the center of this small logging town, where ashen shingles replace the red tile of warmer villages below, the engine of the new machine is Rigoberto Galvan.
He is known more widely as the old town boss.


THE NEW BLACK SUBURBS
There's a popular saying that white Americans "just don't get it" when it comes to understanding African-Americans.
Yet the same could be said of the African-American residents of Prince George's County, Md., who were featured in David Dent's article.
They just don't get the fact that racist stereotypes are forged and fueled in segregated communities.
Statements in the article that imply that an affluent black neighborhood could enhance race relations are pure fantasy.


Patriots Indoors
NOT only do members of the so-called cultural elite misrepresent what the average American thinks, but sometimes they don't even have to pay to go to the movies.
Last Wednesday, for example, a pack of them were invited by Miramax Films and Paramount Pictures to the TriBeCa Film Center for a screening of "Bob Roberts," Tim Robbins's directorial debut about a folk-singing, right-wing candidate's campaign for the United States Senate.


POSTINGS: From Studios to 2-Bedrooms; 162 Rentals on Houston
North and south of Houston Street, new residential neighborhoods have sprung to life in former industrial districts.
But more recently even Houston Street itself -- the east-west corridor that is a boundary for both SoHo and NoHo -- has been getting a taste of residential development.
Nearing completion between Elizabeth and Mott Streets, for example, is a 162-unit building called Soho Abbey, the newest of a handful of residential projects that have gone up on Houston Street in the last few years.
Earlier, a 130-unit rental building called Red Square opened between Avenue A and Avenue B. And another recent rental building is at the corner of East Houston Street and Mulberry Street.


Corrections
A report in the Postings column last Sunday about renovation for a new Benjamin Moore paint center in Flanders, N.J., misstated its cost and the location of the company's headquarters.
The renovation will cost $2 million, not $42 million.
The headquarters is in Montvale, N.J., not Newark.


Alyssa Karger and Nicholas Lovegrove
Mr. and Mrs.
Allan I. Karger of Rockville Centre, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alyssa Jill Karger, to Nicholas Charles Lovegrove, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Lovegrove of London.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Karger, 32 years old, is a senior project manager in London at McKinsey &amp; Company, a management consulting firm.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the vice president of marketing for Calev Photolabs in New York.
Her mother, Arlene Karger, is a photographers' agent in New York.


LET SOME SMOKE IN
Tom Wicker makes a noble effort to resuscitate the conventional wisdom that all the Democrats need to do in order to start winning Presidential elections again is to return to a more deliberative, broker-oriented system of selecting their nominees ("Let Some Smoke In," June 14).
However, the last several Democratic nominees are in fact the very kind that we would expect under a more deliberative system.
Walter Mondale, Michael Dukakis and now Bill Clinton are hardly the "glamorous or charismatic" candidates appealing to an intense faction that Wicker claims the current system necessarily favors.


The Road to Victory
It has become a cliche of the American political hero: The candidate off in the provinces, planning and dreaming his way to the nomination, believing while others despair, thinking while others rest.
In the case of Bill Clinton, who will accept his party's Presidential nomination on Thursday night, there is some truth to it.
Article, page 18.


Barry Is Absent
The Boston Celtics' first long look at their top draft pick will have to wait: JON BARRY rejected the team's contract offer and didn't attend the rookie-free agent camp that opened yesterday at Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass.
"I don't know what to think," said DAVE GAVITT, senior executive vice president of the Celtics.
"We've been very up front with them from the start. But I'm not surprised. This agent's track record is pretty consistent."


Marjorie L. Fox, Jeffrey T. Naiman
Dr. and Mrs.
Howard A. Fox of Little Silver, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Marjorie Laura Fox, to Jeffrey Todd Naiman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Peter T. Naiman of Woodbridge, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fox, 26 years old, is a law clerk in Fairbanks, Alaska, for Chief Justice Jay A. Rabinowitz of the Alaska Supreme Court.
She is a magna cum laude graduate of Yale University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a clinical professor of pediatrics at Hahnemann University in Philadelphia and the chairman of the pediatrics department at the Monmouth Medical Center in Long Branch, N.J.
Her mother, Barbara E. Fox, is a certified public accountant in Little Silver.


Results Plus
GOLF Dougherty Shoots 66 for One-Stroke Lead Ed Dougherty, still without a PGA Tour victory at age 44, shot a five-under-par 66 yesterday for a one-stroke lead in the Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic in Williamsburg, Va.
Dougherty completed three rounds of Kingsmill Golf Club at 12-under 201.
David Peoples had a chance to get a share of the lead on the par-4 18th, but wound up with a bogey and a 67 after pulling his tee shot down a hill and into the left rough.
At 203 were Morris Hatalsky, who led after two rounds, Bruce Lietzke and Bill Britton, who shot a 64. (AP) Three Top L.P.G.A.: Betsy King, Meg Mallon, and Katie Peterson-Parker were tied for the lead after two rounds of the L.P.G.A.
Phar-Mor tournament in Vienna, Ohio.
The three were at six-under-par 138 on the Squaw Creek Country Club course, one shot ahead of five golfers: Beth Daniel; the first-round leader, Denise Baldwin; Donna Andrews; Rosie Jones, and Dottie Mochrie.
King shot a 67 that included five birdies in six holes, and Mallon and Peterson-Parker shot 69's.
Nancy Lopez, seeking her first victory of the year, was tied with Brandie Burton at 140. (AP) Final-Hole Eagle Wins It: Peter O'Malley of Australia capped a remarkable late surge by sinking a 20-foot eagle putt on the final hole to win the Scottish Open in Gleneagles.
O'Malley played the last five holes in seven under par to finish with an eight-under-par 62 and win for the first time as a professional.
The triumph also qualified the 27-year-old for this week's British Open at Muirfield.
O'Malley's 18-under 262 total was two strokes better than Colin Montgomerie of Scotland, who closed with a 65.
Rocco Mediate, with a 272 total, was the top American. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Fredericks Is First in 200, Second in 100 Frankie Fredericks of Namibia dominated the 200 meters but lost the 100 to Bruny Surin of Canada in a meet in Caorle, Italy, yesterday.
Surin, who beat Ben Johnson in the Canadian trials last month, started quickly in the 100 and fought off Fredericks's strong finish.
Surin was hand-timed in 9.9 seconds, with Fredericks in 10.0.
Calvin Smith of the United States, the former world record-holder who failed to qualify for the Olympics, finished third in 10.1.
Fredericks, who ended Michael Johnson's two-year winning streak in the 200 at Rome last month, beat Smith in the 200, finishing in 20.3.
Renaldo Nehemiah won the 110-meter hurdles in 13.7. (AP) SOCCER South African Team Ties Cameroon South Africa completed a solid return to world soccer yesterday by tying Cameroon, 2-2, in Johannesburg and finishing its three-match exhibition series even with the 1990 World Cup quarterfinalists.
Each team finished with one victory, one loss and one draw in South Africa's first international competition in 29 years. (AP) AUTO RACING Despite Distractions, Mansell Takes Pole A teammate's crash and a deluge of rain yesterday took the edge off Nigel Mansell's clinching the pole position for today's British Grand Prix in Silverstone, England, Mansell's time was 1 minute 18.965 seconds.
Riccardo Patrese escaped unhurt from a spectacular collision with a Frenchman, Erik Comas, during an untimed practice on the rain-soaked track.
But Patrese's Williams Renault was damaged, forcing him to use Mansell's spare for the official practice and disrupting team organization. (AP) TENNIS Shelton Reaches Hall of Fame Final Bryan Shelton, the defending champion, beat Javier Frana, 6-1, 6-4, yesterday to reach the final of the Hall of Fame championships in Newport, R.I.
Shelton, a 26-year-old American, will face unseeded Alex Antonitsch of Austria, who eliminated Neil Borwick, 6-4, 7-6 (7-3).
The sixth-seeded Shelton broke Frana's service in the fourth and sixth games to win the first set of the grass-court tournament, and broke serve in the fifth game of the second set to put the match away. (Reuters) Bruguera in Final Again: Sixth-seeded Sergi Bruguera defeated Gabriel Markus, 4-6, 7-5, 7-6 (7-1), in the semifinals of the Swiss Open in Gstaad.
Francisco Clavet beat Fabrice Santoro, 6-3, 6-2, to make it an all-Spanish final.
It is the third consecutive year that Bruguera will appear in the final, but he has yet to win this clay-court tournament. (AP) Gustafsson Rallies and Rolls: Magnus Gustafsson, the second-seeded Swede and the defending champion, rallied from a 1-5 deficit in the first set to beat Jordi Arrese, 7-5, 6-3, yesterday in the semifinals of the Swedish Open in Bastad.
Gustafsson will meet unseeded Thomas Carbonell of Spain in today's final of the clay-court tournament.
Carbonell defeated sixth-seeded Guillermo Perez-Roldan, 7-6 (7-5), 3-6, 6-3.
Ferreira Is Out Again: Richard Krajicek defeated Wayne Ferreira, 6-2, 6-4, in the semifinals of the Gunze World exhibition in Tokyo.
Ferreira had been eliminated on Wednesday by Jeff Tarango, but was put back into the draw when Michael Stich withdrew because of back trouble.
Shuzo Matsuoka, a local favorite, had 15 aces in a 7-6 (7-4), 6-3 triumph over Tarango.
In the women's semifinals, top-seeded Helena Sukova beat Leila Meskhi, 6-1, 4-6, 6-3, and Gigi Fernandez outlasted No. 2 Katerina Maleeva, 5-7, 7-6 (7-5), 7-6 (7-4). (AP) BOWLING  Miller Suvives Open Frame at the End Mike Miller survived a disastrous 10th frame yesterday to win the title match of the Wichita Open in Kansas and take his second Professional Bowlers Association title.
Miller defeated Ron Williams, 202-198, to earn $20,000.
In the final frame, the top-seeded Miller needed 19 pins to close out Williams.
Instead, he left the 3-9-10 split and failed to convert it.
Williams then stepped up needing 17 pins, but he missed his chance for the title when he left the 2-4-5-7 combination on his first ball. (AP)


I Need You, You Need Me
THERE'S a riddle going around at meetings where co-dependency is discussed.
It is this: What is a co-dependent?
Someone who, when hit by a bus, sees someone else's life flash by.
It was once assumed that in many troubled relationships it was the woman who was the co-dependent, the one who couldn't break away.
The man had the drug or alcohol addiction and the woman had the job of caring for him, at the cost of subordinating her own needs and feelings.


From the People Who Gave You The Bellamys
The two serious English dramatic actresses who created "Upstairs, Downstairs" have a hot tap-dance act.
Eileen Atkins and Jean Marsh cavort at charity events in red-and-white outfits cut high at the thigh, set off by black tights, black tap shoes with floppy red ribbons and matching floppy red ribbons in their hair.
And they do it at the drop of a hat.
Not long ago, in Ms.
Atkins's two-story cottage on the Thames in London, the two shed their shoes and socks, got into taps and launched into a series of basic steps done with heavy tread and high humor.


Plant, Water, Mulch and Watch Out for Worms
Continue to plant beans, beets, carrots, chard, heat-resistant lettuce, basil and dill to keep the harvest coming all summer.
Continue to plant seeds of perennials and biennials, and keep the seedbed moist to insure germination.
Thin as the seedlings grow, and move to permanent spots in the fall.
Or let them winter in their nursery bed, and move them in the spring.


No More Nice Girls; In Angry Droves, Radical Feminists Just Want to Have Impact
As the sound of stamping feet rose above the mundane urban din of East 15th Street last Wednesday, passersby turned in curiosity.
Few could guess its source: 500 women, angry, demanding and not afraid to act.
It is that way each week.
Men are not welcome.
Bad attitudes are.
They call it WAC, like a thump to the head -- the Women's Action Coalition.
Forged almost haphazardly last January out of a communal fit of displeasure over the treatment of Anita Hill and attacks on abortion rights, in the half-year since the group has grown from about 100 artists, writers and longtime feminists to a politically loaded loose cannon 15 times that size.
The credo is revolt.
The colors, black and blue.


BEST SELLERS: July 12, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
18
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
4
3
SCRUPLES TWO, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $22.) Continuing the story of the crowd that frequents an ultrachic Beverly Hills store. (LP)
3
3
7
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
4
5
6
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) An insane Jedi threatens Luke Skywalker in the second volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
5
7
9
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones. (LP)
6
10
4
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
7
2
8
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) On a mission to Africa, Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
8
8
12
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
9
6
116
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
10
9
4
DOUBLE DEUCE, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) Spenser joins his old friend Hawk to investigate murders in a Boston housing project.
11
11
19
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe. (LP)
12
12
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) A couple in the Harlem of the 1920's learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
13
12
5
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
14
13
21
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles. (LP)
15
11
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $18.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
2
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
2
2
7
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
3
3
4
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
4
3
SAM WALTON: MADE IN AMERICA, by Sam Walton with John Huey. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who became the richest American by creating the Wal-Mart store chain.
5
6
6
PEROT, by Todd Mason. (Business One Irwin, $16.95.) An unauthorized biography of Ross Perot, by a reporter for The Wall Street Journal.
6
5
7
DIANA IN PRIVATE, by Lady Colin Campbell. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
7
7
10
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) An economist considers the upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
8
2
A BRILLIANT MADNESS, by Patty Duke and Gloria Hochman. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress tells how she learned to live with manic-depressive illness.
9
11
12
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.95.) Satirical essays on recent social and political developments.
10
12
4
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $20.) Essays on the pleasures of living extravagantly during the high-flying 1980's.
11
14
24
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
12
33
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
13
15
8
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) From childhood in New York to the White House: the first 49 years of a pre-eminent First Lady.
14
13
10
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A journalist's account of how powerful monied interests and elite groups dominate the Federal Government.
15
8
6
CHIEF, by Daryl F. Gates with Diane K. Shah. (Bantam, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who headed the Los Angeles Police Department for 14 years.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
4
21
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
1
4
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
2
12
THE JUICEMAN'S POWER OF JUICING, by Jay Kordich. (Morrow, $15.) A program for staying healthy and trim by consuming fresh fruit and vegetable juices.
4
3
32
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
5
5
32
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
BASTARD OUT OF CAROLINA, by Dorothy Allison. (Dutton, $20.) This first novel, perfect of ear, abundant in memorable people, precise and terrible in the details of poverty and meanness, narrates the life and world of its title character to the age of 13, when a dreadful trauma persuades her that her life is finished.
WHY BUILDINGS FALL DOWN: How Structures Fail, by Matthys Levy and Mario Salvadori. (Norton, $24.95.) Two wise, delightful structural engineers explain what can go wrong in their trade.
RUBBISH!
The Archaeology of Garbage, by William Rathje and Cullen Murphy. (HarperCollins, $23.) The findings of excavations in modern urban landfills, which often tell more about ourselves and our habits than we are willing to confess.
WHAT IT TAKES: The Way to the White House, by Richard Ben Cramer. (Random House, $28.) A disheartening examination by a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist of the Presidential contenders of 1988: why they did it and what happened to them in consequence.
WAS, by Geoff Ryman. (Knopf, $22.) Turning L. Frank Baum on his head, Mr.
Ryman's novel imagines the true life of a girl named Dorothy who lived a loveless, deprived life in Kansas until she took refuge in madness -- a nasty Oz from which there is no returning.
A CAPTIVE OF THE CAUCASUS, by Andrei Bitov. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.) A wonderful volume of extended essays by a Russian writer who lost his heart to Armenia in the 1960's but kept his critical and reflective head for the human condition.
WOMAN OF VALOR: Margaret Sanger and the Birth Control Movement in America, by Ellen Chesler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) A spirited biography of a radical and feminist organizer who achieved respectability in her lifetime.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; DEMOCRATS GATHER TO RESHAPE IMAGE AND CROWN CLINTON
As the cast of characters for the 41st Democratic National Convention assembled in Manhattan yesterday, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson ended a long holdout and endorsed Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and Senator Al Gore of Tennessee -- the ticket the delegates will ratify later this week.
Mr.
Clinton, who has seemed to regain his political equilibrium in recent days, won Mr.
Jackson's backing, however grudging and however tardy, on his own terms.
Unlike other recent Democratic nominees, he declined to bargain with the black leader for his support, lest he seem a captive.


Penalizing Companies for Fighting Crime
To the Editor:
Otto G. Obermaier, United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York, in "Drafting Companies to Fight Crime" (May 24), claims securities law enforcement "is more potently armed than ever before." The most recent addition to this arsenal are the Sentencing Guidelines, which encourage companies to establish internal compliance programs to prevent or detect unlawful conduct; upon detecting wrongdoing, a company is expected to alert its regulators.


Lois Keiffer Calhoun, James Fisher Dwinell 4th
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Calhoun Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lois Keiffer Calhoun, to James Fisher Dwinell 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dwinell 3d of Wayland, Mass.
An October wedding is planned.


Senior Gets Birthday Gift Of a Lead
Little-known Larry Laoretti, seemingly immune to the chaos all around him, shot an impeccable 67 on his 53d birthday today to take the lead going into the final round of the United States Senior Open.
A host of well-known players, led by the second-round leader, Dave Stockton, were seemingly playing a futile imitation of hockey on short putts on the Saucon Valley Country Club's ever-quickening greens.
But Laoretti, sucking on a cigar as if it were a pacifier, cruised through the pressure to pass 12 players, none of whom were able to break par of 71.


Roger Williams Would Have Said 'Amen' to School Prayer Ban
To the Editor:
"Plaintiffs Are 'Thrilled' by School Prayer Ruling" (news article, June 25), on the ruling in Lee v.
Weisman to reaffirm the ban on school prayer, notes that the Weismans found it ironic that the case should arise in Rhode Island, the state founded by Roger Williams, who left Massachusetts to escape religious persecution.
A further irony: although Williams was the great architect of the principle of separation of church and state, his philosophical position grew not out of liberalism, but rather from his profound religious conservatism.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MATERNITY WARD Behind the Scenes at a Big City Hospital. By Susan Stanley. Morrow, $22.


Another Opening


Souvenir Scavengers Give New Meaning to Restaurant 'Takeout'
FOR years, a little alcove at the front of Oliver's Taverne, one of the more popular watering holes in Essex, has featured a picture of a raccoon.
While framed decorations near other tables have been changed, the raccoon stays.
One day recently, a patron -- who said he and his wife enjoyed eating at the one alcove table because of its privacy but thought the raccoon painting was ugly -- asked why the animal had such a long wall life.


The Latest Rivers Gossip
NAME: Melissa Rivers.
IDENTITY: Gossip reporter for MTV.
HOME: Malibu, Calif.
PERSONAL: Daughter of Joan Rivers, the comedienne and talk show host.
TRADEMARK ATTIRE: Sunglasses, cutoff denim shorts and a T-shirt.
Q.
Did you always want to be a professional gossip hound?
A.
Oh, God no.
I studied acting with Sanford Meisner.
I had directed my first play and I was in a play at the time when I got the phone call.
Q.
Did you have reservations?
A.
Of course I did.
You know, I always think of gossip columnists as sort of potentially hurtful people and I've been hurt by gossip before so many times that the first thing I said was, "There's no way I'll hurt anybody."
Q.
Where do you draw the line?
A.
It's one thing to say this one is dating so-and-so or this one is pregnant.
That's not hurtful.
It's just kind of silly.
It's what I used to talk about with my friends in college.
Q.
Who do people really want to hear gossip about right now?
A.
They want to hear everything and anything about "Beverly Hills, 90210." It's become a running joke between me and the MTV staff because every week I have something on the show's cast.
Q.
How has your life changed since you got the job last April?
A.
The day I got MTV -- do you know what Doc Martens are?  [ They're shoes. ]  I went out and bought them.
I figured I had to have them since everyone on the network seems to wear them.
Q.
Your mother does a lot of gossip on her show; are you competitive?
A.
Not at all.
My mother and I are so close and my father and I were so close.
It was never my mother's career, it was
the
career. Everyone helped out, and now with me it's the same thing.
Q.
So are you planning to do stand-up comedy, like her?
A. No, I never would. That's asking to be punished.


Trigger-Happy
To the Editor:
Fascinating, if depressing, movie advertisements in the Arts and Leisure section of June 21: an almost half-page ad for "Lethal Weapon," showing both Mel Gibson and Danny Glover holding guns at the ready.
An almost full-page ad for "Unlawful Entry," showing Kurt Russell pointing a gun.
A nearly half-page ad for "Patriot Games," wherein a determined Harrison Ford is aiming a gun.


World Markets; A Bet That the Worst Is Over in Japan
John Koeneman is back in Japan, a signal that there are some prominent investors who think the worst is over in the world's second-largest stock market.
Mr.
Koeneman, who is managing director of Koeneman Capital Management in Singapore, says his computer-driven analysis has given him a green light on Japan for the first time in more than two and a half years.


In Iran-Contra Inquiry, New Interest in Reagan Aides' Actions
After five years of inquiry, prosecutors in the Iran-contra case have come full circle, returning to a central question of the scandal: did Ronald Reagan's top aides conspire to cover up the President's role?
Specifically, the prosecutors have re-examined the actions of Mr.
Reagan's principal advisers, among them Edwin Meese 3d, Donald T. Regan and George P. Shultz.
None of the three have been accused of any wrongdoing, and each has denied that he tried to conceal any aspect of the affair.


Audrey Hirsh, Brian Kaplan
Audrey Gail Hirsh, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren Hirsh of New York, was married last evening to Brian Kaplan, a son of Mildred Wolff of Fort Lee, N.J., and the late Robert Kaplan.
Rabbi Charles Davidson performed the ceremony at the Helmsley Palace Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Kaplan, 25 years old, teaches at Public School 6 in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Tulane University and received a master's degree in education from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of the Gloria Vanderbilt clothing company in New York.
Her mother, Norma Hirsh, is a vice president of Douglas Elliman, Gibbons &amp; Ives, the New York real-estate company.


Rural Cuba Speaks Up for Castro
In a rundown prerevolutionary building off the main square of this industrial town, Cubans fresh from food lines mill about an exhibit of home-grown biotechnology that the Government promises will soon increase crop production and help stem their encroaching misery.
In cosmopolitan Havana, 400 miles to the northwest, most residents long ago grew skeptical of such ballyhooed Government efforts in the face of economic realities that only seem to grow grimmer.
But in provincial cities like this and in rural areas visited during a five-day trip to eastern Cuba, many people, though certainly not all, express faith in the country's Communist leadership, even as they declare that their lives have never been harder.


Corrections
A picture in Styles of The Times last Sunday with a report about the engagement of Margo Miller to Michael Weill was published in error.
It showed Allison Ilene Miller and Oren Chaim Lewin, whose engagement was reported on May 10.


IN SHORT: FICTION
VARIATIONS ON THE THEME OF AN AFRICAN DICTATORSHIP By Nuruddin Farah.
Graywolf, three volumes, paper, $12 each.


Removing Stairway Wall
REMOVING floor-to-ceiling walls at the top of a stairway can turn an upstairs hallway or room into a light and airy landing and also bring increased light and openness to the stairwell.
For safety, the floor surrounding the stairway must be partly enclosed.
One solution is to install a railing around the opening.
Another, described here, is to build a low wall around it.
Such a wall costs less than a bannister-style railing and offers more protection in a house with small children.


Talking: Co-op Voting; Retaining A Firm for Elections
FEARING that a serious fight on several issues was brewing last year between the board and a group of dissidents in a 200-unit co-op on Park Avenue South, its managing agent suggested hiring an outside company to conduct the annual election.
The move, said Jeffrey Gold, the manager involved, was meant to keep each side from accusing the other of tampering with the outcome, after which the matter might have wound up as a costly court fight.
Mr.
Gold is vice president of Marvin Gold Management of Brooklyn, which manages 136 buildings in New York City.


Lean Times? Not at the Specialty Grocer
PRESTON TURCO, owner of Turco's Super Ranch Specialty Supermarket in Hartsdale, spends time every day observing his customers' buying habits.
"The more I know about what draws customers into the store, the better," Mr.
Turco said.
"Today, people are seeking freshness and quality. And they want variety."


Handicapping the 29 Superstars
Elvis was easy.
For one of the rare Postal Service stamps dedicated to popular music, he was the obvious choice.
Along with the announcement that people preferred young Elvis came some fine print: the Presley stamp will be joined by other Legends of American Music, for a set of eight stamps devoted to rock and rhythm-and-blues.
According to a spokeswoman for the Postal Service, the other seven names will be announced in the fall and sets of stamps in other musical categories will follow.
By the mid-90's, Americans who are far better known than aviation pioneers or medical inventors will be staring back from envelopes.


Outdoor Home for Sculpture
STORM KING on the Hudson, the Socrates Sculpture Park in Long Island and the Quietude Garden Gallery in East Brunswick are sculpture enclaves well named.
But Grounds for Sculpture may top them all.
This is the new outdoor gallery that adjoins the Johnson Atelier here and is sponsored by the atelier in collaboration with the Atlantic Foundation in Princeton.
A site that originally served as the State Fairground and included a race track, its 16 acres are bounded along the front by the Ward Avenue Extension and in back by a pond beyond which lie new houses that could be more tightly packed, but not by much.
Closer to the atelier compound are two brick and concrete structures ornamented with colored ceramic tiles.
Both of them relics of old trade fairs, one is labeled Domestic Arts, the other Motor Exhibits.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on June 7 referred incorrectly to the Lake Michigan Carferry Service.
It is not the only cross-lake ferry operating on the Great Lakes.
A reader's letter, dated June 18, points out that the Pelee Island Ferry crosses Lake Erie between Sandusky, Ohio, and Leamington, Ontario.


Spare the Shears and Spoil the Yard
THOSE untidy looking sprouts that appear at the bases of many trees should be pruned away -- now!
These unwanted growths, called suckers, add nothing to the tree's ornamental appearance.
What's more, suckers are extraneous and can sap energy from the tree.
They distract from its appearance and use vital nutrients and moisture when they are not removed.
Suckers can become woody and strong; untended, the base of the tree eventually has the look of a shrub growing at its base.
These suckers are quite easy to remove.
Just take sharp pruning shears and cut them off flush with the trunk.
Be sure the shears are sharp and make the cuts flush with the trunk.
Add these clippings to compost, as they decompose readily.
If the suckers are small and succulent, as they often are when growing on the tree's trunk, snap them off between thumb and forefinger.


H.I.V. Infecting More in High School
A SHARP rise in the number of Long Island AIDS cases involving people between the ages of 20 and 29 has generated new concerns among health officials and educators.
Because it takes an average of 10 years for symptoms of AIDS to appear from the onset of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, this means that people whose symptoms show up in their 20's probably became infected while teen-agers, said a spokeswoman for the state's Department of Health, Frances Tarlton.


Isn't That What's-Her-Name, the Star?
Beverly D'Angelo has made a career out of not being recognized.
At a West Hollywood restaurant, a man interrupts lunch to tell her, "You were terrific in . . . 'Rocky Horror Picture Show.' "
"Thank you," Ms.
D'Angelo coos between bites of chicken taco salad.
"I'm sure I would have been."


Jets Hope Off-Season Steps Mean Strides in Standing
When the Jets open training camp on Wednesday in preparation for the third season under Coach Bruce Coslet and General Manager Dick Steinberg, they will be looking for ways to break away from the pack of playoff pretenders.
All players under contract are supposed to report by 7 P.M.
Tuesday to the training center in Hempstead, L.I.
Physicals will be conducted on Wednesday, and the first practice will be held Thursday afternoon.
The Jets are starting camp a week early this year because they play their first preseason game, against the Eagles in the Hall of Fame game at Canton, Ohio, on Aug. 1.


Removing Stairway Wall
REMOVING floor-to-ceiling walls at the top of a stairway can turn an upstairs hallway or room into a light and airy landing and also bring increased light and openness to the stairwell.
For safety, the floor surrounding the stairway must be partly enclosed.
One solution is to install a railing around the opening.
Another, described here, is to build a low wall around it.
Such a wall costs less than a bannister-style railing and offers more protection in a house with small children.


Fit for the Road
THE TROUBLE WITH MOST VACATIONS," says Steven Lischin, fitness and nutrition consultant at Performances Fitness Services, based at the World Gym in New York, "is that just when you finally find the time to pay attention to yourself, you turn your back on your health with the excuse: 'I deserve this.' In fact, you deserve better.
Exercise requires consistency.
Interrupt your workouts several times a month and you'll never see the changes you long for."
This doesn't mean you have to forgo antiquing or an afternoon with a Tom Clancy novel for a 20-mile jog to the nearest gym.
It does, however, require commitment, time (30 minutes to 1 hour each day, depending on the intensity of your normal workout) and some basic equipment -- much of it ingenious and all of it compact enough to fit in a suitcase or the trunk of your car.


Grilled Tuna With a Sauce and Two Salads
THE centerpiece of a summer menu is often food from the grill.
To round out the main course, colorful salads of vegetables or filling starches can be added.
These days, instead of hamburgers, steaks, chicken or butterflied leg of lamb, which were once typical, the ingredients sizzling on the grill are often types of seafood.
For grilling, about the best fish is tuna.


Sports of The Times; New York's Lone 'Star' Season
WHEN the All-Star Game is played Tuesday in San Diego, the state of New York baseball will be too apparent: one player each from the Mets and the Yankees.
As if these were the Mets of a decade ago with John Stearns as their only selection, or the Yankees of two decades ago with Bobby Murcer.
The All-Star Game is not to be taken seriously, but its rosters are.
The most players are supplied by the best teams.


Not Too Far From The Madding Crowd
"ENGLAND'S Lake District has become so crowded that traffic jams can sometimes pile up for miles on main roads," one guidebook warned me as I began preparations for my first trip there in many years.
I wondered if my husband, James, and I were making a mistake.
Were the lakes, which had once seemed to me so pristine, now completely ruined?
Smoky with pollution?
Noisy?
Overrun with visitors?
Several weeks later, on a sunny September morning, we drove by the full parking lot for Aira Force, a justifiably popular waterfall we had already explored, and stopped at a one-car turnoff with an intriguing signpost: "Seldom Seen." From the turnoff, a rough track led up a steep cleft among woods and moorland.
James and I climbed for almost an hour, past a farmhouse (Seldom Seen), along stone walls and finally into the heart of Glencoynedale, a tranquil windswept valley curving into an enclosed high basin.


Stitches in Time: College Exhibition Features Historic Quilts
BETSY STERN was in her element teaching.
"The quilt is as old as China, Egypt and Rome," said the former American history teacher to the women gathered in her home here.
"But it was the American woman who made it into an art form."
Mrs.
Stern, whose antique quilt collection tumbles from every sofa and cupboard of her Colonial house, was infusing the proper spirit into the newfangled quilting bee in progress in her living room.
Fifteen women, their fingers more accustomed to tapping keyboards than pulling thread through fabric, had gathered to prepare Mrs.
Stern's quilts for an exhibition, "Seven Generations of Quilts," opening on July 26 at Westchester Community College in Valhalla.


Susan Strauss, Stephen Kelly
Helen Feind and Stuart M. Strauss, both of Alpine, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Strauss to Stephen Patrick Kelly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Kelly of Ardmore, Pa.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Strauss, 35 years old, is the manager of desk-top publishing for the Strategic Management Group, an executive development training organization in Philadelphia.
Her father retired as a sales executive at Lightolier, the lighting manufacturing and installation company in New York.
Her stepfather, Dr.
Carl R. Feind, is a professor emeritus of clinical surgery at Columbia University and an associate attending surgeon at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.


The Executive Computer; A Computer or Not? Apple Readies Its Newton
And now for something completely different!
Stand by for Apple Computer Inc.'s Newton, a "personal digital assistant" that Apple hopes to start selling next year.
Some people who have seen a prototype have described the Newton as "a Sharp Wizard on steroids"; others say it recalls the communicators used by Captain Kirk and the crew of the Starship Enterprise.
The Newton weighs about a pound, uses a special, unattached pen for data entry and runs on standard penlight batteries.


Nona Murphy, William Collin
Mr. and Mrs.
Elliott E. Vose of New York have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Vose's daughter Nona King Murphy to William Elwell Collin, the son of Mrs.
George B. Angevine and William W. Collin 3d, both of Sewickley, Pa.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Murphy is a sales representative with Brown, Harris, Stevens, a real-estate brokerage in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her stepfather, who is retired, was a lawyer and a senior vice president of Grumman International in Bethpage, L.I.
She is also a daughter of the late Esmond K. Murphy.


POSTINGS: Homes Around a Lake; Financing Sweetener
When the 50 custom-built homes at Mendham Lake Estates in Randolph Township, N.J., were first offered for sale two years ago, the response was respectable, considering the bleak economic times.
Fifteen homes were sold and built.
All 15 are now occupied.
Six months ago, though, the developers of the project, J.D.
Branmaur of Manhattan, sweetened the deal on the 35 remaining homes, which cost from $500,000 to $1.5 million.
The company is now offering secondary financing at 6 percent coupled with complimentary architectural services and free home decorating.


Daly Gets a Close Look at His Not-So-Dream Team
Early this morning at Fairleigh Dickinson University, Chuck Daly sat on a plastic chair rubbing his eyes, running his fingers through his hair and stretching on occasion.
The new head coach of the Nets looked an awful lot like a man who had just awakened from a dream.
That might have actually been the case.
For Daly, in a break from his chores as coach of the United States Olympic basketball team, was watching rookies, free agents and several New Jersey players scrimmage at the official opening of the Nets' summer camp.


New &amp; Noteworthy
FANNY WRIGHT: Rebel in America, by Celia Morris. (Illini Books/University of Illinois, $16.95.) If Dan Quayle is outraged by Murphy Brown, he should be glad he didn't live in the era of Fanny Wright.
The Scottish-born Wright (1795-1852) was a champion of feminism and free love, and an activist in the antislavery and prolabor movements.
This biography "makes a good story as well as good history," David S. Reynolds said here in 1984.
NEAR CHANGES: Poems, by Mona Van Duyn. (Knopf, $10.) Last month Mona Van Duyn was named poet laureate of the United States, the first woman to receive the honor.
In this volume, which won the Pulitzer Prize for poetry in 1991, she explores the surprises of daily life as well as the qualities of love in old age.
In 1990 our reviewer, Edward Hirsch, called her "a John Donne of the postwar American suburbs." He observed: "For Ms. Van Duyn poetry is 'death's antonym,' the means of transport from the inner to the outer realms, a bridge to the other. As she puts it in 'Memoir': 'Art fixes the world I-to-eye.' In 'Near Changes,' she has 'fixed' her world with pathos and wit."


Husbands, Wives, Friends and Lovers
DURING one of the moments of identity mix-up and bedroom switching that propels "Don't Dress for Dinner," a sex farce at the Westport Country Playhouse, one frenzied participant stops for breath and declares, "This is not remotely funny; it's a disaster."
Not quite. "Don't Dress for Dinner" is
remotely
funny, not a disaster, and that's as praiseworthy as it gets.
One of those infernal British diversions about a cheating husband, his cheating wife and their inverted sense of morality, this one happens to have been originally written in French.


Modern Mail Makes History a Current Event
THE phrase "postal history" conjures up images of scruffy envelopes that passed through the mails sometime before your grandmother was born.
But modern mail also reflects history in the making.
Wars yield the most interesting material.
A case in point: the civil war in Somalia forced the suspension of international mail service in January, and letters must be carried in and out of the country by couriers, typically diplomats or Red Cross workers.
Envelopes sent by courier are hard to find, and the few that have come on to the market are being sold for $15 each and up.


Removing Stairway Wall
REMOVING floor-to-ceiling walls at the top of a stairway can turn an upstairs hallway or room into a light and airy landing and also bring increased light and openness to the stairwell.
For safety, the floor surrounding the stairway must be partly enclosed.
One solution is to install a railing around the opening.
Another, described here, is to build a low wall around it.
Such a wall costs less than a bannister-style railing and offers more protection in a house with small children.


Mutual Funds; Bargain Look in Closed-End Munis
There may be bargains among closed-end municipal bond funds for the first time since the group was created in the 1980's.
At least for the moment.
That is good news for investors who want tax-free income but who have refused to pay what seem to be inflated share prices for these funds.
Prices for closed-end funds, which are listed on exchanges like stock, are set by supply and demand, and shares trade at a premium or discount to the value of the securities the funds own.
Funds in the muni group have consistently traded at rich premiums, but "we're finally beginning to see cracks in the wall," said Thomas J. Herzfeld, who specializes in closed-end fund investment.


The Vision Thing
The Democratic and Republican Nominating Conventions have long since lost their suspense and their middle name, now that primary voters do the nominating.
And by picking Senator Al Gore as his running mate, Gov.
Bill Clinton has lifted the last veil from this week's Democratic Convention.
But that doesn't mean the proceedings will degenerate into a dull drone of praise for "the next Pres-a-dent of the Yew-nited States."
This year's conventions -- all three of them -- present an unusually important opportunity for all three candidates to explain themselves.
The truth is that this year, the public doesn't much know what
any
of them stand for.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In His Own Words; Excerpts From Perot's Nashville Talk
Following are excerpts from a speech yesterday by Ross Perot to the N.A.A.C.P. in Nashville, as transcribed by the Federal News Service, a transcription service.


Elizabeth S. Moran and Dean C. Barry
Elizabeth Sarah Moran, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Moran of Bronxville, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Dean Cameron Barry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Barry of Aurora, Ohio.
The Rev.
Francis Stinner performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Joseph's Church.
Mrs.
Barry, 34 years old, graduated from Middlebury College and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
She is a research associate at Zivic Group, an executive recruiting concern in San Francisco.


The Ones We Left Behind
A YEAR IN SAIGON
How I Gave Up My Glitzy Job in Television to Have the Time of My Life Teaching Amerasian Kids in Vietnam.
By Katie Kelly.
Illustrated. 254 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.


A Tale of Two Swimmers
By the time 15-year-old Anita Nall, the world's fastest 200-meter breaststroker, is sloshing toward consciousness on her unheated water bed, by the time she is showing some life under her American-flag coverlet and rolling her head over on her pillows with their Stars and Stripes cases, 20-year-old Janet Evans, the world's fastest distance swimmer, has completed one of her industrial-strength workouts.
A half-hour of running in Zilker Park in Austin, Tex.
Two hours of doing six miles of laps and stroke drills in the University of Texas Swim Center pool.
By 7:30 A.M., Evans is usually driving her red BMW convertible, a gift from her father after the 1988 Olympics, toward her favorite breakfast dive where she (usually) orders buttermilk pancakes that are almost the size of dinner plates.
Carbohydrates equal energy, and Evans can use the replenishment because in the afternoon, after her one class and a nap, she has to do the workout all over again except then, instead of the half-hour run, she will lift weights for an hour with, among others, the University of Texas football team.


Paul Theroux's Travels
To the Editor:
In Eric Hansen's review of Paul Theroux's "Happy Isles of Oceania," I was struck by the sentence: "The man seems to have an uncommon talent for meeting unpleasant people in beautiful places." How true.
Such has been my own reaction to reading any of Mr.
Theroux's travel books since his 1975 best seller, "The Great Railway Bazaar."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Perot Taps Black Minister
The Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d, the pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem and one of New York's most influential black ministers, will be a co-chairman of Ross Perot's independent Presidential campaign in New York State, Perot aides said yesterday.
Thomas D. Barr, a Manhattan lawyer who is one of Mr.
Perot's senior advisers, said Mr.
Butts would "certainly be one of the co-chairs," and that others would be announced later this week.
A secretary at the church said yesterday that Mr.
Butts was out of town and could not be reached for comment, and Mr.
Butts did not return a message left at his home.


Smoother Sailing at City Hall
Politicians are always claiming comebacks, new images, new beginnings.
New York's Mayor, David Dinkins, isn't claiming any of those; he's living them.
After a shaky start that hurt him and his city, Mr.
Dinkins has learned much from his mistakes.
Recent polls show greater respect for his performance, and opponents lining up to challenge him have pulled a few punches.
The Mayor still yields too often in labor negotiations and betrays signs of his earlier bent for indecision; his mayoral opponents next year will not lack ammunition.


He Found $50 Billion in a Five-and-Ten-Cent Store
SAM WALTON
Made in America: My Story.
By Sam Walton with John Huey.
Illustrated. 269 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $22.50.


60's Coalition Falls Victim to 90's Sensibilities
THE Westchester Coalition, born in the 1960's to address the problems that led to civil unrest in the nation's major cities, is going out of business, a victim of the kind of economic problems and changing social conditions that led to its creation.
The Coalition created the neighborhood health centers and scores of other innovative programs intended to equalize opportunities in employment, housing, health and education.
But it has seen its corporate assistance decline in recent years, both in financial terms and in the level of executive support.


Emily Saltzman and David Hoffner
Mr. and Mrs.
Herb Saltzman of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Emily Saltzman to David Scott Hoffner, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Burton Hoffner of Woodmere, L.I.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Saltzman, 28 years old, is Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's assistant in New York for ethnic affairs.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received a master's degree in public administration from Columbia University.
Her father is a broadcast marketing consultant in New York.
Her mother, Joan Saltzman, is a financial consultant at Ribolow Staffing, an employment agency in New York.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Then and Now; New York City, a Decade Older, Has a Great Many New Wrinkles
The New York City Pat Lehman will find as a delegate to the Democratic National Convention is one that she experienced at the 1980 convention -- only more so.
There are hundreds of thousands more people living here, millions of extra square feet of offices massing along the skyline, new populations of immigrants from more than a hundred countries, surges in crime, drug use and unemployment, health crises, poverty that has grown more extreme and gripping and great examples of defiance, pluck, and exuberance.


Those Who Hunt And Those Who Don't
Re: "In the Natural State" (May 31), Pete Dunne divides people into two categories: those who would purposely run down a box turtle and those who would save it.
One wonders why Mr.
Dunne, a hunter, finds running down a turtle on the highway so much more odious than shooting an animal in the woods.
The former is a spontaneous act of pure malice; the latter a calculated slaughter.


Chilean Leader Seeks to Limit Army's Power
Two years after Chile's return to democracy, the Government is trying to strip the military and the country's former military leader, Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, of much of their remaining political power.
President Patricio Aylwin has proposed a series of changes to the Constitution that General Pinochet wrote in 1980 and that continues as the basis of Chilean law.
One change would permit Mr.
Aylwin to dismiss General Pinochet as army commander.


Data Bank/July 12, 1992


Noted With Pleasure
Mighty Rocks and Maize Plants


The Whimsical Walking Stick: Beyond a Fashion Statement
A century ago, most men owned walking sticks, although they used them less to lean on than to make fashion statements or to conceal a blade or a flask.
"In 1877, as the cane craze was peaking," said George H. Meyer, a lawyer from Birmingham, Mich., and a longtime collector who owns about 900 walking sticks, "The New York Times commented editorially on the phenomenon. Out of a population of 50 million Americans, 15 million carried canes. The Times obviously thought it was all a bit ridiculous."


Beirut Sees Candidates Where Martyrs Gazed
The posters of martyrs that for years have been the distinguishing feature of the shell-pocked walls on the city's streets have given way to prints of smiling, smartly dressed candidates for the first parliamentary elections in 19 years.
Candidates across the country are busy holding rallies and visiting the homes of prominent families trying to solicit support in their campaigns for the 128-seat Parliament.


Making a Difference; Mr. Cutler's Gift to PC Users
When David Cutler left the Digital Equipment Corporation in 1988, he was expected to start his own company, and the venture capitalists were there waiting for him.
Mr.
Cutler was best known as the chief architect of VMS, the operating system software for Digital's phenomenally successful minicomputer.
But instead, Mr.
Cutler accepted a position at the Microsoft Corporation, where he was assigned to create an entirely new operating system. (Operating systems control the basic flow of data between the processor and the disk in a computer, or between multiple computers on a network.) Last week, more than 4,000 independent software developers crowded into the Moscone Center here to see the fruits of Mr.
Cutler's labor, now known as Windows NT.


The Right to Intervene for a Humanitarian Cause
THE Munich Summit's threat last week to force open relief routes into Sarajevo and other parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina if necessary is the latest example of a concept that is gaining recognition in international law, the elevation of the rights of suffering people above sovereignty.
The trend has continued for four years as the world community has broken new ground in international law, slowly laying the foundations of a new right of outside humanitarian intervention in the formerly sacrosanct internal affairs of sovereign states.


Church's Land Deal Stirs Call for Inquiry
Elected leaders of the Greek Orthodox Church met here this week to discuss issues like church governance, seminary budgets and youth programs.
But the meeting was shadowed by a matter that the leaders voted not to pursue: a real estate deal that went sour, costing the church at least $5.5 million and raising questions about the accountability of the church's chief financial managers.
For several years, a handful of prominent lay members have been trying to open the decision-making process in the church, America's largest and wealthiest body of Eastern Orthodox Christians, to greater scrutiny.
In particular, they are asking the church to clear up questions about the role of Chris Demetriades, a Scarsdale, N.Y., builder of luxury homes who for many years has also been the church's unpaid director of economic development.


Sprinter Is Banned
The Canadian sprinter CHERYL THIBEDEAU has been banned for life by Athletics Canada after testing positive for banned anabolic steroids in June.
In a statement issued late Friday, Thibedeau, 26 years old, said she was innocent and said the identifying number on the urine sample was different from the number on the paperwork filed with her urine samples.
The sprinter, who had failed to qualify for the Olympic Games in Barcelona, said she has hired a lawyer to appeal the drug suspension.


Spare the Shears and Spoil the Yard
THOSE untidy looking sprouts that appear at the bases of many trees should be pruned away -- now!
These unwanted growths, called suckers, add nothing to the tree's ornamental appearance.
What's more, suckers are extraneous and can sap energy from the tree.
They distract from its appearance and use vital nutrients and moisture when they are not removed.
Suckers can become woody and strong; untended, the base of the tree eventually has the look of a shrub growing at its base.
These suckers are quite easy to remove.
Just take sharp pruning shears and cut them off flush with the trunk.
Be sure the shears are sharp and make the cuts flush with the trunk.
Add these clippings to compost, as they decompose readily.
If the suckers are small and succulent, as they often are when growing on the tree's trunk, snap them off between thumb and forefinger.


Tracey A. West, Michael C. Bolden
Tracey Allyson West, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis A. West of Holliswood, Queens, was married yesterday to Michael Clay Bolden, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George C. Bolden of Cherry Hill, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert Andrews performed the ceremony at St.
Nicholas of Tolentine Roman Catholic Church in Jamaica, Queens.
Mrs.
Bolden, 30 years old, is an assistant district attorney for Middlesex County in Somerville, Mass.
She graduated from Georgetown University and its law school.
Her father is the president of New Jersey Adhesives Inc. in Passaic.
Her mother, Judith West, is the principal of Intermediate School 271 in Brooklyn.


Ambassador to Moscow Returns To Lobby House for Russian Aid
Ambassador Robert S. Strauss says he is planning to spend several weeks in Washington to "work the phones" there until the Bush Administration's Russian aid package "is out of the way."
Mr.
Strauss, a Texas Democrat with a reputation as a dealmaker, said Friday at a briefing before his departure today that he recognizes the difficulties members of Congress have in voting for foreign aid in an election year, and that he believes he can spend the next few weeks acting as a nonpartisan lobbyist for the Russian aid package, which passed the Senate last week but is facing a tougher time in the House.
Democrats Seek 'Cover'
He said that he thought House Democrats favored the bill, but that they wanted enough Republican votes to provide "political cover" in an election year.


Removing Stairway Wall
REMOVING floor-to-ceiling walls at the top of a stairway can turn an upstairs hallway or room into a light and airy landing and also bring increased light and openness to the stairwell.
For safety, the floor surrounding the stairway must be partly enclosed.
One solution is to install a railing around the opening.
Another, described here, is to build a low wall around it.
Such a wall costs less than a bannister-style railing and offers more protection in a house with small children.


With Au Pair Acquitted, Focus Turns to the Police
After the acquittal of a Swiss au pair in an arson-murder case here, it seemed that a local Police Department had replaced the defendant on trial.
What had been merely embarrassing tales of police missteps during the trial of the au pair, Olivia Riner, became the main elements of an intense discussion about how competent suburban police departments are at anything other than routine tasks.


No, Let's Try To Hear the Ball
To the Sports Editor:
In her Wimbledon loss to Monica Seles, Nathalie Tauziat made, to my mind, a long overdue and thoroughly justifiable complaint: "I couldn't listen to the ball when she hit the ball."


Mary Fratto, Douglas Schaenen
Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth P. Fratto of Holmdel, N.J., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Mary Elizabeth Fratto, and Douglas Kingan Schaenen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nelson Schaenen of Madison, N.J.
Ms.
Fratto, 30 years old, is a vice president at Wang Associates Health Communications, a public relations firm in New York.
She graduated from the University of Arizona.
Her father is the owner of Cambridge Opinion Studies, a marketing-research company in Holmdel.


Spare the Shears and Spoil the Yard
THOSE untidy looking sprouts that appear at the bases of many trees should be pruned away -- now!
These unwanted growths, called suckers, add nothing to the tree's ornamental appearance.
What's more, suckers are extraneous and can sap energy from the tree.
They distract from its appearance and use vital nutrients and moisture when they are not removed.
Suckers can become woody and strong; untended, the base of the tree eventually has the look of a shrub growing at its base.
These suckers are quite easy to remove.
Just take sharp pruning shears and cut them off flush with the trunk.
Be sure the shears are sharp and make the cuts flush with the trunk.
Add these clippings to compost, as they decompose readily.
If the suckers are small and succulent, as they often are when growing on the tree's trunk, snap them off between thumb and forefinger.


Laid-Off Bosses Scramble in A Changing World
AS the national economy teeters agonizingly between slow convalescence and recessionary relapse, the men and women who once helped run the private sector as mid-level bosses, as well as their sidekicks or their secretaries, are peculiarly plagued by America's economic ailments.
A few jobs may be coming back -- but usually not their kind.
Some of them may be returning to work, but it is taking longer than it once did.
To fit into an economy that is reinventing itself, economists say, they may have to reinvent themselves, too.
When Peter Pollet was laid off from his job as sales manager of a manufacturing concern he joined a group called Capital Area Career Network near Concord, N.H.
"We tell people to assess their skills, and we encourage them, if they can, to get into the service industry," he said.


Discovering Family Values at 'Falsettos'
The week that the Vice President began lecturing the country about family values, I decided to take my children -- Nat, 12, and Simon, 8 -- to a family musical on Broadway.
Our options included:
*
"The Secret Garden," a show about an orphaned girl who is raised by her widowed uncle.


Eleri J. Reiner and Glenn S. Dixon
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard C. Reiner of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Eleri Jocelyn Reiner, to Glenn Sterling Dixon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Dixon of Longboat Key, Fla.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Reiner, 29 years old, is a vice president of the Lehman Brothers division of Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is a lawyer in New Rochelle.
Her mother, Marian Reiner, is a literary agent.


Apples, Oranges And Vincent
To the Sports Editor:
In Dave Anderson's column ("Howe, Vincent and the Yankees," The Times, July 5), the key sentence for me was: "Howe's suspension remains the issue, not Vincent's scolding on Wednesday of the Yankees' Gene Michael, Buck Showalter and Jack Lawn for disagreeing with baseball's drug policy in their testimony at Howe's grievance hearing."


Dead Threads
Who would have thought back then in the Summer of Love, sitting on the grass in Golden Gate Park and grooving to the Grateful Dead, that 25 years later the lead guitarist, Jerry Garcia, would be peddling a collection of men's ties at Bloomingdales?
It's heavy, man.
The J. Garcia Neckwear Collection, based on paintings and drawings by Mr.
Garcia, debuted last week.
The pyschedelic silk crepe ties cost $28.50.
They are probably just the thing for the new generation of baby-boom politicians, like Gov.
Bill Clinton and his running mate Senator Al Gore, guys who are young enough to have breathed the spirit of the 60's, even if they didn't inhale.


Changing Places


Mass Media Don't Create the Political Fiascos
To the Editor:
In "That's Entertainment?" (Op-Ed, June 24), Leonard Garment adds his voice to those blaming the entertainment industry, part of the "cultural elite," for the social problems in this country.
He says Vice President Dan Quayle does not go far enough in chastising television and film producers for making the electorate sick of politics and politicians.


Brooklyn's Shepherd Shakes Up the Flock
If Thomas V. Daily's predecessor as head of the Diocese of Brooklyn was beloved as a man of the people, the burly and energetic Bishop Daily takes pride in being a fiercely loyal man of the church.
"If the Holy Father told me to go to Siberia, I'd go to Siberia," the 64-year-old Bishop Daily often says.
Two years after his arrival, a growing number of his priests might be happy to hear of such a reassignment.
A conservative in a liberal diocese, Bishop Daily has been making waves in Brooklyn since Pope John Paul II appointed him to succeed the late Bishop Francis J. Mugavero.


Another Vote for the Trains
To the Editor:
"When Trucks and Trains Unite" (June 21) is right on.
I have been advocating that transportation be managed on the common-good principle, and a switch from truck to rail would benefit everyone by reducing:


The Sights Beneath the Sidewalks
PERHAPS a word of explanation is in order before I suggest a visit to the sewers and catacombs of Paris.
After all, it's not as if the city had nothing more enticing to offer.
But this underworld could become a valuable bargaining chip for parents visiting Paris with children between the ages of, say, 8 and 15.
Nice kids have a way of turning nasty when fed a daily diet of churches and museums.
But most can also be blackmailed into silence if promised something potentially disgusting or spooky.
Et voila!
Underground Paris to the rescue.
For a start, a visit to Notre Dame can be sweetened by a visit to the Archeological Crypt beneath the plaza in front of the cathedral.
It was here around 300 B.C. that the Celtic Parisii tribe settled what is now the Ile de la Cite and, since then, this has always been considered the heart of Paris.
A huge fire in 1772 and the 19th-century modernization of Paris carried out by Baron Haussmann razed many ancient buildings on the island in the Seine.
But construction of an underground parking lot in 1965 led to the discovery of old ruins.
And now they can be visited.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Blue Point 95,000
37 Oakwood Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, skylights, 1-car detached garage; taxes $3,200.
Bohemia 165,000
949 Maple Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; dining room, den, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.
Laurel Hollow 550,000
20 Picardy Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old Dutch colonial; dining room, 2 fireplaces, 2 acres, swimming pool; taxes $8,900.
Oakdale 145,000
22 Amina Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.
Sayville 170,000
240 Candee Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 31-year-old split level; dining room, den, fireplace, basement, beach rights; taxes $4,700.
Valley Stream 170,000
56 Hamilton Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 51-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 1-car detached garage; taxes $4,200.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y. 280,000
West Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 26-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, porch, dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 1.2 acres; taxes $6,213.
Danbury, Conn. 209,500
172 Kohanza Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, 1 acre; taxes $3,303.
East Brunswick, N.J. 125,000
13 Windsor Drive
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; double-tiered deck, large backyard, full basement; taxes $2,150.


On Sunday; Tend a Garden, Pay the Price: A Legal Story
By all accounts, Joel Proyect is an enormously talented, humane man, a small-town lawyer who gave a great deal.
He's a recent vice president of the bar association, a legal guardian for children in family court.
He took court-assigned clients who could not afford lawyers.
"One would think he is being paid thousands of dollars the way he represents indigent people," said Tim Havas, a legal aid lawyer.
When his neighbors, the Friedlanders, had a baby, Mr.
Proyect plowed their driveway without being asked, so they could get home safely.
He shoveled his pond so nearby kids could skate, though he doesn't.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; In Congress, Gore Has a Reputation for Taking the Long View
Sending Al Gore to Capitol Hill to get his administration's legislative program enacted in 100 days, as Gov.
Bill Clinton promised to do Friday, could be the most substantive use ever of the historically trivial job of Vice President.
Like most veteran lawmakers, Mr.
Gore knows the legislative ropes and understands compromise, timetables and the other things that get bills passed.
If Mr.
Clinton and Mr.
Gore win, their party is all but certain to remain in control of Congress.
And with Democrats there starving for an administration with generally similar goals, Mr.
Gore might encounter little of the sort of institutional friction that has sometimes made it hard for Vice Presidents to play any Congressional role beyond the constitutional one of breaking ties in the Senate.


Removing Stairway Wall
REMOVING floor-to-ceiling walls at the top of a stairway can turn an upstairs hallway or room into a light and airy landing and also bring increased light and openness to the stairwell.
For safety, the floor surrounding the stairway must be partly enclosed.
One solution is to install a railing around the opening.
Another, described here, is to build a low wall around it.
Such a wall costs less than a bannister-style railing and offers more protection in a house with small children.


Judy Ann Graner, Allan C. Connal
Judy Ann Graner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil J. Graner of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to Allan Charles Connal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan B. Connal of Old Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles Kavanagh performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Connal, 27 years old, teaches at the Park Elementary School in Ossining, N.Y.
She graduated from Lynchburg College and received a master's degree in education from Western Connecticut State University.
Her father is the president of Office Equipment Corporation, a business machine company in New York.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Hometown; Clinton and Gore Choose Postcard Setting to Extol Traditional American Values
At their first campaign rally as running mates, Gov.
Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore stood on the steps of an old country courthouse today and promised they would bring the nation back to the values and pride that mark small-town America.
Sharpening a theme he has been developing since Thursday, when Mr.
Clinton picked him as the Democratic Vice-Presidential candidate, Mr.
Gore spoke of how he and Mr.
Clinton were the products of small-town childhoods and that each had set his moral compass from the experience.


Two-Thirds of a Tiara For Turnback the Alarm
Turnback the Alarm captured the lead in the yearlong contest for honors among 3-year-old fillies yesterday when she won the Coaching Club American Oaks, the third and final event in the Triple Tiara series and the most prestigious race for fillies in America.
It was the second straight victory in the series for the gray daughter of Darn That Alarm, and it gave her a distinction held by no other horse in the country.
Nobody has swept either series of classics for colts or fillies this year, but she has come the closest by winning two of Belmont Park's three landmark races for fillies.


Let's Hear It For Seles
To the Sports Editor:
George Vecsey couldn't be more right regarding the injustice done Monica Seles at Wimbledon ("Power Play for Women: Noises Off," The Times, July 5).
Seles should not have been shut up: not by the fuddy-duddies at the All England Club, not by losers like Nathalie Tauziat and Martina Navratilova and not by the jaundiced journalism of London tabloids.


A NEW FACE FOR AMERICAN LABOR
It is ironic that John P. Scanlon, who spearheaded the ill-fated public-relations campaign against the unions of The Daily News, is now using the Letters column of The New York Times Magazine to continue his attacks (Letters, June 21, in response to "A New Face for American Labor," by Sam Roberts, May 10).
Scanlon berates Dennis Rivera for his "knee-jerk support for unions that have notoriously excluded people of color." Permit me to supply the facts that Scanlon omitted.


Spare the Shears and Spoil the Yard
THOSE untidy looking sprouts that appear at the bases of many trees should be pruned away -- now!
These unwanted growths, called suckers, add nothing to the tree's ornamental appearance.
What's more, suckers are extraneous and can sap energy from the tree.
They distract from its appearance and use vital nutrients and moisture when they are not removed.
Suckers can become woody and strong; untended, the base of the tree eventually has the look of a shrub growing at its base.
These suckers are quite easy to remove.
Just take sharp pruning shears and cut them off flush with the trunk.
Be sure the shears are sharp and make the cuts flush with the trunk.
Add these clippings to compost, as they decompose readily.
If the suckers are small and succulent, as they often are when growing on the tree's trunk, snap them off between thumb and forefinger.


Wendy E. Wyrwa, M. P. Esposito 3d
Wendy Eileen Wyrwa, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward S. Wyrwa of Wall Township, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Patrick Esposito 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Esposito Jr. of Oradell, N.J.
Bishop Robert Garner of the Archdiocese of Newark performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Roman Catholic Church in Sea Girt, N.J.
Mrs.
Esposito, 27 years old, graduated from Boston College.
She is an elementary-school teacher at the Allenwood School in Wall Township.
Her father is a dentist in Wall Township.


Normandie Keith, Jonathan Avery
Normandie Keith, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman C. Keith of Mill Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to Jonathan Stuart Avery, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Avery of Houston.
The Rev.
Mitzi Noble performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown Church in Locust Valley, L.I.
Mrs.
Avery, 20 years old, is a model in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was the president, chief executive and chairman of the Commonwealth Oil Refining Company in New York.


Q and A
Property Insurance Question: In my divorce settlement, I acquired ownership of a condominium in Maryland.
The property was leased to tenants by my former husband.
I am now looking for fire and liability coverage for the property.
But since I do not own property in New York I cannot add the town house as a rider to an existing policy.
Are there insurance companies that provide fire and liability coverage for property that the owner does not live in? . . .
Ana Vazquez, the Bronx Answer: Yes.
According to Rene Carter, a spokesman for the American Insurance Association, a trade group representing insurance companies, it is possible to get the type of coverage you need.
Your policy would probably be a dwelling fire policy rather than a homeowner's policy.
It would protect you against damage to the property, but your tenants would be responsible for coverage of their belongings.
Ms.
Carter suggested that before you arrange for coverage, you contact a member of the condominium's board of managers.
It could be helpful to know what kind of coverage the condominium has and if there are insurance requirements of homeowners that you need to know about.
A member of the board or other owners might be the best source for recommendations on companies and policies.
Changing Co-op Bylaws  Question: Because of the poor real estate market, I have been unable to sell my three-bedroom co-op apartment.
My co-op does not allow subletting.
More than a year ago, other shareholders and I spent considerable time and energy developing a petition for support to amend the bylaws to permit subletting.
We got 85 percent of the shareholders to support this resolution and submitted it to the board at the annual meeting.
During the past year the board has refused to move on the matter and has just given me lip service.
They recently voted to table the resolution.
Was their behavior illegal? . . .
Brian Levine, Fort Lee, N.J.
Answer: No.
But it is possible to have the bylaws changed.
According Richard R. Kahn, a lawyer who specializes in real estate matters and who practices in Hackensack, N.J., the petition you circulated was not a legally binding proxy statement.
"There is a distinction between a petition and a formal proxy," said Mr.
Kahn, "and the co-op board would not be bound by the petition."
Mr.
Kahn said the solution to the problem is simple, but will probably require that you, and the other shareholders who support the change in the bylaws, hire an attorney.
You can call a special meeting of the shareholders at which an appropriate and legally binding vote on the proposed change supporting subletting in the bylaws can be taken.
Hire an attorney who specializes in co-op law to assist you in drafting the resolution that complies with your co-op's bylaws and New Jersey statutes.
"The resolution should take into account the other legitimate interests of the co-op," said Mr.
Smith, "such as limiting the time allowed for subletting."
If two-thirds of shares vote in favor of subletting, then the bylaws would be changed.
Rights of a Tenant Question: I am a senior citizen living in a two-family house where the basement is also rented as a living space.
The landlord does not live in the house.
I have not had a lease for five years.
Recently the landlord told me that I would have to move because his son's family wants the apartment.
Does he have the right to force me out? . . .
Henry Cogan, Queens Answer: Yes.
Since your apartment is not covered by the laws that govern rent-regulated housing, there are no statutory requirements that your landlord offer you a new lease.
However, a landlord cannot evict a tenant without an order from Housing Court.
Section 232c of the state's Real Property law says that when a tenant remains beyond the lease term and the landlord accepts rent after that, the tenant is governed by the rules of a month-to-month tenancy.
In New York City, all tenants must be given 30 days' notice, in writing, before eviction proceedings can begin.


All About/Ready-to-Assemble Furniture; As Easy as Joining A to B and C to D
"Some assembly required." The words strike fear in the hearts of parents who have struggled to put together toys and of backyard warriors cursing the jigsaw pieces of a new hibachi.
But for a growing number of Americans with a screwdriver and some patience, unassembled furniture is that rarity in hard times: an affordable option for sprucing up one's home.
Sales of traditional furniture have suffered in the recession, putting pressure on large manufacturers like Ladd Furniture Inc., which just entered the do-it-yourself market, and Drexel Heritage, now a subsidiary of the Masco Corporation.
Some retailers have also been hard hit, with Seaman's, for example, filing for bankruptcy protection.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a news analysis article last Sunday about the 1992 session of the New York State Legislature misstated the origin of proposals to bail out the deficit-laden governments of Nassau and Suffolk Counties.
They originated in the State Senate, not with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


Los Angeles Tourism After the Riots
ONLY a few days after the riots and arson that wreaked havoc on Los Angeles in April, a group of intrepid Italian tourists rebelled during their Starline Tour of movie-star swankiendas in Beverly Hills.
They told the bus driver they preferred to see riot wreckage, and he obligingly wheeled around to the charred hulks of what had been shops in Koreatown, where the passengers happily snapped pictures of the blackened rubble.
The riot had become a kind of tourist attraction in the land of make-believe, a real-life mirror image of the fake mayhem Hollywood studios stage for celluloid and television.
But if one tour group took a certain perverse curiosity in the terrible events that followed the acquittal of four Los Angeles police officers in the beating of Rodney G. King, the same cannot be said for the Japanese or most other visitors to the Los Angeles area.


Senior Gets Birthday Gift Of a Lead
Little-known Larry Laoretti, seemingly immune to the chaos all around him, shot an impeccable 67 on his 53d birthday today to take the lead going into the final round of the United States Senior Open.
A host of well-known players, led by the second-round leader, Dave Stockton, were seemingly playing a futile imitation of hockey on short putts on the Saucon Valley Country Club's ever-quickening greens.
But Laoretti, sucking on a cigar as if it were a pacifier, cruised through the pressure to pass 12 players, none of whom were able to break par of 71.


Maria Falzon, David C. Neal
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Falzon of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter Maria Falzon to David Charles Neal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donn Neal of Bethesda, Md.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Falzon, 21 years old, graduated from Kingsborough Community College and is a candidate for an master's degree in education at Hunter College.
Her father is the superintendent of the Hearst Building in New York.
Her mother, Connie Falzon, is a teller at the Green Point Savings Bank in Brooklyn.


Hello, Columbus
Honoring the quincentenary at a waterside reception.


Revealed at Last: Why People Hate TV
If there's one thing a misanthrope can't stand, it's a closet misanthrope.
And according to Florence King, a columnist for National Review and the author of a new book on the subject, the classic example of a closet misanthrope is a person who claims to disdain television.
In this excerpt from her eighth book, "With Charity Toward None," subtitled "A Fond Look at Misanthropy," she reveals what the members of the anti-television set are really afraid of.
The widespread hatred of television is a form of closet misanthropy of special interest to anyone who grew up in the radio era.
We didn't hate radio and blame it for all sorts of ills.
We didn't worry about how many hours a day our radios were on; we didn't lie about our radio habits ("I never listen to it").
We didn't claim that radio invaded our privacy, and our newspapers did not contain self-help pieces entitled "Turning Off the Radio Habit."


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Retail sales, percent change
0.2
0.3
Consumer prices, percent change
0.2
0.2
Ten-day auto sales, annual rate, millions
7.5
7.2
Wednesday
Industrial production, percent change
0.6
0.3
Capacity utilization, percent
79
70
Business Inventories, percent change
0.1
0.1
Thursday
Housing starts, annual rate, millions
1.23
1.24
Friday
Trade deficit, billions
-$7
-$6.2
Monday: Democratic convention begins *
G-10 bank governors meet *
European Community ministers meet  Wednesday: White House releases mid-year economic forecasts  Thursday: Bundesbank Council meets *
Democratic National Convention ends  (Sosurce: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Audrey Prashker, Alexander Clarke
Audrey Eve Prashker, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene I. Prashker of Gladwyne, Pa., was married last evening to Alexander Oldham Clarke, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Clarke of New Bern, N.C.
Rabbi Mayer Selekman performed the ceremony at the Radnor Valley Country Club in Villanova, Pa.
Mrs.
Clarke, 33 years old, is an associate in the Toyko office of the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
She graduated from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her J.D. from Columbia University.
Her father is an investor in Ardmore, Pa.
Her mother, Roberta Prashker, is a reading specialist in the Lower Merion School District in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.


Don't Feel Left Out: Join the All-Dud Team
As usual, the voting by the fans and the selection of reserves by the managers and league presidents for the All-Star Game produced complaints about players who should be starting Tuesday or should at least be on the team.
Cecil Fielder, Frank Thomas, Dave Winfield, Delino DeShields and Dave Fleming certainly have legitimate complaints about not being invited to San Diego.
Here, however, are two selective teams that would evoke no complaints from anyone who was left off.
They are the All-Dud teams of the National and American Leagues, teams of sub-.200 hitters (or close) and pitchers who have impressively poor won-lost records.


Perotmania vs. Perotphobia
LIKE
-PHILIA
,
-MANIA
IS A combining form for "being crazy about";
-phobia
is a combining form for "being fearful of." Both
Perotman
iacs
and
Perotphobes
have responded to this department's request for a name for supporters of Ross Perot's candidacy.
Some pro-Perot people call themselves
Perotisans
, a play on
partisans
, in the sense of guerrilla fighters; others prefer
Perotesters
, pronounced puh-ROW-test-ers; still others have suggested
Perotians
, recalling militant Martians. Others advocating
Perotstroika
suggest
Rossniks
, while one former oarsman likes
Perowers
.
Larry Bakst, writing from Cologne, Germany, suggests that supporters of a candidate who would clean out the four-flushers in Washington be called
Peroto-rooters
. Correspondents in the military like
Pero
troopers
, while James H. Goulder Jr. of St.
James, L.I., submits a word to highlight moral firmness:
Perotcrusteans
.


A Purchase Agreement for Jay Land
THE longest-running land-use dispute in Westchester's history has finally been settled, with the county's legislative and executive branches announcing an agreement to buy the Jay Property in Rye for $11.5 million.
The purchase price represents the maximum amount the county had said it would pay for the 23-acre historic site, after a settlement reached in April with the land's owner, Diane G. Millstein, a developer.
The land borders the county-owned Marshlands Conservancy, and environmentalists argued that the fragile wetlands preserve had to be protected.


Deaths at Crossings: A Matter of Priorities
I was disturbed by "L.I.R.R. Police Patrol Crossing Gates"  [ June 21 ] .
The writer states: "Since 1973, there have been . . . 18 fatalities at the five crossings in Mineola."
The writer fails to mention that half of these fatalities were the result of a single accident in 1982, when nine teenagers were killed in a van whose driver went around lowered safety gates at Herrick Road.


Grilled Tuna With a Sauce and Two Salads
THE centerpiece of a summer menu is often food from the grill.
To round out the main course, colorful salads of vegetables or filling starches can be added.
These days, instead of hamburgers, steaks, chicken or butterflied leg of lamb, which were once typical, the ingredients sizzling on the grill are often types of seafood.
For grilling, about the best fish is tuna.


By Any Other Name: Junk Mail
Third-class mail has many names in the Postal Service lexicon: bulk mail, direct advertising, pre-sorted mail.
One name that the agency has stricken in the most censorious of black ink is the name that "Residents" and "Occupants" use: junk mail.


JULY 5-11: It's a Warning; A Wiretap of Computers Leads to Arrest of Hackers
From early days of brainy mischief, the computer hackers' movement last week had achieved a kind of perverse progress, according to Federal prosecutors.
A grand jury indicted five young New Yorkers on charges of breaking into highly sensitive computers used by big businesses.
Using nicknames like "Outlaw" and "Phiber Optik," the youths, ranging from 18 to 22 years of age, face up to 55 years in prison.
They plan to plead not guilty.


Conversations/Nancy Wackstein; Memo to Democrats: Housing Won't Solve Homelessness
NANCY WACKSTEIN is a do-gooder who learned she could not do much good even when she was in a position to wield influence.
For years she had been an advocate for the homeless at the Citizens' Committee for Children, attacking what she saw as the heartless policies of the Koch administration.
When David N. Dinkins was elected mayor, he offered Ms.
Wackstein a chance to rectify them.
He appointed her director of his Office on Homelessness and Single Room Occupancy Housing.
"I wanted to see if I could really make a difference if I had the power to do the things I'd been talking about for seven years," she said.
But 17 months later, Ms.
Wackstein said she gave up in discouragement.
She was working 12-hour days and weekends.
Her private life became almost nonexistent.
Moreover, said Ms.
Wackstein, her efforts "didn't seem to be making a difference."


When Love Is Blind, but So Is Justice
PERHAPS no secular institution has had such a long history of looking upon marriage with a fond and foolish regard as the courts.
The marital relationship is "the best solace of human existence," wrote the Supreme Court in 1839.
The awakening has been rude but slow.
States began only 15 years ago to prosecute wife batterers and to declare marital rape a crime.
Just last week New Jersey finally gave a 500-year-old legal privilege for married couples a startled second look.
When legislators realized that Irene J. Seale could not testify in state court against her husband, Arthur, who faces kidnapping and felony murder charges in connection with the death of Sidney J. Reso, an Exxon executive, they rushed to dust off and rewrite the state's version of a legal doctrine known as spousal immunity.


Donkey's Years; Is There Room At the Top For Democrats?
THE bands are primed to play "Happy Days Are Here Again" as the Democratic Party assembles in convention in New York this weekend.
But that upbeat anthem, as evocative of the hopes of the New Deal as F.D.R.'s upturned cigarette holder, rings hollow in the party's time of torment.
Democrats still win more than their share of local contests and maintain big majorities in the Senate and House of Representatives.
But the party has lost five of the last six races for the office that counts most, the Presidency, and its only victor in more than a quarter-century, Jimmy Carter, is just now beginning to emerge from the profound unpopularity that he earned during his term.


Immortalized at 29 And Looking Back
Life has always moved in fast forward for Tracy Austin.
As an 89-pound 14-year-old, she became the youngest United States Open quarterfinalist, then hustled home to start high school; still wearing braces on her teeth but with a new bank account braced by $2 million in endorsements, she turned professional at 15; as a 16-year-old decked out in ruffles and pigtails, she became history's youngest United States Open champion in 1979, and then reached No. 1 in the world in 1980.


Susan Beyersdorf and Robert Maes
Susan Chapin Beyersdorf, the daughter of John P. Beyersdorf and Eunice C. Laughlin, both of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Robert John Maes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Maes of Wyckoff, N.J.
The Rev.
Phillip S. Washburn performed the ceremony at the Scarsdale Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Maes, 28 years old, is a research assistant at Prudential Securities in New York.
She graduated from Springfield College.
Her father is an associate managing director at Wertheim Schroder, a securities brokerage in New York.


Quotation of the Day
You come to this country and think that you can live, that there's work.
Then you find nothing.
There's only cold in the winter, heat in the summer and no support for Latinos. -- ROSAURA OLIVARES, aunt of Jose Garcia, who was slain by a police officer.  [ 1:2. ]


Credentials
WHAT THEY ARE: Not much.
"Nothing more than 3 1/2-inch-by-7 1/2-inch pieces of cardboard," said Tony Jackson, the director of credentials for the Democratic National Convention.
But as New York City girds itself for the party's quadrennial sellathon at Madison Square Garden this week, they are the hottest tickets in town, required neckwear for entry.
About 17,000 credentials will be issued for each of the four days of the convention, each with a hologram on its face.


In Profit Search, Postal Service Goes Mailer-Friendly
The United States Postal Service, slipping deeper into deficit and concerned over a four-year decline in the volume of business mail, has greatly expanded the marketing of its business services.
Beyond its traditional role of delivering the mail, the Postal Service has started helping companies design envelopes for advertising material and computer-compatible addresses.
It even sends employees to private offices to help move the mail.


Laura Dyson, Michael Trent
Laura Clarissa Dyson, the daughter of Dr.
Robert Dyson of Rye, N.Y., and Romola Dyson of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married in New York last night to Dr.
Michael Stephen Trent, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bertram J. Trent of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Cantor Raymond Smolover officiated at the Stanhope Hotel.


Grilled Tuna With a Sauce and Two Salads
THE centerpiece of a summer menu is often food from the grill.
To round out the main course, colorful salads of vegetables or filling starches can be added.
These days, instead of hamburgers, steaks, chicken or butterflied leg of lamb, which were once typical, the ingredients sizzling on the grill are often types of seafood.
For grilling, about the best fish is tuna.


Remembering The Good Times In Ancient Egypt
Even in a decade that will have seen many wonderful exhibitions, a high rank must be accorded to "Egypt's Dazzling Sun: Amenhotep III and His World," which has just opened at the Cleveland Museum of Art.
"Amen
who?
" is a widespread reaction to that title. But from the moment we cross the threshold of the ground-floor gallery and see, successively, the colossal heads of Amenhotep III, the monumental seated figure of a ram from Berlin and the no less monumental reclining lion from the British Museum, we are in the presence of great art that works upon us in secret and in silence. Nothing here is flamboyant, or overemphatic, or underconsidered.


Libraries Can't Copy New York City Model
There is more to the situation of Westchester's libraries than "White Plains Considers Instituting a Library Fee"  [ June 28 ]  indicates.
Several local libraries and the Westchester Library System have considered (and, in some cases, undertaken) private-sector fund-raising campaigns.
Although a few efforts have succeeded in raising capital funds, drives for operating funds have not.
Why the failures?


Jennifer Miller, Geoffrey Symonds
Mr. and Mrs.
Martin H. Miller of New York have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Jennifer Elise Miller and Geoffrey Lloyd Symonds, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cedric R. Symonds of Sydney, Australia.
Ms.
Miller, 26 years old, is an associate with Loving &amp; Weintraub, a public relations company in New York.
She graduated from Emory University.
Her mother, Madge S. Miller, is a consultant to the fashion industry in New York.
Her father is the president of Baxter International Ltd., a men's sportswear manufacturer in New York.


Soaring to the Stars on Another Burst of K's
The question of credentials lingered in David Cone's consciousness.
His selection to the All-Star Game was official, his airline reservations for San Diego confirmed, his basic belief in his worthiness undoubted.
But there remained a bit of baseball business -- tonight's start against the Astros -- and with it a chance not so much to justify his selection as to emphasize its appropriateness.
Suffice it to say, National League Manager Bobby Cox won't be making any apology for his choice next week.


For PBS: No Strings
To the Editor:
I am grateful that John J. O'Connor has finally challenged the conservative myths and their attack on freedom of speech and ideas  [ "For the Right, TV Is Half the Battle," June 14 ] .


School Panel Rejects Foreign-Accent Curb
A school board subcommittee in this western Massachusetts city has rejected a proposal that would have barred from first-grade or second-grade classrooms any teacher who spoke English with a foreign accent.
By a vote of 3 to 0, the curriculum subcommittee turned back the proposal on Wednesday night after being advised by the board's lawyer, John Teahan, that such a ban would not be legally enforceable.
The office of the State Attorney General had threatened to sue the board on civil rights grounds if the proposal was adopted.


Ms. Ravener, Richard Pace
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Ravener of Somerville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathleen Marie Ravener to Richard Pace, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Augustine Pace of South Glastonbury, Conn.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ravener, 31 years old, is a sportswear manager in the corporate marketing division of Liz Claiborne Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Rutgers University, from which she and her fiance received M.B.A. degrees.
Her father is a vice president of the Connell Company, an exporter in Westfield, N.J.


Pinstripes Now and Then


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
May 92
May 91
Change
New York
324.4
510.2
-36%
New Jersey
140.3
179.1
-22%
Connecticut
92.1
89.3
+ 3%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.54
8.62
9.86
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.82
5.84
7.29
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.40
8.50
9.69
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.59
5.60
7.34
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.44
8.54
9.72
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.64
5.59
7.14
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.60
8.75
10.02
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.39
6.43
7.73
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.96
4.14
6.40
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.20
8.20
9.23
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


The Battleship, the Rabbit and Other Ideas for Serving Soup
A SILVER model of a battleship, complete with guns protruding from the portholes and two double-headed-eagle plaques bearing the monogram of Catherine the Great, Empress of Russia, is displayed near a porcelain rabbit contentedly munching on a turquoise lettuce leaf.
The connection?
They are both 18th-century soup tureens in an exhibition at the Newark Museum.
The exhibition, which includes nearly 100 tureens, soup plates and ladles from 18 countries, was selected from the collection of the Campbell Museum in Camden.


Russians Line Up for Gas as Refineries Sit On Cheap Oil
BY mid-morning, the line of cars at Gasoline Station No. 35 stretches for half a mile down Trifonovskaya Street.
Everywhere in Russia there are similar lines, and filling the family car has become as frustrating and uncertain as it was for Americans during the Arab oil crises of the 1970's.
But the reasons are different.
While the Americans suffered from shortages of Middle East oil, Russia's supplies are sufficient.
However, the oil is being held in huge storage tanks at Russian refineries, without being shipped to gasoline stations.
The problem is price.
With oil selling for $19 a barrel on the world market, Russian oil goes for about 300 rubles, or less than $3 a barrel.
So the Russian oil industry is holding back as much fuel as it can, waiting for prices to be allowed to rise.


Technology; Getting Nuclear Plants Down to Size
For the first 20 years of the nuclear era, reactor designers insisted that bigger was better.
But in the last few years, as demand for existing designs dropped to zero, engineers have started fresh and are planning streamlined reactors incorporating advanced technology.
Along the way they have rethought their ideas on size, and some people are now disputing the old idea that cheaper power can be achieved through economies of scale.
As a result, the most striking new nuclear designs are for reactors just half the size of the old ones, breaking a long trend of larger and larger plants.
The trend began with the first commercial plant, a 60-megawatt generator in Shippingport, Pa., ordered in 1953, and ended with Palo Verde, a plant the Arizona Public Service ordered in 1973, which at 1,270 megawatts is 21 times larger.


The Unquiet Future of Commercial Health Insurance
New state laws aimed at insuring that older and sicker people get affordable medical coverage are expected to accelerate a shakeout in the $108 billion commercial health insurance industry.
The most recently approved law, passed in New York this month, requires insurers to accept any individual or small business that applies and charge the same rate regardless of age, sex and health history.
Vermont, Maine and Oregon have recently approved less stringent versions of this approach, and Hawaii has long had a similar system.
Other states are considering such proposals.


Schmaltz Versus Realism
To the Editor:
I applaud Francis X. Clines's observations on the inability of American film makers to take risks and produce more realistic movies about Ireland  [ "Ireland With and Without Blarney," June 21 ] .
As a second-generation Irish-American, I am greatly frustrated by film producers who continue to feed us schmaltzy, sentimental pictures of Ireland out of fear that controversy will offend potential audiences.


Wall Street; Hidden Compensation in Fortune's Survey
Because of a change in methodology in Fortune magazine's annual survey on executive pay, big portions of four executives' pay packages may never make the well read listing.
Coincidentally, two of the four executives whose pay is understated are Steven J. Ross and N. J. Nicholas Jr.
Until this year, when Mr.
Nicholas resigned, they were co-chief executives of Time-Warner, which publishes Fortune.
For the 1990 rankings, the magazine decided it would count only one-third of the value of stock options worth more than $5 million, and it informed readers that the missing two-thirds would show up in 1991 and 1992.
The policy, which pushed the four executives down in the 1990 rankings, was meant to reflect the long-term nature of such incentives.


From an Old Pro, A New Trick or Two
DAVID DOUGLAS DUNCAN, the veteran Life magazine war photographer who has had 19 books published, is known for making discoveries.
He is credited with helping to bring world attention to an unknown camera -- the Nikon -- after World War II.
In 1980, he befriended George Forss, whom he found standing in the November cold in a seaman's coat on 45th Street in Manhattan, selling his photographs of New York City.
The work was so good that within days an article on Mr.
Forss, a street photographer, appeared in Time, and soon he found himself on the "Today" show.
He now runs a gallery in the Finger Lakes region of New York.


Ariel Hallsteen, Robert Biddle
Ariel Buff Hallsteen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter H. Hallsteen Jr. of Kenilworth, Ill., was married there yesterday to Robert Whelen Biddle, a son of William W. Biddle of Seattle and Barbara R. Noyes of Boston.
The Rev.
Gilbert W. Bowen, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Kenilworth Union Church.
Mrs.
Biddle, 35 years old, graduated from Smith College.
Her father is an investment banker at Gruntal &amp; Company in Chicago.


Julia C. May, Marc Boddewyn
Julia Cushman May, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Cushman May of New Canaan, Conn., and Manila, was married yesterday to Marc Jonathan Boddewyn, the son of Luella Adams and Jean Boddewyn, both of New York.
The Rev.
Kenneth Barnes performed the ceremony at the Old School Baptist Meeting House in Warwick, N.Y.
Mrs.
Boddewyn, 27 years old, is an art advisory assistant at Citibank in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father is the director of the private-sector department at the Asian Development Bank in Manila.


Update; Agreement on Improvements For Psychiatric Patients
Patients taken to psychiatric emergency rooms in New York City's municipal hospitals can look forward to improvements in treatment and in the conditions under which they are detained, under a settlement approved recently in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
The settlement aims at ending years of inhumane care and crowded and often unsafe conditions endured annually by the 65,000 psychiatric patients who either come in voluntarily or are brought by police officers to the 11 psychiatric emergency rooms in the municipal hospital system.


JULY 5-11: Rockefeller vs. D'Amato; A Powerful Political Name Reappears in New York
Just out of Harvard in the summer of 1966, Laurance Rockefeller, who likes to be called Larry, piloted a small plane 33,000 miles around the world, flying at low altitudes to study rivers, rain forests and coral reefs and winning a letter from Charles A. Lindbergh praising his "difficult and successful flight."
Last week Mr.
Rockefeller, an environmental lawyer and a nephew of former Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller, took off on another difficult trip, announcing that he would challenge Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato in a Republican primary this fall.
Mr.
D'Amato and his allies promptly dismissed him as a rich liberal Democrat in disguise, but Mr.
Rockefeller hit back.


The Show Goes On
Celebrating a director, playwright and designer.


Savings Bonds: A Great Deal At 6 Percent
As investors desperately try to read the economic tea leaves, one of the dullest investments available to individuals has become one of the most attractive.
It is savings bonds.
Sales of the bonds are surging, and it seems likely that this year individuals will invest more than $12 billion in them, breaking the record set in 1986, the last time the Government made savings bonds incredibly attractive.
In the first six months of this year, $6.6 billion worth of the bonds were sold, 32 percent above the 1991 pace.


Cara London and Eric Sirota
LAST August, Eric Sirota met Cara London at a singles dance on the Intrepid, the aircraft carrier docked permanently in the Hudson River at West 46th Street.
They were two of 2,000 singles aboard, all wearing name tags.
Soulmates in many ways, Ms.
London, a 30-year-old painter, and Dr.
Sirota, a 33-year-old senior physicist at the Exxon Research and Engineering Company in Annandale, N.J., both participated in the New York singles scene.
Ms.
London has attended everything from cocktail parties to relay races organized by Quest, a singles group in Manhattan.
She has endured, in her words, "countless loser dates" (she even coined a term, P.D.D., for post-date depression) and spent two summers in group houses on Fire Island.


Walks to Take When Watching for Birds
FOR many people, summer signals a restful interlude in otherwise overcrowded schedules.
Now is the season to discard agendas and instead savor strolls along the shore or rambles through woods.
While few pleasures can compare with such pointedly purposeless summer outings, sometimes finding a focus for an excursion can amplify its benefit, or at least provide an excuse to get out of the backyard hammock.
Besides the beauty of summer wildflowers in an open meadow or the tranquillity of sylvan settings under a leafy canopy, Westchester's varied parks, preserves and nature centers offer visitors ample opportunity to observe a wide range of birds.


Sports of The Times; New York's Lone 'Star' Season
WHEN the All-Star Game is played Tuesday in San Diego, the state of New York baseball will be too apparent: one player each from the Mets and the Yankees.
As if these were the Mets of a decade ago with John Stearns as their only selection, or the Yankees of two decades ago with Bobby Murcer.
The All-Star Game is not to be taken seriously, but its rosters are.
The most players are supplied by the best teams.


JULY 5-11: Relax, Fans; Baseball's Logic Is In the Mind of the Logician
When the major league baseball commissioner, Fay Vincent, ordered the realignment of the National League last week, he adhered to the bylaws of the game, which empower him to act unilaterally in "the best interests of baseball."
Next season, the commissioner decided, the Atlanta Braves and the Cincinnati Reds, currently competitors in the league's Western Division, would move to the Eastern Division, changing places with the Chicago Cubs and the St.
Louis Cardinals.
This is, at the very least, logical; east is east and west is west, after all.
The question is whether logic serves baseball's best interests.


THE NEW BLACK SUBURBS
Your article evoked memories of my childhood in a mostly Jewish suburban enclave in Baltimore.
My parents moved there for pretty much the same reasons that the middle-class black parents in your article did: the feeling that they were unwelcome in some neighborhoods, and the desire to develop a positive ethnic identity in their children.
These families will learn, as many of ours did, that living in such communities is a mixed blessing.
There may be less day-to-day prejudice and a greater feeling of security and community.
But other communities and ethnic groups may come to be perceived as different, mysterious and dangerous.
CHARLES MERRILL
New York, N.Y.


A Risky Step for New Chief
Police Chief Willie L. Williams took a risky and surprisingly bold step in moving quickly this week to crack down on long-rumored political spying by the department he inherited less than two weeks ago.
Chief Williams, a cautious man who said he would avoid making big changes in his first months in office, acted with dramatic speed on Thursday to padlock the offices of the Organized Crime Intelligence Division and begin an internal investigation.


Middlebrowing the Durants
To the Editor:


Chrysler's New L/H, as in Last Hope
Live, from Chrysler Corporation headquarters in Highland Park, Mich., it's "Who Are We Anyhow?" Before an audience of hundreds of its advertising-agency people, Chrysler has brought in actors and stage props to produce the mock game show.
The contestants are three couples who epitomize the ideal customers for a new line of three midsize cars on which Chrysler is staking its future.
They answer questions about their tastes in everything from houses to magazines and reminisce about their first important cars.
For one couple, it was a '57 Chevy for him, and the '60 Impala convertible she was driving when she met him.
The play-acting in Chrysler's auditorium last summer dramatized some deadly serious business for the nation's No. 3 auto maker.
It is part of a three-pronged marketing campaign intended to win back a lost generation, buyers who have abandoned an auto maker that many associate with boxy, boring cars, sell-at-all-costs discounting, and corny pitches by Ricardo Montalban boasting of Corinthian leather interiors.


Marjorie Felcher and Gregg Newman
Dr.
Marjorie Felcher, a daughter of Martin W. Felcher of New York and Rita Felcher of Riverdale, was married last night to Gregg Charles Newman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herb Newman of Studio City, Calif.
Rabbi Lawrence Raphael performed the ceremony at the Westbury Hotel in New York.
Dr.
Newman, 28 years old, is an internist at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her M.D. from Mount Sinai Medical School.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Lane Felcher Kurlander &amp; Fox.
Her mother is a freelance jewelry designer in Riverdale.
Dr.
Newman's stepmother, Elinor F. Felcher of New York, is a freelance writer.


Israel Drops Hotel Ratings
The Israeli Government intends to phase out its 40-year practice of rating hotels and awarding them from one to five stars.
With the Government removed from the rating process, travelers' choices will determine a hotel's success, tourism officials say.
Each hotel and hotel chain will fix its rates and the rating of a hotel will be left to outside bodies.
Officials at the Ministry of Tourism criticized the old system of rating hotels with stars as distorted.
Stars were given annually by Government inspectors on the basis of various criteria, such as facilities, service and refurbishing.
But an older less well-equipped five-star hotel could charge similar prices to the better five-star hotels, although their quality might be quite different.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Sidelines; Cuomo at Peace With Decision On Presidency
In the minds of many Democrats, this could have been Gov. Mario M. Cuomo's show.
Seven months ago, the Democratic Presidential nomination seemed to be Mr.
Cuomo's for the taking.
Pollsters and party leaders saw him as a heavyweight in a bantamweight field, a third-term Governor who quickened the pulse with moving tributes to Democratic values and blistering attacks on the Republican record.


Violence, Too, Is Socially Relevant
To the Editor:
It is natural that critics should be interested in the socially relevant content of "Batman Returns." What I found impossible to understand about Caryn James's essay  [ " 'Batman Returns' With a Capeload of Angst and Ills," June 28 ]  was how she managed to ignore the most obvious and disturbing connection that the film makes with contemporary American society: namely, the ultra-realistic violence it depicts.


U.S. Team Going to Moscow To Push Joint Missile Defense
In an effort to persuade the Russians to agree to joint deployment of anti-missile defenses, the Bush Administration is sending a team of high-ranking officials to Moscow on Sunday.
The trip, arranged during the summit meeting last month between Mr.
Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin, is being led by Dennis B. Ross, the head of the State Department's Policy Planning Staff, and includes officials from the Pentagon, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and the National Security Council staff.
The two sides plan to meet on Monday and Tuesday.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Armonk, N.Y. 550,000
4 Cobblers Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, deck, study, family room, Jacuzzi, 1 acre; taxes $8,706.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 245,000
Trinity Pass  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old ranch; fireplace, living room, eat-in kitchen, screened porch; taxes $3,773.
South Salem, N.Y. 280,000
West Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 26-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, porch, dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 1.2 acres; taxes $6,213.
Danbury, Conn. 209,500
172 Kohanza Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, hardwood floors, 1 acre; taxes $3,303.
Fairfield, Conn. 227,500
341 Buena Vista  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; moldings, fenced-in yard, 50- by 160-foot lot; taxes $2,867.
Manchester, Conn. 920,000
108 North Elm Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 92-year-old Victorian; formal dining room, spacious rooms, hatch to attic, 0.33 acre; taxes $2,048.
OTHER AREAS Blue Point, L.I. 95,000
37 Oakwood Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, skylights, 1-car detached garage; taxes $3,200.
Bohemia, L.I. 165,000
949 Maple Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; dining room, den, ; taxes $4,000.
East Brunswick, N.J. 125,000
13 Windsor Drive
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; double-tiered deck, large backyard, full basement; taxes $2,150.


Grilled Tuna With a Sauce and Two Salads
THE centerpiece of a summer menu is often food from the grill.
To round out the main course, colorful salads of vegetables or filling starches can be added.
These days, instead of hamburgers, steaks, chicken or butterflied leg of lamb, which were once typical, the ingredients sizzling on the grill are often types of seafood.
For grilling, about the best fish is tuna.


PEROTSPEAK
In the On Language column "Perotspeak" (June 14), William Safire writes that the Presidential campaign of Ross Perot is having trouble deciding what to call his supporters.
The answer is obvious:
Perotselytes
. ERWIN KLINGSBERG
Mountainside, N.J.


Foreign Affairs; How to Get the Job Done
The Presidential campaign begins this week with the Democratic Convention.
And Americans might actually turn out to be interested and tune in.
The danger is that when they spot the young, handsome and articulate Clinton-Gore team, they will see two new politicians selling the same old snake oil.
An understandably dispirited and cynical public does not want to hear Bill Clinton and Al Gore rehearse the usual list of noble promises.
Rather, people want to know whether the two baby boomers have the ideas and guts to achieve those promises.


Versace con Moto
This summer's status shirt, for both men and women, comes from the designer Gianni Versace: it is made of silk and has a baroque motif printed by means of five to eight silk screens, a process that makes for a crisp mix of bold patterns in vibrant colors.
Italian printing mills are well known for their complex multiscreen printing.
It was the Italian designer Emilio Pucci who shook up the conservative 1950's with dazzling prints that became a generation's signature.


Mutual Funds; Fed Gives Money Funds a Lift
Despite record-low interest rates, the assets of money-market funds have increased $39.98 billion this year, to $488.76 billion, thanks in large part to the Federal Reserve Board.
Funds open to individual investors have lost $3.08 billion so far in 1992, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report in Ashland, Mass.
But the funds that cater solely to institutional investors ballooned, rising $43.06 billion through July 7.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
AT THE CRACK OF THE BAT
Baseball Poems.
Compiled by Lillian Morrison.
Illustrated by Steve Cieslawski. 64 pp.
New York: Hyperion Books for Children. $14.95. (Ages 8 to 12)
THE FIELD BEYOND THE OUTFIELD
Written and illustrated by Mark Teague.
Unpaged.
New York: Scholastic Inc. $13.95. (Ages 4 to 9)


Sonoma Dreamin'
SONOMA COUNTY IS ONE of those places where people go for a few days and end up staying for decades.
The initial lure is wine -- more than 6,000 acres of vineyards roll away from the county's roads and up its hillsides.
They score little sweeps of valleys and hem the mountains, defying both an uncompromising sun and the ruddy Sonoma ground that is so dry it coughs dust.
These vistas have a certain power over anyone who's ever been moved by the contents of a wineglass.
A vineyard is its own field of dreams.
Bunches of young, hard grapes are awesome in their determination and hopeful in the possibility of what they might become.
At first glance, you are unaware of what a vineyard says about the interplay of individual character and the great and unreasonable unknown.
But eventually you understand that the fortune of any grape is largely at the mercy of its own private microclime.
And it is at this point that a weekend jaunt can become a life's journey.


Welcoming the Convention
Mayor Dinkins welcomed the Democratic National Convention to New York for what local officials hope will be a financial and public-relations bonanza for the city.
For their part, the visitors found a New York with more people, more buildings and more problems than in 1980, when the Democrats last gathered here.
And for city residents, the convention means another line of traffic hurdles to negotiate this week.
Articles, pages 20 and 21.


Making a Difference; A New President Signs On At a Downsized Dataquest
Like the personal computer industry it provides market research to, Dataquest Inc. has been through some lean times recently, marked by layoffs and the lack of a president for nearly a year.
Last week, Judith H. Hamilton, who has spent 26 years in computer services and software, was chosen to fill the empty slot.
A unit of Dun &amp; Bradstreet, Dataquest is based in San Jose, Calif.
As a former buyer of consulting services, Ms.
Hamilton said she knows consulting is often among the first things cut back during recessionary times, which makes it all the more important to offer exceptional service.
Companies "don't eliminate it, but they do go for best of breed," she said.
The computer industry "is going through a real sea change right now, and there are all kinds of indicators that service providers have to go through the changes as well."


How Customs Keeps Shoppers Honest
IF your bags catch the eye of Paul Mazurkewitz, a senior inspector for United States Customs, on the luggage carousel at Kennedy International Airport, you'd better have filled in your declaration completely, or the conclusion of your trip abroad may be rather unpleasant.
At an airport where the Government is focusing heavily on trying to stop the entry of illegal drugs, Inspector Mazurkewitz and 15 or 20 others in Kennedy's Customs force of 500 specialize in spotting merchandise that travelers are trying to bring in without paying duty.


Threats Used To Push Jobs for Minorities
A growing number of groups demanding jobs for black and Hispanic workers have been disrupting construction sites in New York City, beating workers and extorting money for labor peace, the police, prosecutors and industry officials say.
The proliferation of these groups, called minority coalitions, has bred sometimes-violent competition, with members waging intramural gun battles in the fight over turf.


Call-In Radio And Voters' Failings
Re: "A Call-In Radio Station Shakes Up State," June 21:
New Jersey is desperately in need of a voice, especially now with New Jersey Network facing extinction, and radio station WKXW is providing an essential service to the people of New Jersey.


Corrections
An article on June 28 about development on Spring Island, S.C., misstated the financial condition of Seabrook Island, 45 miles to the north, and the cost of its lots.
The island's homeowners' association is not in receivership.
The first-quarter average price of its lots was $76,000, not $23,000.


From Great Chefs, New Offspring
PARIS is a city that pays scant attention to trends -- particularly when the subject is gastronomy.
After all, no one has really managed to improve upon a menu fashioned around simple, traditional French home cooking: golden roast chicken, a soothing potato gratin and a carafe of spirit-lifting, tannic red wine.
With that in mind, it's surprising to witness a bona fide food trend in France's capital, the birth of a madness for the "baby" bistro.
In the past few months alone, Jacques Cagna, who runs a Michelin two-star restaurant that bears his name, and Gilles Epie of Miravile, which has one star, have added bistros, while Marcel Baudis of the popular L'Oulette near the Place des Vosges, moved to larger quarters, leaving his original establishment in the hands of a well-trained assistant.


Susan Elliott, Richard Beard
Susan Anthony Elliott, a daughter of Mary Turnbull Elliott of Hightstown, N.J., and the late Dr.
Robert H. E. Elliott, was married yesterday in Darien, Conn., to Richard Eric Beard, a son of Richard B. Beard of Harrisburg, Pa., and the late Peggy Beard.
Susan Stern, a Connecticut justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the home of Mary E. Fogarty, the bride's sister.
Ms.
Elliott, who is 45 and is keeping her name, is a music critic for The New York Post.
She graduated from Chatham College.
Her father was an associate dean of the Columbia University College of Pnysicians and Surgeons.


Morris Pesin, 80, Civic Watchdog Who Founded Liberty State Park
Morris Pesin, a longtime civic leader in Jersey City who is credited as the father of the park that honors the Statue of Liberty, died Friday at Christ Hospital in Jersey City.
He was 80 years old.
The cause of his illness was undetermined, his family said.


For Education And Reading Pleasure
I am still trying to absorb the meaning of the article that the White Plains Library and other branches may institute fees for use by non-residents.
I am well aware of the constraints our libraries are under, with no Federal help and the budget woes of our towns and villages.
What I fear is the limitation of the library as a resource for students and other readers who may need or want a book from a branch other than their own.
I have made grateful use of this service, as well as others provided by libraries both here and in New York City.
I would not have been able to go to college as a senior student nor depend on this exchange for research for my column, The Bonus Years, in the North County News, without access to other branches.


Yanks 101, Showalter Presiding
If Buck Showalter had his way, the Yankees would have Moose Skowron, Hank Bauer and other old Yankees as instructors in spring training.
It would be a simple way to teach the new Yankees about the mystique of the most successful team in baseball history.
Showalter, who is 36 years old and has been in the Yankee organization for 16 years, takes obvious pride in the pinstripes, but it is just as obvious that few current Yankees possess that proud feeling.
On a day when Joe DiMaggio, Mickey Mantle and Whitey Ford returned to Yankee Stadium for Old-Timers Day, the present Yankee manager was bothered by the way some legendary Yankees have been forgotten.


Corrections
An article last week about the use of New Jersey houses as locations for making films misidentified the head of Allencrest Associates, a location-finding company in Red Bank.
She is Judy Sillen.


There's Toulouse-Lautrec (and Comics Too)
The City of Kawasaki, a little over an hour out of Tokyo on the way to Yokohama, is a modern industrial paradigm.
Once it was thick with heavy industry; the din of blast furnaces rang through the air.
Today it pulses and clicks along with high-tech companies like Fujitsu and NEC.
Kawasaki looked at itself in the mirror about a dozen years ago and decided that it needed to brighten its image to woo a new grade of workers and residents to the ramparts of electronics and information services.
What does a city do to raise its social status?
It builds a big public park, with tennis courts, a baseball field and a swimming pool, and puts up as its centerpiece a sizable museum.
This Kawasaki did in a most original way.
The Kawasaki City Museum, founded in 1980, opened in November 1988 with an agenda not quite like that of any other museum: it celebrates both the city itself and, more unusually, art in the age of mechanical reproduction.


JULY 5-11: A Very Bare Cupboard; The House Votes Its Wishes But Its Budget Constraints Deny the Usual Pleasures
The House faced the 1990 budget act's spending limits twice last week.
First it pretended they weren't a problem, passing a bill to raise the theoretical maximum of Pell grants to needy college students from $3,100 to $3,700 in 1993-94 even though an Appropriations subcommittee voted to cut them from $2,400 to $2,300.
Then the House voted to change the budget law's spending limits, so $400 million from the unpopular foreign aid budget, money it had cut last month, could be spent on politically appealing highways.
But the measure barely passed, and is unlikely to become law.


And Now for Something Substantially Different: Digital TV
It has been a long time coming, but the day is finally drawing near when television undergoes its first big facelift since the introduction of color.
After nearly two decades of uncertainty and debate, the Federal Communications Commission is now in the last lap of establishing a new nationwide technical standard for broadcasting high-definition television, or HDTV.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Senator Al Gore


Trying to Contain Anarchy; As Some Nations Build, the Past Devours Others
THERE is a factory outside Toyota City, Japan, where 66 human beings and 310 robots build 300 Lexus sedans each day.
There are hills around Sarajevo where five children were killed by tank fire last month as they were picking fruit from a cherry tree.
In many ways the Lexus and the cherry tree are the symbols of the post-cold war world.
Some countries, it seems, are emerging from the cold war intent on building a better Lexus, while others are emerging from the cold war intent on renewing tribal feuds over who owns which cherry trees.
In Japan, in Taiwan, in Singapore, in Maastricht, the future seems to be burying the past.
In Sarajevo, in the West Bank, in Nagorno-Karabakh, in Moldova, in Northern Ireland, the past seems to be burying the future.
It was not supposed to be this way.
After the long march of the cold war, it seemed to many in the West that they deserved a rest and that from here on, history would be a story about free-market, pluralistic, democratic values gradually spreading around the globe: Lexus triumphant.


Chicago
When the country goes in search of itself it often lands in the Middle West where beige flatness seems closer to essential truth and where Chicago, the region's capital, is the primordial big city, all granite and brawn and broad, noisy boulevards.
Without the veneer of Hollywood or Broadway, it is perhaps the most frankly American of big American cities, surrounded by suburbs and cornfields, proud of its skyscrapers and bratwursts.


London Theater
To the Editor: As an enthusiastic theatergoer and frequent traveler to London I would like to point out that your reply to the question on obtaining theater tickets (Q &amp; A, April 12) does not mention the most convenient and economical method of obtaining seats -- namely, calling the box office direct.
I have done this over five years.
Not only is the trans-Atlantic call cheaper than the premium charged by the agencies, but, in addition, the box office will let you know where you will sit.
I have had no problem in charging my seats to a major credit card; the tickets are held for me at the box office.
I obtain a list of shows and theater phone numbers from the British Tourist Authority or a London newspaper at my local library.


On Fire Island, Groupers Confront 'No's'
ANITA FRANK sat on the witness stand, voice cracking as she denied charges of violating the code prohibiting house-sharing in Ocean Beach on Fire Island.
Miss Frank, a lawyer acting in her own defense, was testifying in front of a judge, bailiff, stenographer and half that day's police force of Ocean Beach, which is called the Land of No for its rules against eating and drinking on the beach or sidewalks, bicycle riding and group rentals.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TURNING RIGHT The Making of the Rehnquist Supreme Court.
By David G. Savage.
Wiley, $22.95.


Group Is Formed to Defend East German Interests
Asserting that the Government is ignoring the problems facing Germans in the former Communist eastern half of the country, a group of politicians, writers, artists, clergymen and professors announced today the formation of a "Committee for Fairness," which they said could evolve into a new political party.
"After the great hopes of 1990, many people in the new German states now feel that they are second-class citizens, unwelcome politically, economically, socially and culturally," the founders of the committee said in a statement.


Maradona, Continued
DIEGO MARADONA, who completed a 15-month international suspension last week, is now in trouble with the Italian soccer authorities because of remarks he made recently about Italian soccer officials.
The Italian Federation said yesterday that its disciplinary commission would review comments by the 32-year-old Argentine in a recent television interview and possibly suspend him or fine him.


A Tighter G.O.P. Grip on the Senate in Albany?
The Republican power base in New York State is its 27-year-old grip on the State Senate, where G.O.P. members outnumber Democrats, 34 to 27.
The party's odds of holding on to that edge seem to have risen in the last few days as three of its Senators in the New York City area, all of whom were widely believed to be looking to move on, said that they would instead run for re-election.
Senator Frank Padavan of Queens dropped a threat to run for Congress, as did Dean G. Skelos of Nassau County.
And Christopher J. Mega, of Brooklyn, said he would run for a seventh term because he had failed to win his desired nomination from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo for a Court of Claims judgeship.


For a Bounty, Keep On Sowing
MY tomato plants are flowering like mad, the Royal Burgundy beans are almost ready to be eaten, and I've been eating mesclun and buttery bibb lettuce for weeks now.
When your garden is on a roll, it's easy to forget that in a few weeks, when you're hip-deep in tomatoes and squash, the basil will start tasting like licorice, and the dill -- for those fabulous dilly beans -- will have flowered and gone to seed.


Police Accelerate Efforts to Expand Their Presence in Washington Heights
The violent disturbances in Washington Heights last week have accelerated efforts to expand the police presence in upper Manhattan.
For years, community leaders and elected officials in Washington Heights have advocated splitting in two the 34th Precinct, which covers the tip of Manhattan above West 155th Street.
The precinct, one of the largest and most densely populated in the city, led the city in homicides in 1991 with 119.


Q and A
Marrying in France
Q.
My fiancee and I would like to get married in France during a visit in late August and September.
We are both United States citizens.
How do we arrange this? -- Albert Robinson, New York


Excellent Fare, Good Looks All Around
THE CRESCENT has set the North Shore on its heels.
This gorgeous stunner in the new, imposing Crescent Beach Club has put Bayville on Long Island's culinary map.
At sunset, The Crescent offers spectacular vistas of sand, Sound and distant Connecticut.
The soaring three-story restaurant has pale-wood sculptures of fish and other sea creatures overhead.
Soft standards trickle down from a baby grand piano on an upstairs balcony.


Traffic Alert
Second Avenue between Second and 14th streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. today for the Lower East Side Second Avenue fair.


Ductape
To seal air-conditioning or cooling ducts, one uses duct tape: strong, sticky and waterproof.
The webbed cloth tape backed with plastic is so sturdy that innumerable users have found innumerable other uses for it: to bind up broken toys or furniture, patch holes in screens, fix leaky downspouts.
Summer finds even more uses.
Duct tape seals plastic beach toys, torn tents, backpacks and sleeping bags.
Look at the worn handles on luggage going by on the airport carousel: duct tape.


Selling Cruises
To the Editor: I am sick and tired of travel agent bashing under the guise of helping readers obtain the best bargains.
Betsy Wade's Practical Traveler column "Cruises: Do Travel Agents Steer Clients Straight?" (June 7) is a good example.
I challenge anyone to sit in a travel agent's chair for just one day.
Few work so hard, care so much, face such contradictions, confusion and variations while making so little money.
Sure, there are some bad eggs out there, as there are bad doctors, teachers and painters.
Would you seek health advice from the cheapest doctor, or use the cheapest house painter?
Not every traveler benefits from the cheapest cruise, air fare or tour.
The savvy traveler chooses a good agent to work with in planning the best vacation, with the least hassle, at the best value.


JULY 5-11: Aftermath of Tailhook; The Pentagon's Accountant Takes Over a Troubled Navy
With the Navy reeling from the military's worst sexual harassment scandal, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney last week tapped one of his closest aides, Sean O'Keefe, the Pentagon comptroller, to clean up the mess.
As Acting Navy Secretary, Mr.
O'Keefe, a 36-year-old former staff director for the Senate Appropriations Committe's Subcommittee on Defense, will have to deal with the fallout from a scandal involving the assault of 26 women at last year's convention of the Tailhook Association, a private group of retired and active-duty aviators.
Lawrence Garrett 3d resigned in June as Navy Secretary over the incident.


THE NEW BLACK SUBURBS
David J. Dent's article "The New Black Suburbs" (June 14) captured and fortified what we, as black people, truly want -- that is, an environment that will provide reasonable assurances of a stable, safe neighborhood, with access to quality education for our children.
The attempt to assimilate (via integration) within the fabric of America's mainstream was "welcomed" with limited acceptance at best.


Japan's Other War Crimes
Japan deserves credit for accepting responsibility, finally, for the sexual enslavement of tens of thousands of Korean women during World War II.
But the gesture was neither spontaneous nor graceful.
Half a century later, Tokyo still resists acknowledging other appalling wartime crimes.
Until it does, Japan's efforts to play a more active role in Asian affairs will provoke distrust.
Some 20 million people died in the Pacific war, 17 million of them victims of Japanese aggression.
Yet Japanese textbooks and popular culture still emphasize how Japan suffered.


Grilled Tuna With a Sauce and Two Salads
THE centerpiece of a summer menu is often food from the grill.
To round out the main course, colorful salads of vegetables or filling starches can be added.
These days, instead of hamburgers, steaks, chicken or butterflied leg of lamb, which were once typical, the ingredients sizzling on the grill are often types of seafood.
For grilling, about the best fish is tuna.


Mass Media Don't Create the Political Fiascos; Lack of Public Morals
To the Editor:
In "Mr. Quayle's Lectures, and Leadership" (editorial, June 14), on Vice President Quayle's criticism of the "cultural elites," you state that everyone agrees that values are important, but that the real issue is a lack of increased funds.
I think you have missed the Vice President's real message and, furthermore, that you are mistaken in believing that no one disagrees with these values.


U.S. Issues Tips To Beat Crime
The State Department, warning that crime against travelers is a growing problem worldwide, has issued a list of what it calls commonsense precautions Americans should take abroad.
Among them are:
Wrapping rubber bands around your wallet makes it more difficult for a pickpocket to remove it.
Don't carry money or identification in a handbag because thieves simply take the bag, sometimes breaking arms in the process.
Hide valuables on your person.


The Candidates as Culture Vultures
Pity the Presidential candidate of 1992.
It is not enough that he rises at dawn to shake hands at a factory gate; that he has a position on everything from parity to notch babies; that he is at all times and in all ways presentable; that he has a proper reverence for the past yet looks to the future; that he is conservative but not reactionary, liberal but not leftist; that he is acceptable both to the broad majority that elects the President and to all the determined minorities who control various pieces of his party.
He must also have Culture.


Reds Refuse to Play Overconfidence Game
The surging Cincinnati Reds have won seven of their last nine games, 12 of 17, 19 of 28, 31 of 44, and their winning percentage at home is the best in baseball.
The Reds, just about unbeatable at Riverfront Stadium with a 26-9 record, entered tonight's action with 46 home games left and only 32 road games.
The Reds and their offense, all but crippled by injuries early in the season, are getting healthy, a recovery epitomized by Barry Larkin, out from mid-April to early May with a sprained left knee but back and batting .500 over his last nine games.


A Medalist Withdraws
Britain's PETER ELLIOTT, the 1988 Olympic 1,500-meter silver medalist, has withdrawn from his country's Olympic track and field team because of a hamstring injury.


Longtime Friends on the Farm, Through the Fresh Air Fund
The girl and her friend from New York had splashed their way to the deep end of an outdoor pool at the suburban country club.
"Danaya, I want to go back to the shallow end," said 6-year-old Sarah Brinker of Doylestown, Pa., to 9-year-old Danaya Munnerlyn of Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, as they clung to the pool's edge.


Among Others


Elisabeth Lachmann and Kevin Hunt
Dr.
Elisabeth Amanda Lachmann, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Erich Lachmann of Middletown, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Kevin Charles Hunt, a son of E. Charles Hunt of White Plains and Cathi Hunt of New York.
The Rev.
Peter Rustico performed the ceremony at St.
John's Lutheran Church.
Dr.
Lachmann, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, is an attending physician in rehabilitation medicine at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received her M.D. from the Medical College of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the president of Turnpike Service, a car dealership in Middletown.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Cutbacks in Network Broadcasts Leave Room for Newcomers
There is no better sign of what the networks think of the Democratic National Convention than the fact that Comedy Central, the all-gag cable network, plans more comprehensive, albeit irreverent, broadcasts of the political spectacle than do ABC, CBS or NBC.
Among the options for viewers who want more of the convention than the hour or so of prime-time broadcasts that the major networks plan each night will be Comedy Central's "Indecision '92." Or, for viewers who want less on Tuesday night, CBS will offer little more than brief updates squeezed between innings of the baseball All-Star Game.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
The Bungee Business
THERE are conservative businessmen, and then there is John Gore of Huntington.
Mr.
Gore prefers thrills in his enterprises.
"I was looking to buy a roller coaster," he said.
He settled for bungee jumping instead.
Mr.
Gore and Dave Sandel of Center Moriches run the Bungee Zone in Greenport, New York's first licensed bungee operation.
Mr.
Gore purchased the spot.
Mr.
Sandel brought the crane.


Harro, Not Harrow
To the Editor:
In his review of Bill Buford's "Among the Thugs" (June 7), Clancy Sigal mentions a town called "Harrowgate." He means Harrogate.
Perhaps, under the influence of soccer violence iteratively reported, he had in mind the harrowing of hell, or the English public school usually paired with Eton.
PAUL WEST Ithaca


Amy L. Thomas, William Tasman
Amy Lynn Thomas, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth W. Thomas of Worton, Md., was married yesterday in Chestertown, Md., to William Graham Tasman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William Tasman of Chestnut Hill, Pa.
The Rev.
Earl M. Brooks performed the ceremony at the Christ United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Tasman, 23 years old, graduated from Marymount University in Arlington, Va.
Her father is a sales manager at the Hoober Equipment Company in Middleton, Del.
Her mother, Marie Thomas, is a community nurse at the Kent County Health Department in Chestertown.


Spare the Shears and Spoil the Yard
THOSE untidy looking sprouts that appear at the bases of many trees should be pruned away -- now!
These unwanted growths, called suckers, add nothing to the tree's ornamental appearance.
What's more, suckers are extraneous and can sap energy from the tree.
They distract from its appearance and use vital nutrients and moisture when they are not removed.
Suckers can become woody and strong; untended, the base of the tree eventually has the look of a shrub growing at its base.
These suckers are quite easy to remove.
Just take sharp pruning shears and cut them off flush with the trunk.
Be sure the shears are sharp and make the cuts flush with the trunk.
Add these clippings to compost, as they decompose readily.
If the suckers are small and succulent, as they often are when growing on the tree's trunk, snap them off between thumb and forefinger.


Mary Kalisz, Alex Boyle
Mary Elizabeth Kalisz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Kalisz of Williamstown, Mass., was married there yesterday to Robert Alexander Boyle, the son of Robert H. Boyle of Cold Spring, N.Y., and the late Jane Sanger Boyle.
The Rev.
William Cyr performed the ceremony at St.
Raphael's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Boyle, 28 years old, is an account executive at Donna Karan, a New York clothing designer.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father teaches history at Nessacus Middle School in Dalton, Mass.
Her mother, Carol Kalisz, teaches mathematics and science at St.
Stanislaus School in Adams, Mass.


A Brazilian Legend Comes to New York As a Monster Mom
When the Brazilian actress Fernanda Montenegro makes her entrance in Gerald Thomas's "Flash and Crash Days," she stumbles across the stage dressed like Brunnhilde.
Her face is contorted in horror, with an expression straight out of Fritz Lang's cinematic treatment of Wagner's "Ring Cycle," as she grasps an arrow piercing her throat while her waiflike daughter looks on.
She dies, mechanically resurrects with the aid of archangels in winged business suits and miners' helmets, and, in the course of the play, aborts a fetus, directs her daughter in a frenetic masturbation session, poisons her with a glass of milk and watches as the daughter gleefully takes revenge by devouring her mother's heart.
At 62, the most revered actress in Brazil, Miss Montenegro will be performing in the play on Tuesday and Wednesday, as part of the Serious Fun festival at Lincoln Center.
The work, she said, is a "grotesquely funny cartoon or a terrifying children's story for adults." It is also a domestic drama that draws on the real-life mother-daughter relationship of Miss Montenegro and Fernanda Torres, her daughter by her husband, the Brazilian actor Fernando Torres.


Nighttime Is the Right Time For Fly Fishers Seeking Bass
Saltwater fly fishing for striped bass -- at least on the island of Martha's Vineyard, Mass., where I do most of my angling for the species -- is a nocturnal endeavor.
The bass move into the shallows under the cover of darkness bent on herding hordes of bait fish, most commonly slender, ubiquitous sand eels, against the beach and in so doing come within reach of the fly fisher.


And What Will You Be Doing This Week?
What's Tammy Wynette, the country singer Hillary Clinton slighted in a television interview last winter, doing for the Democratic National Convention?
"She's sitting back and watching the situation," said Evelyn Shriver, Ms.
Wynette's spokeswoman.
"She thinks it's going to be the most interesting race of her lifetime."
Here's how some other people plan to spend convention week:
SISTER SOULJAH, -- rap singer:


Mass Media Don't Create the Political Fiascos; Getting the Job Done
To the Editor:
Richard Brookhiser (Op-Ed, June 18) praises Vice President Quayle for addressing serious issues and reminding us of the virtues of traditional values.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  ATTACK ON A BOSNIAN BASTION


Domestic Problems Hurt Rising Stature of Egypt
Antar Kamil, a 28-year-old unemployed university graduate, is engaged to be married, but like many young Egyptian men he has had to postpone his wedding.
He has given up on finding a decent job and is preparing to join the estimated 2.1 million Egyptians who have left to make their living in other Arab countries.
"I thought I had a future when I graduated from school," he said morosely late one afternoon in a small coffee house in the Boulak Abu al-Ila slum.
"But I was wrong. The only solution is to leave."


Obituaries on TV: Pittsburgh Sorely Feels a Newspaper Strike
In the early evening, as part of the nightly news, the names begin to scroll slowly across the television screen.
Reverent piano music plays in the background, and alongside the people's names are their ages, hometowns and funeral homes.
It is the nightly obituary show, broadcast every evening by local television stations in one of the more amazing innovations for spreading information in a city now entering its third month without major local newspapers.


Elizabeth Halpert, Matthew B. Cohen
Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Halpert of Livingston, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Debra Halpert, to Matthew Brian Cohen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nelson Cohen of Morristown, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Halpert, 26 years old, graduated from George Washington University.
She is a bond trader for Halpert &amp; Company, investment bankers in Millburn, N.J.
Her father is the company's president and chief executive.


Brenda Brophy, David Pivirotto
Brenda Thomson Brophy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond C. Brophy of Washington, was married yesterday in Wolfeboro, N.H., to David Horne Pivirotto, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard R. Pivirotto of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
John Myslinski performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Cecilia's Church.
Mrs.
Pivirotto, 25 years old, graduated from Georgetown University and operates B. B. Designs, a graphics design firm in Washington.
Her father is a real-estate developer in Washington.


Corrections
A front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about Presidential candidates refers incorrectly in some editions to an incident involving Margaret Truman.
A music reviewer criticized her singing; it was her father who played the piano.


A Serb, Fighting Serbs, Defends Sarajevo
AT an age when most soldiers hang up their boots, Col.
Jovan Divjak is engaged in the fight of his life.
At 55, he spends his nights crawling along muddy river banks in camouflage fatigues to scout new enemy tank positions, or racing through the blacked-out streets of Sarajevo in a car without headlights, dodging hostile fire on his way to talk with fighters "at the front," in burned-out hospitals and rocket-scarred university buildings, and in bunkers on the Alpine slopes that run almost to the heart of the city.
By day, as deputy commander of the army of Bosnia and Herzegovina, he may be found standing on a grassy hillside in a drizzling rain, as he did on Monday, leading official mourners at the funeral of one of his fighters.
In moments when he isn't in conferences with other commanders or touring gun positions, he pauses in his office in the Presidency, the century-old Austro-Hungarian building that now is a command center, and relaxes over cups of Turkish coffee, or, when a bottle can be found in this city under siege, a glass of Lozovaca brandy.
In an army that has as many men in running shoes and jeans jackets as in camouflage fatigues, Col.
Divjak has become the Omar Bradley of the war, the soldiers' soldier who prefers to be where the action is.
The judgment is not the colonel's but that of many of his fighters, among whom "Jovo," ready with a joke, or with the rarest of treasures in Sarajevo, a cigarette, has become one of the most popular officers.
Three months ago, few in Sarajevo would have picked him for this role.
He had been 32 years in the army of Yugoslavia.
He was a member of the ruling League of Communists from the age of 18, and a member of Marshal Josip Broz Tito's personal security guard.
He had been a passionate Yugoslav, believing it was the army's task to prevent the country's breaking apart.
He was a Serb in an army dominated by Serbs, and he had served for years in the military command in Sarajevo.
Now he is a Serb in an army commanded by a Muslim, with more Muslims and Croats than Serbs among its fighters, and he is facing the army he served in most of his life.
It has been renamed now, for the sake of Serbia's political deniability, as the army of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia, but its commanders, men like Gen.
Ratko Mladic, the officer best known for telling his gunners to "burn it all" when bombarding Sarajevo, are men who trained with Colonel Divjak and who debated with him into the night over Yugoslavia's future.
These days, General Mladic lists Colonel Divjak as a traitor, for which the penalty is the firing squad.
On the other side of the war, Colonel Divjak's name prompts vituperation.
"He is a complete madman, he has no honor and no honesty," said Col.
Tomislav Sipcic, the commandant of the Lukavica military barracks on the outskirts of Sarajevo, from which heavy artillery has fired into the city for 14 weeks.
"He has joined an army that is not of his own people, an army which wants to subjugate Serbs, and to drive them from the earth. A man who can do such a thing can only be insane."
Hearing this, Colonel Divjak shook his head.
It was deep into the night, in a room doubling as his office and bedroom.
"Yes, I suppose I am a traitor in their eyes, but to many Serbs who live in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and no doubt to many Serbs who live outside this republic, I am a hero," he said.
"But to me, both of these views are extreme. The fact is that I am a man who came to a point in his life where he had to look his conscience square in the face. And here I am."
The moment of decision came at 6:15 P.M. on April 7, after General Mladic's forces left the city and began the bombardments.
Col.
Stjepan Siber, a Croat who is another deputy commander of the Bosnian forces, telephoned to invite Colonel Divjak to cross over.
"I came to the conclusion that I was being given a chance to express myself as I could in no other way," Colonel Divjak said.
"It was a chance to prove myself as a man in a way that I never had in the Yugoslav Army." Resisting Nationalism
Until April, the colonel's career had been unremarkable.
He had stayed with the Communist convictions born of a wartime boyhood in a Serbian enclave of Romania, where his father, a teacher, and his mother were members of an anti-Nazi underground.
He had done well in the infantry and had acquired proficient French.
But for 12 years he remained a colonel, regularly being leapfrogged over by others who became generals.
His exam grades qualified him for promotion, but from the army's viewpoint, he had a disabling proclivity: that of speaking out, in conclaves of fellow officers, against the Serbian nationalist views that became increasingly fashionable in the army after Marshal Tito's death in 1980.
Under Slobodan Milosevic, Serbia's President, these views supplanted Communism as the army's orthodoxy, and were the fuel for wars in Slovenia and Croatia last year, when the army was used in an effort to maintain a Serbian-dominated federation.
Now a similar process, with still greater brutality, is unfolding in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where Serbs, Croats and Muslims are more mixed than in any other former Yugoslav republic.
Before Sarajevo, the process seemed cruellest at the Croatian city of Vukovar, where artillery bombardments from last August to November reduced the city of 45,000 to rubble and killed thousands, many of them Serbs.
For Colonel Divjak, Vukovar was a turning point -- "a case of an army behaving with total brutality towards an unarmed civilian population, and it revolted me profoundly." But with retirement approaching, he expressed his revulsion only privately.
For nearly five months he stayed at his army job in Sarajevo, commanding Bosnia's territorial forces.
"I wasn't honest about the events in Croatia, because I didn't speak out," he said.
"Today, I feel thoroughly ashamed." An Ideal Under Fire
Often, as events here are reported abroad, the siege of Sarajevo and the wider war for Bosnia are depicted as a 20th-century replay of age-old tribal conflicts, with Serbs fighting for territory and political dominion with Muslims and Croats.
But for Colonel Divjak, and for thousands who live under the Serbian attacks, this view is distorted.
The fight, as he and scores of others express it, is for the survival of a society based not on national identities and hatreds, but on the rule of law, equal civil rights and democracy.
The concept is expressed in a Bosnian Government document, issued last month, that declares the republic "a multinational and multireligious community" based on parliamentary democracy, human rights and "freedom for each and all."
The ideal took a blow last weekend when the strongest Croatian leader in Bosnia, Mate Boban, proclaimed a separate Croatian state on a third of the republic's territory, similar to the separate Serbian state declared in May on the other two-thirds.
For Sarajevo's 400,000 inhabitants, the Croatian move made the ideal of a multi-national democracy here seem still more remote.
Within the Government, it is an ideal that has had to be defended against extremists, Muslims and Croats, who have been keen to take punitive action against the 80,000 Serbs still living in the city.
These Serbs, in turn, have more and more looked to Colonel Divjak as their ally against arbitrary arrests, property seizures and allegations that they constitute a fifth column.
Despite pessimism over the Croat move, however, the Government was encouraged when Croats fighting for it, including Colonel Siber, reaffirmed their loyalty last week.
The job of reassuring Sarajevo's Serbs is a task that impels Colonel Divjak to make frequent telephone calls to police commanders, to dash out into the city in support of Serbs who have been seized or abused, and to attend meetings with other prominent Serbs at which petitions to the Government, or statements in support of it, are drafted.
For many Serbs, staying here has been difficult, but few have made the commitment that Colonel Divjak has, which makes death virtually certain if the defense of the city should fail.
For now, it is a matter he contemplates philosophically.
"I have the comfort of a man who knows he has finally done the right thing," he said.
"And anyway, so far we've been winning the war, simply because we haven't lost."


Atom-Waste Plant Gains, but Only in Part
The Energy Department's effort to open the nation's first permanent repository for nuclear waste cleared one obstacle on Friday when a Federal appeals court, reversing a lower court's decision, ruled that the department did not need an operating permit from the State of New Mexico.
But the ruling, issued by a unanimous three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, upheld a part of the lower-court decision requiring the department to obtain Congressional approval before opening the repository, carved from salt beneath the desert near Carlsbad, N.M.


4 Priests in Queens Are Robbed By a Gunman in Their Driveway
Four priests returning from a movie were robbed at gunpoint Friday night in the driveway of their residence near St.
John's University in Queens, the police said yesterday.
One priest was pistol-whipped and all four were forced to wipe the suspect's fingerprints off the hood of the car, where the robber had ordered them to place their wallets before he escaped with $630 in cash and several credit cards.
The gunman was identified by the police as the so-called driveway robber, suspected in more than 50 similar crimes in Queens and in Nassau County on Long Island.


Update; Jury Recommends Damages for Bias in Real-Estate Ads
A Federal District Court jury in Manhattan has recommended that a Manhattan real-estate company pay $262,500 in damages to two black couples and a fair housing organization for running racially biased real-estate advertisements.
All the advertisements seeking tenants for two luxury Manhattan apartment buildings showed people who appeared to be young and wealthy.
They also had one other thing in common: All were white.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 12, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
13
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
2
24
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
2
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
4
3
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $5.99.) Attending a family funeral, a woman lawyer finds new understanding and love.
5
34
PATRIOT GAMES, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan battles terrorists.
6
7
THE HOUSE OF THUNDER, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A woman recalls the horrors that brought her to a hospital.
7
8
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
8
24
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) An elderly woman reminisces about six decades of life in rural Alabama.
9
2
THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A woman insurance investigator probes the murder of a millionaire.
10
2
RAVISHED, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $4.99.) When a British beauty summons a man with a dubious past to stop the looting on her property, the results are romantic.
11 *
1
THE DECEIVER, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $5.99.) Sam McCready recalls his years in the British secret service.
12 *
4
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
13
1
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
14 *
1
THE LILAC BUS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) A dozen interlocking short stories about life in contemporary Ireland.
15
6
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
5
ROSS PEROT: IN HIS OWN WORDS, by Tony Chiu. (Warner, $4.99.) A compilation of statements about himself and his beliefs by the Texas billionaire who seeks the Presidency.
3
8
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series.
4
60
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
5
3
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France, by a British writer.
6 *
23
ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $5.99.) The rescue of two Americans from an Iranian prison.
7
52
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
8 *
453
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
9
8
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
10
10
CRUEL DOUBT, by Joe McGinniss. (Pocket, $5.99.) The tribulations of a woman whose son was accused of planning her murder.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
48
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
12
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
3
96
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
77
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
16
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
6 *
2
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1992 edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Midsummer Night's Dreaming
Performance artists turn Tavern on the Green into a fantasy land at an after-hours disco party.


Threats Used To Push Jobs for Minorities
A growing number of groups demanding jobs for black and Hispanic workers have been disrupting construction sites in New York City, beating workers and extorting money for labor peace, the police, prosecutors and industry officials say.
The proliferation of these groups, called minority coalitions, has bred sometimes-violent competition, with members waging intramural gun battles in the fight over turf.


RECORD BRIEFS
Master Musicians of Jajouka: 'Apocalypse Across the Sky'
Axiom 314-510 857-2; CD and cassette.


On Louisiana's Future, Governor Deals From Past
He celebrated the New Year betting $1,000 chips at the craps tables at Caesar's Palace in Las Vegas, Nev.
He capped his first legislative session since returning to office for an unprecedented fourth term as Louisiana Governor by successfully pressing state lawmakers to enact legislation to build the world's biggest casino in New Orleans.


POSTINGS: Kosciuszko Foundation House; An Inside Job
The Kosciuszko Foundation House, a three-story 1917 limestone building at 15 East 65th Street with a fourth-floor setback, looks as grand as ever from the street.
But inside, the usually sedate center for Polish culture and education is in the midst of a noisy, dusty $1.5 million renovation.
The bulk is expected to be done by October -- in time for the first concert, by the Chopin Trio of Warsaw, in its classical music series.
"The building has always been maintained and painted," said Joseph E. Gore, president and executive director, "but it has lacked a modern air-conditioning and heating system."


Julie Olbert and Spencer Mason
Julie Olbert and Spencer Mason, members of the Pforzheim Opera in Pforzheim, Germany, were married yesterday in Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Scott Olbert, the brother of the bride, performed the Lutheran ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Francis S. Mason Jr.
Mrs.
Mason, 37 years old, is first flutist in the opera's orchestra.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth N. Olbert of Columbus, Ohio.
She graduated from the Cincinnati Conservatory of Music and received a master's in flute performance from the University of Illinois.


Miss Dabezies, C.W. Goodyear 4th
Elizabeth Morris Dabezies, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Oliver H. Dabezies Jr. of New Orleans, was married there yesterday to Charles Waterhouse Goodyear 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Goodyear 3d of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Thomas Condon performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the chapel of the Academy of the Sacred Heart.
Mrs.
Goodyear, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Alabama.
She is a leasing manager with the Edward J. DeBartolo Corporation, a real-estate firm in New Orleans.
Her father is an ophthalmologist in New Orleans and a clinical professor of ophthalmology at Tulane University.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Road to the Nomination; While Others Shrank From the Race, Clinton Clung to Dream of Presidency
It was April 1991, and the nation felt very good about itself and its President in the aftermath of the Persian Gulf war, and a sort of sullen silence had fallen on the Democratic Party.
Paul E. Tsongas was running for President, but nobody gave him much of a chance, and George McGovern was thinking about it.
None of the supposed heavyweights was making a move.
But down in Little Rock, on a spring afternoon, Gov.
Bill Clinton seemed immune to the Beltway blues.


Police Officer Is Killed By Hit-and-Run Driver
An off-duty Suffolk County police officer was killed near his home early this morning when he was dragged 500 yards by a hit-and-run driver whom the officer had attempted to question about property damage in the neighborhood, the police said.
A suspect was later arrested and charged with murder.
The 45-year-old officer, Henry Stewart, was awakened shortly after midnight by loud noises outside his home on Brookdale Avenue in Bay Shore, said Detective Sgt.
Kevin Cronin of the Suffolk police homicide squad.
Going outside to investigate, Officer Stewart approached the driver of a gray Oldsmobile that was parked in front of his house.


Summer Festivals Move Into Parks
THE best things in life are free, declared De Sylva, Brown and Henderson in "Good News," and that applies to lots of good music.
Today, for instance, costumed dancers and singers enliven the Slavic Heritage Festival, from 1 to about 6 P.M. at Tibbetts Brook Park in Yonkers.
Next Sunday during those same hours, the Irish Heritage Festival brings jigs, reels and fiddle tunes to Ridge Road Park in Hartsdale.
There is, though, a modest parking charge at both locations ($2.25 in Yonkers, $2 in Hartsdale).
The number to callfor additional details is 285-7275.


Her Brilliant (but Brief) Career
During the 1930's, the Farm Security Administration hired photographers like Dorothea Lange and Walker Evans to document the plight of the rural poor.
In LOOKING FOR THE LIGHT: The Hidden Life and Art of Marion Post Wolcott (Knopf, $35), Paul Hendrickson, a staff writer for The Washington Post, examines the life of a lesser-known F.S.A. photographer who worked for the agency from 1938 until 1942.
Traveling alone almost without respite for four years, mostly in the South, but also in New England and the West, Marion Post Wolcott (1910-90) photographed miners, Saturday-night jitterbuggers, tinkers and farmers -- all of whom she portrayed with respect and compassion.
She also spent time photographing, not so sympathetically but with no less grace, rich people in Florida and Virginia.
In 1941 she got married, and shortly afterward she left the agency and absented herself from the world of professional photography until historians rediscovered her work in the 1970's.
Therein lies the root of her long obscurity and the central problem for her biographers.
Why did she stop, what role did the responsibilities of family life play, and what does that tell us about the lives of women artists?
To address these questions, Mr.
Hendrickson has written a New Age sort of biography, long on feeling and personal history, short on the conventions of chronology and research.
The book has no footnotes, no bibliography, no index, and therefore no guideposts for others who might want to know more about Wolcott's life and times.


POSTINGS: Repairing an Old Stable; Stucco Staying
What may be the largest private stable structure still standing in Manhattan is being repaired.
But it seems that the glory of its original red-brick facade cannot be recovered.
The stable, at 166 East 73d Street, was completed in 1884 for the financier and art collector Henry Marquand.
The architect was Richard Morris Hunt, who also designed Marquand's home at Madison Avenue and 68th Street and -- under Marquand's patronage -- a portion of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Tech Notes; De-icing, as Easy as a Car Wash
Normally, de-icing an airplane is a cumbersome and time-consuming task.
In most cases it is done at a departure gate with workers spraying a liquid -- generally a mixture of ethylene glycol and water -- on the wings.
They do this while standing in cherry pickers mounted on trucks, which must be maneuvered around the plane.
The procedure can take about 20 minutes.
To speed up the process and make it more efficient, airlines at various airports have begun installing huge gantries, frameworks where planes pull up and are sprayed by computer-controlled nozzles for about five minutes each.


Yankees Spoil the Memories
The Yankee fans came to see Joe DiMaggio and Mickey Mantle during Old-Timers Day yesterday at Yankee Stadium and both received huge ovations, as they always do.
The fans did not come to see Don Mattingly miss a grounder, but he did.
And that's something he hardly ever does.
Sure, Omar Vizquel's ball was hit sharply and was scored a single.
Sure, Mattingly was inching forward for a possible bunt and was screened by Dave Cochrane dancing off first.
Sure, the Yankees had chances to win before the Seattle Mariners scored the lead run on the deflected grounder and snatched a 5-3 victory in 12 long innings yesterday at Yankee Stadium.


Doctors and Midwives Share a Common Goal
I am writing in reference to your article on June 7 entitled "Slowly Midwives Gain a Niche in the County." I was offended by the comments made by Dr.
Bertrand Bell regarding obstetrical practices in Westchester.
As a full-time partner in a four-woman OB/GYN group practicing out of Northern Westchester Hospital Center, I take great pride in our obstetrical management of patients both antenatally and intrapartum.
The majority of our obstetrical patients are over 30 years old, and we absolutely do not consider them high risk on the basis of age alone.
Furthermore, over the years our Cesarean section rate has been consistently averaging less than 18 percent, while the national average is 25 percent.
We also have a tremendous VBAC (Vaginal Birth After Cesarean) success rate.


Shirley Higginson, Francis Murray 3d
Shirley Foerderer Higginson and Francis Wisner Murray 3d were married yesterday at St.
John's Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee performed the Episcopal ceremony.
Mrs.
Murray, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Percival E. Foerderer, is the chairman of a philanthropic foundation in Philadelphia bearing her parents' names.
She graduated from Mount Vernon Junior College and Adelphi University.
Her father was the president of Robert H. Foerderer Inc., a leather-goods maker in Philadelphia.
Both the bride and bridegroom were widowed.
Her late husband, Thomas L. Higginson, was a senior partner in the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.


The Minefields In Monologues
BLAME SPALDING GRAY.
He certainly isn't the first person to get up on a stage and talk about himself.
But he's been hugely successful with his theatrical monologues ("Swimming to Cambodia," "Sex and Death to the Age 14," "Monster in a Box"), recounting the odder and odder things that keep happening to him, despite his best efforts to lead a simple, hassle-free life.


Botswana's Elephant Country
A TARPAULIN canopy shaded us from the white glare of the afternoon sun as the three of us sat with our guide in a dinghy on the Chobe River in northern Botswana watching a pair of crocodiles snoozing, their jaws wide open, the impressive teeth and yellow interiors of their mouths on display for all to see.
Herons and pygmy geese played in the stands of papyrus, white egrets swooped into the water.
Straight ahead, four bull elephants, still only humps on the skyline, moved toward us.
Our guide cut the outboard motor.
"We'll watch them for a while as they cross the river," said Phil O'Shaughnessy, his voice now the only sound in the silence of the bush.
Within a few minutes, the elephants reached the river and sloshed in, forming a straight line, trunk to tail, trunk to tail.
We pushed ourselves closer with our paddles as they submerged themselves, leaving just their heads above water and their trunks stretched skyward like upended hoses.
We could see the red of their eyes as they paddled around and then headed back to shore, their wet tusks glistening in the sun and their skin the color of dark chocolate from the swim.
Their first order of business on land was to scoop up dirt with their trunks and spray it over their backs, an elephant's version of talcum powder.
The dust served as an abrasive to dislodge ticks, Phil explained.


Lauren Gottlieb, David Sussman
Lauren Dana Gottlieb, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David Gottlieb of Westport, Conn., was married last night in Rye Brook, N.Y., to David Jay Sussman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Sussman of Milford, Conn.
Rabbi Peter Rubenstein performed the ceremony at the Rye Town Hilton.
Mrs.
Sussman, 24 years old, was until recently a teacher at the Multi- Media Preschool in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a periodontist in Norwalk, Conn.
Her mother, Arlene K. Gottlieb, is a lawyer in New York.


After the Uproar, What Has Sellars Done for Mozart?
Haven't Peter Sellars's productions of the three Mozart-da Ponte operas been amply discussed, even talked to death?
Is there anyone who still doesn't know that "Cosi Fan Tutte" is now set in Despina's yuppie-haven diner by the sea, "Don Giovanni" in a rubble-strewn ghetto and "The Marriage of Figaro" in the Almavivas' Trump Tower penthouse?
Even people who haven't seen the productions have heard enough to have an opinion about this most fashionable of directors.
Boy genius?
Fraud?
But perhaps the release on video of staged re-creations produced by Austrian Radio and a consortium of partners ("As Seen on Public Television," the stickers proclaim) will allow some enthusiasts to take the plunge out of earshot of the media din. ("Cosi" is London 071 513, "Don Giovanni" 071 511, "Figaro" 071 512; videocassette and laser disk.)


A Hideaway in the Madeiras
CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS honeymooned there and pirates plundered it over the centuries, but few people seem to go to Porto Santo these days.
One of Europe's most unspoiled stretches of beach, this tiny dry island 350 miles west of Morocco belongs to Portugal and forms part of the same volcanic Atlantic chain as Madeira -- but is a world apart.
While Madeira, 24 miles to the southwest, bursts with lush tropical vegetation and high-rise hotels, Porto Santo has little more than a cluster of whitewashed cottages, a museum dedicated to Columbus and a four-mile golden beach.
Absent are the yachts and package tours and the affluent British who built Madeira into a luxury winter resort with hotels like Reid's.
At Porto Santo, boats fish for tuna, yoked oxen thresh grain and the donkey is still sometimes called upon to carry things.
The climate is also different -- dry and generally warm enough to swim the year round, and the landscape of cactus and spiny shrubs is more reminiscent of Morocco.
The island's name means "holy port" and that's what the gently curved bay must have seemed to its Portuguese discoverers, Tristao Vas Teixeira and Joao Goncalves Zarco, when they landed there in 1418, blown off course by a storm while exploring the coast of Guinea.
It was the first island they discovered in the Madeira chain, and their patron, Prince Henry the Navigator, assigned Columbus's future father-in-law, Bartolomeu Perestrello, to administer Porto Santo.
Legend has it that a particularly fertile rabbit came over with the first settlers and, with her many offspring, chewed up every seedling on the island, leaving it bare forevermore.
The harsh life on this unproductive terrain -- and attacks on villages by English, Moorish and French pirates over the 15th to 18th centuries -- sent many islanders running to Madeira.


'Romeo and Juliet' Filtered Through Socialist Realism
The big sleeper of the Kirov Ballet season was the revival of Leonid Lavrovsky's "Romeo and Juliet," created in 1940.
Common wisdom had it that Lavrovsky's remarkable fusion of mime and dancing would look old-fashioned, that this Socialist Realist epic with decadent aristocrats pitted against "the people" could no longer be taken seriously.
Surprisingly, this once-controversial treatment of Prokofiev's score (seen in New York with the Bolshoi in 1959) was a superb revelation all over again.
Here was dramatic realism made marvelously bold and conveyed through a choreographic style totally different from that seen in the West.
In dance-dramas like Antony Tudor's, body language
symbolizes
psychological truths. (A fall might telegraph an emotional collapse.) In this "Romeo and Juliet," a gesture communicates its meaning directly.
Yet such movement is never naturalistic but is incorporated into a gestural flow.
The Juliet of Galina Ulanova, with her seamless line, introduced this sculptural and supple silhouette to the West and left hundreds of viewers deeply moved.


Commercial Property: Regional Competition; How David (Westchester) Beat Goliath (Connecticut)
IN what has been described as a "slugfest," Westchester County recently went toe-to-toe with Connecticut in a fight to hold onto a multimillion-dollar corporation that was looking to expand outside of the county.
In the end, Westchester scored a knockout.
JWP Inc., a multinational technology company, agreed to lease 78,000 square feet of office space in the village of Rye Brook for its world headquarters and other operations, despite an offer of more than $3 million in relocation perks by Connecticut.


SURFACING
ADVERTISING --
Infomercials for movies:
Tom Hanks and Penny Marshall are touting "A League of Their Own" (and related merchandise) on the QVC shopping network.
RETAIL --
Gap Shoes:
coming this fall, a new Gap chain for footwear. KITCHENS --
The farmhouse sink
: deep, wide English imports made of vitreous china with a porcelain glaze.
LITERATURE --
Audio bookstores:
in California, shops that sell only books on tape. WORDS --
Synthetic glass:
what used to be called plastic.


For Many on Refugee Ship, Reprieve Was Brief
To the Editor:
In "St. Louis Survivors" (letter, June 23), Ted Stone states that the 907 Jewish refugees on the liner St.
Louis who were forced to return to Europe from Cuban and United States shores in 1939 were accepted by Britain, Belgium, France and the Netherlands.
However, except for the 287 admitted to Britain, nearly all of the 620 remaining were murdered in Auschwitz and other death camps when the Germans occupied these three "safe havens."


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
East Brunswick 125,000
13 Windsor Drive
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; double-tiered deck, large backyard, full basement; taxes $2,150.
Franklin Lakes 390,000
637 Knollwood Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; one-acre plot, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $5,084.
Old Bridge 148,000
9 Venus Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old newly renovated split level; family room, vinyl siding; taxes $3,673.
Piscataway 152,500
426 Metlars Lane
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; ceiling fans, storage shed, fireplace; taxes $3,327.
Rockaway 129,000
126 West Union Turnpike
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 51-year-old colonial; flat deep wooded lot, family room, full basement; taxes $2,570.
Westfield 215,000
420 Birch Road
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 63-year-old colonial; new kitchen and windows, brick fireplace; taxes $3,741.
OTHER AREAS Blue Point, L.I. 95,000
37 Oakwood Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, skylights, 1-car detached garage; taxes $3,200.
South Salem, N.Y. 280,000
West Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 26-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, porch, dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 1.2 acres; taxes $6,213.
Danbury, Conn. 209,500
172 Kohanza Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, 1 acre; taxes $3,303.


Shared Streets, Crossed Paths and a Death
The only thing Jose (Kiko) Garcia and Officer Michael O'Keefe had in common was the sweltering, buzzing sidewalks of Washington Heights, a world where drug-fueled lawlessness too often seems to touch the lives of good and bad alike.
Mr.
Garcia, an illegal alien who came to this country four years ago to be with family, apparently eked out a living peddling clothing on the street, returning at night to a cramped one-bedroom apartment he shared with his mother, two sisters, two brothers and a niece.
Friends and relatives said he was a timid "big kid" who loved to eat, watch television and have a beer or two with friends who always seemed to be on the stoops that lined West 162d Street near St.
Nicholas Avenue.
He was once arrested there after police officers said they saw him sell a packet of cocaine.


VIOLENCE IN GAZA PITS ARAB VS. ARAB
Ibrahim Ashurafa was sitting in front of his grocery store when the masked men pulled up to the dusty curb and leaped out of their car.
He knew right away that he was in trouble.
"I am Fatah," Mr.
Ashurafa said, referring to the mainstream movement of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
He did not need anyone to tell him that these half-dozen masked men were Hamas, an Islamic fundamentalist rival dead set against the Middle East peace talks, which the P.L.O. supports.


Karen Marcia Lewis, Trevor William Shearly
Karen Marcia Lewis, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael P. Lewis of Brooklyn, was married last night in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Trevor William Shearly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford Shearly of Epsom, Surrey, England.
Judge Lawrence J. Tonetti of the New York State Court of Claims in the Bronx, officiated at the Tarrytown Hilton.
Mrs.
Shearly, 31 years old, is an operations officer of the Marine Midland Bank in New York.
She graduated from Brooklyn College.
Mr.
Shearly is 33.


'Delve More Deeply'
To the Editor:
Francis X. Clines's commentary on the current popularity of Irish artistic endeavors in America was wrongheaded: Ireland and America, having broken with Britain politically, share an artistic impulse to break with Britain's literary/cultural tendencies toward whitewashing, stereotyping and melodrama.
It is precisely this shared desire to expose hypocrisy and ugly realities that makes Irish art so appealing to Americans.


The Hit Parade of Broadway
MOST Broadway musicals have at least a couple of numbers that become hit songs independently of the show.
"Shall We Dance?" and "Getting to Know You" from "The King and I," "What Kind of Fool Am I?" from "Stop the World -- I Want to Get Off" or "Send in the Clowns" from "A Little Night Music" are frequently heard, even though the shows may be long gone.
And "Sunrise, Sunset" from "Fiddler on the Roof" has become a classic at weddings.


Odd Lunchfellows
To the Editor:
The review of Janet Burroway's "Cutting Stone" by Angeline Goreau (June 7) illustrated for me that book reviews are almost as good as history.
The curious "incident of historical marginalia" that put Pancho Villa, John J. Pershing and Alvaro Obregon at a common table in Bowie, Ariz., in August 1914 also explained a puzzle that bothered me since last year, when I saw a photograph, for sale in a San Antonio second-hand store, of the same trio smiling out in the sepia color of the time.


Nicaraguan Money Scandal Threatens a Chamorro Ally
The Government of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro is caught in growing accusations of misuse of public funds that could damage the credibility of the son-in-law she depends on to run the country.
Some foreign aid is involved in the scandals, which include allegations of vote buying and bad loans by state banks.


Enthroned


Noted With Pleasure
Mighty Rocks and Maize Plants


Miss Burba, Mr. Cantwell
Desiree Sherman Burba, a daughter of Mrs.
Wallace Burba of Tiverton, R.I., and the late Mr.
Burba, was married on Friday in Worcester, Mass., to Robert Cantwell Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cantwell of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Joseph Pomeroy performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Joseph's Chapel at the College of the Holy Cross.
Mrs.
Cantwell, 28 years old and a Holy Cross graduate, is the executive assistant to the president of Talent Tree Personnel Services in Boston.
Her late father was an engineer with the Naval Underwater Systems Center in Newport, R.I.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Racial Politics; Perot Speech Gets Cool Reception at N.A.A.C.P.
In his first campaign appearance before an organization of blacks, Ross Perot called today for racial harmony and said economic development was the answer to the problems of the nation's cities.
But he elicited little response from the audience and left some listeners offended by what they said were patronizing or insensitive remarks.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and his Vice-Presidential choice, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee, also appeared today before the group, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, on a day that underscored the importance and uncertainty surrounding the black vote in the three-sided Presidential race.


Miss Dougherty, Stuart Hebb
Dr. and Mrs.
James F. Dougherty of Sea Girt, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Noreen Dougherty to Stuart MacIntosh Hebb, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Robert C. Hebb of Lunenburg, Nova Scotia.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Dougherty, 28 years old, is a personal shopper for Tiffany &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University and expects to receive her master's degree in education from Fordham University later this month.
Her father, who is retired, was the chief of radiology at the Ocean County Medical Center in Point Pleasant, N.J.


New Orleans Office on Wheels
New Orleans is experimenting with a mobile information cart whose driver dispenses information and gives out brochures and rescues lost tourists if necessary.
The three-wheeled vehicle, white with letters in purple, green and gold -- the Mardi Gras colors -- went into service last month.
It tours the area of the Convention Center, the Warehouse District, Jax Brewery and the French Quarter, making 15-minute stops at designated points, from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. daily.
At each stop the student "city ambassador" will answer questions.
The Greater New Orleans Tourist and Convention Commission, which operates the vehicle, says it is the first city tourist bureau to introduce such a service.


Blitz Hits Small-Studio Pix
Some Hollywood studios are having a terrific summer, as the receipts for hits like "Batman Returns" and "Sister Act" indicate.
But in contrast to recent years, virtually none of the most popular movies this year come from the small public film companies that blossomed in the 1980's.
Long gone are such financially precarious companies as Cannon Films and De Laurentiis Entertainment, which had few successful movies.
But now, even the smaller companies that had their share of hits are under varying degrees of pressure.


Irresolute Meetings Chip Away at Summitry's Stature
BOTH at the economic summit of seven leading industrial democracies in Munich and at the larger gathering of the 52-state European security conference here last week, world leaders tried hard to create the illusion of resolve.
They sounded firm about the crucial economic and military problems before them, but what they actually did was very little.
In Munich, the leaders said it was a shame they had been unable to get their negotiators to make good on past promises to reach a new global trade agreement, and they vowed -- for the third straight year -- to push for agreement by the end of December.


Streetscapes: Pennsylvania Station; On Preservation, 'I Told You So'
FOR those who fought vainly to save the old Pennsylvania Station in 1962 and 1963, there could be no greater irony than Amtrak's announcement last month that it needs a grander station than the low-ceilinged replacement that opened in 1968.
What the railroad now seeks seems to be just what a group of diehard activists fought to preserve three decades ago.


JULY 5-11: Cancer Controversy; An Appeals Court Ruling Would Ban 35 Pesticides
The development of pesticides to protect crops from insects, weeds and diseases is one of the great scientific achievements of the 20th century.
Last week, though, a Federal Appellate Court in San Francisco directed the Government to begin banning some pesticides because of the risk, no matter how small, that they can cause cancer in laboratory animals.
A three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ordered the Environmental Protection Agency to remove from the market any pesticides that both cause cancer in laboratory animals and leave residues in processed food.
The panel said it was guided by a 34-year-old provision of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetics Act.


A Second Cheer For Dear Old Baseball
The premiere of HBO's "When It Was a Game" last year was an occasion for diamond joy.
Here was a lovingly assembled documentary made wholly from 8- and 16-millimeter home movies taken by players and fans between the 1930's and 1950's.
Color images of Lou Gehrig, Ted Williams, Joe DiMaggio and Babe Ruth revivified a history consigned to grainy black-and-white film.
And if the old ballplayers weren't doing a whole lot more than talking, mugging for the camera and playing pepper, who cared?
This was gold.


Savannah
To the Editor: Based on your recommendation in "What's Doing in Savannah" (April 5), we stayed at the Ballastone Inn, where we had a most unpleasant experience.
Prior to our departure from Boca Raton, Fla., we reserved at the Ballastone for Friday, April 24.
When we arrived about 5:30 P.M., we asked if we could stay also on Saturday night in the same accommodation.
The man at the reception desk said there would be no problem.
It was a two-room luxury accommodation at $150 per night.


Iowa Casinos Bet on Gulf Coast
Little more than a year after the first riverboats opened to gambling in the states along the Mississippi River, the burgeoning industry of floating casinos is growing ever more competitive.
Seeking less restrictive state regulations, the operator of two Iowa riverboats says it is moving them to new berths on the Gulf Coast in Biloxi, Miss.
Steamboat Development Corporation, based in Bettendorf, Iowa, said its two boats, the Diamond Lady Riverboat Casino and the Lady Emerald, would open for business in Biloxi by July 31.
The 201-foot long boats were due to finish service in Iowa on July 5 before transferring to the Gulf Coast.


Roads of Montana Recall the Accidents
The article "Remembering the Young People Who Died on the Highways"  [ June 7 ] , sent me looking for a photo, which I took two summers ago in Montana.
My son and I were driving across the country, and these white metal crosses are all over the highways and smaller roadways of Montana, placed there in memory of Native Americans killed in car crashes.


A Subway Party With an Above-Ground Ending
It was a hot party in more ways than one.
On Wednesday at 11:45 P.M., more than 100 people converged on the uptown side of the No. 1 train's Franklin Street subway station for what was billed as an "underground fashion show."
"I feel like a human towel rack," said Michael Musto, The Village Voice columnist, modeling a pink terry-cloth suit.


New Federal Law For the Disabled Slow to Take Hold
WHEN the Americans With Disabilities Act took effect in January, it was heralded as a revolutionary Federal civil rights law that would radically revamp commercial real estate, removing many of the countless barriers that block the physically handicapped from moving throughout restaurants, offices, hotels, airports, theaters and myriad other privately owned places open to the public.
The day after the law took effect, groups representing the disabled in New York City began filing complaints with the Department of Justice against the owners of the Empire State Building, the Hotel Inter-Continental and other properties for failing to comply with a key provision that requires people who own or operate places of "public accommodation" to remove architectural barriers if the changes are "readily achievable."


Pamela Lawrence, Benoit Lombard
Pamela Ann Lawrence, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harding Lawrence of New York and Dallas, was married on Friday in Cap Ferrat, France, to Benoit Henri Lombard, a son of Gen. and Mrs.
Leon-Olivier Lombard of Sceaux, France.
Mayor Renee Vestri performed the ceremony at City Hall.
Mrs.
Lombard, 30 years old, graduated from Southern Methodist University.
Her father is the former chairman and chief executive of Braniff International Airways in Dallas.
Her mother, Mary Wells Lawrence, is a founder and a former chairman of Wells, Rich Greene, a New York advertising agency.


Lynn Cooke and Gerald Dragonetti
Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Cooke of Bergenfield, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Lynn Adele Cooke to Dr.
Gerald Christopher Dragonetti, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Carl Dragonetti of Malvern, Pa.
A September wedding is planned.
Dr.
Cooke, 26 years old, is a second-year resident in family medicine at Bryn Mawr (Pa.) Hospital.
She graduated cum laude from Rutgers University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her medical degree from the Medical College of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the director of public works for the Town of Ridgewood, N.J.
Her mother, Adele H. Cooke, is an English teacher in Westwood (N.J.) Regional High School.


Grilled Tuna With a Sauce and Two Salads
THE centerpiece of a summer menu is often food from the grill.
To round out the main course, colorful salads of vegetables or filling starches can be added.
These days, instead of hamburgers, steaks, chicken or butterflied leg of lamb, which were once typical, the ingredients sizzling on the grill are often types of seafood.
For grilling, about the best fish is tuna.


Custody Reversal in Connecticut Pits the Public Against the Courts
A little more than a year ago, Gina Pellegrino gave birth to a girl in a New Haven hospital.
Single, 19 years old, frightened and registered under a false name, she fled the hospital less than 10 hours later.
Her parental rights were terminated within a few weeks.
On July 1, Ms.
Pellegrino was reunited with her daughter, after a series of court hearings that re-established her parental rights.
But what could have been a happy time became a nightmare that has forced her into hiding, her lawyer said.


How to End the Scandal of Veterans' Hospitals; Heed the Warnings
To the Editor:
I strongly agree with "The Smoke Around Veterans' Health" (editorial, June 20), opposing the amendment by Representative Harley Staggers of West Virginia to the veterans health bill to permit easy access to cigarettes and to smoking lounges in Veterans Administration hospitals.


Farther Down, on the Left
The Village Gate had not been so crowded since Mingus died.
The lefties came in cutoffs and India-print dresses to celebrate The Nation's alternative to the swank, hors d'oeuvre-heavy uptown gigs.


Some Play Before Picking a Presidential Candidate


Dance in Review
'Mo' Moves'  Alice Tully Hall
The Serious Fun festival more than lived up to its name on Saturday night when it presented "Mo' Moves," an evening of street dancing.
The fun part came with the lithe buoyancy of Jamale Graves and Dancers, a group that included an irresistible clutch of tiny break-dancing girls, the wit and grit of the Rhythm Technicians and Rock Steady Crew, and the cheers and shouts of the exuberant audience.


Times Appoints A Projects Editor
Christopher S. Wren, a longtime foreign correspondent for The New York Times, has been appointed editor of new projects at the newspaper.
His appointment to the newly created position was announced by Arthur Sulzberger Jr., the paper's publisher.
Mr.
Sulzberger said Mr.
Wren would work with The Times's marketing and technology groups on the news content of products and delivery systems using information from the newspaper.
For news matters, he will report to Max Frankel, the executive editor.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  SHOOTINGS JOLT JAPAN  An outbreak of shootings has stirred concern that Japan is assimilating the kind of violent lifestyle viewed as typical of American cities.
A3  DOVISH CABINET FOR ISRAEL  Israel's incoming Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, unveiled his Cabinet to a jubilant Labor Party conference.
The new ministers are dovish on Middle East peace issues.
A3


Genlyte Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Darling Flirts With No-Hitter But Settles for Shutout of Jays
A's 8, Blue Jays 0
TORONTO, July 12 (AP) -- Ron Darling pitched a two-hitter and Mark McGwire hit his major league-leading 28th home run as Oakland defeated Toronto, 8-0, today for its third straight victory.


Corrections
A report in the Metropolitan Diary column of The Living Section on Wednesday misidentified the theater where Viveca Lindfors is performing in "Anna, the Gypsy Swede." It is the Theater for the New City.


Bandag Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Laoretti Lights Up the Senior Open
Playing in a rarified zone that kept him impervious to pressure, cigar-smoking Larry Laoretti put together the performance of his heretofore obscure life today to run away with the United States Senior Open.
In the improbable tradition of underdog victors like Jack Fleck in the 1955 United States Open -- but graced for the last two rounds with the kind of unerring control made famous by Ben Hogan -- Laoretti shot an airtight three-under-par 68 on a damp Saucon Valley Country Club course.
He finished with a 72-hole total of nine-under-par 275, four shots better than Jim Colbert.


A Sunday in the Parks And More for Delegates
With lunches for dignitaries, receptions for delegates in all five boroughs and a soggy concert in Central Park, New York opened its landmarks to the Democratic National Convention yesterday.
There were parties at Gracie Mansion and receptions for the 56 convention delegations from states and territories.
Former California Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. had a picnic in Central Park.
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson was applauded at the Apollo Theater.
New York's Democratic Senator, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, was toasted at a lunch at Carnegie Hall.


Dance in Review
'Historias'  Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival Becket, Mass.
Merian Soto and Pepon Osorio are first-rate delvers into social and moral issues, primarily those dealing with Latin American culture.
In their new "Historias," presented on Friday night at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival, Ms.
Soto and Mr.
Osorio take on subjugation and its effects in Puerto Rican history.


Rabin Announces a Cabinet More Dovish Than He Is
A day before he is to take over as Israel's Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin unveiled his Cabinet today to a jubilant Labor Party conference.
The new Labor-led Cabinet is decidedly dovish on Middle East peace issues, in certain respects more so than Mr.
Rabin, who declared that his top priorities would be to speed the peace process that has lumbered along for months and to shift Government money from settlements in the occupied territories to economic needs in Israel.


Jazz in July Festival at 92d Street Y
The singer Margaret Whiting, along with Walt Levinsky and the Great American Swing Band, will lead off the eighth annual Jazz in July festival on July 21 at 8 P.M. at the Tisch Center for the Arts of the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, in Manhattan.
The festival, which is to present six evening concerts through July 30, will salute the big band era and pay tribute to the pioneering Chicago jazz style developed in the late 1920's, classic songs from the 30's and piano jazz.


Abroad at Home; A Decisive Issue
The issue is there in every Presidential election, however unacknowledged: What kind of appointments would the winner make to the Supreme Court?
In this election it is fundamental.
Any doubt about that was swept away on June 29 by the Court's 5-to-4 decision in the Pennsylvania abortion case.
For the prevailing opinion, by Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony Kennedy and David Souter, made clear that at stake was not just abortion but the whole place of law and the Court in our society.


Conventions As TV News: Tradition In Transition
A message to viewers of the Democratic National Convention: Watch carefully.
This may be the last chance you get.
Predictable, plodding, often even soporific, the last few party conventions have attracted so few viewers that this summer they will receive less network television coverage than ever before.
Four years from now, some network news executives say, the conventions might not be broadcast live at all.


Lino Keeps His Smile and the Yellow Jersey
Heading toward the first major shakeout in the 1992 Tour de France, Pascal Lino continues to wear the leader's yellow jersey gracefully.
This morning, before competition began, he sat smiling among a group of Dutch fans eager to photograph him and watch as a masseur rubbed liniment into his legs.


Advanced Micro Devices reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Is Conagra Overdoing Its Healthy Choices?
Just three years after introducing its first Healthy Choice product -- with reduced levels of fat and salt -- Conagra Inc. expects sales to reach $1 billion for its current fiscal year, which ends next May.
But some food industry experts believe Conagra is jeopardizing the success of Healthy Choice by trying to do too much too quickly -- blanketing supermarkets with a sweeping line of soups, desserts, pizza and more.


Third Street Settlement Gets Lila Wallace Grant
The Third Street Music School Settlement, the nation's oldest community arts school, has been awarded a $577,500 grant by the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund.


Montanans Relish First Convention
Two days after the Phillips County Democratic Central Committee collected $120 in a one-pickle-jar fund-raiser at the Westside Cafe in Malta, Mont. (population 1,800), Larry Mavencamp was coming into Manhattan on a bus from La Guardia Airport.
"I like this city," said Mr.
Mavencamp, a farmer's son who is the committee's chairman, tilting his head to take in the tall buildings.


A Field Guide to New Yorkers
If there are delegates to the Democratic Convention who still don't know how to wine, dine and entertain themselves in New York, it's because they haven't read a newspaper in weeks.
What even the best-informed may not know, however, is how to distinguish a New Yorker from an out-of-towner.
Given the city's diversity, the task may seem impossible.
In truth, it is simpler than telling a sparrow from a wren.
No matter how recent their arrival, all New Yorkers follow the same traffic pattern.
They always look as if they know where they're going, even if they don't, because to seem lost is to invite the unwelcome.
They never step aside for anyone, which is why delegates would do well to master broken-field running; and they never wait on the curb for the light to change.
Instead, they cross, or at least paw the gutters.


Service Industry Founders In Unrelenting Recession
While the latest job figures are raising the prospect of a "triple dip" recession for the rest of the nation, economists say that the New York region has yet to emerge from the first phase of the downturn, and that the continuing loss of service jobs makes prospects for recovery here even bleaker.
Across New York, Connecticut and New Jersey, the businesses that fueled the region's growth do not appear to have hit bottom.
Law and accounting firms are laying off junior and senior executives alike.
Advertising agencies, management consulting concerns and public relations companies are carving deeply into their employment, and architecture firms and real-estate brokerage houses are reeling under their worst financial losses in decades.


Cape Cod Bank &amp; Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Continuous Success in Volatile Corner
EDDIE FIRMANI seems to find success wherever he goes.
Firmani, a native of South Africa, was a big scorer as a soccer player in Italy and England, but his biggest accomplishments in the sport have come as a coach in North America and, most recently, the Middle East.
Firmani coached the Cosmos to two North American Soccer League championships, and he won another one with the Tampa Bay Rowdies.


Toyota Is Adding Chrysler As an Auto Parts Supplier
As part of its bid to ease trade tensions with American auto makers and build a network of suppliers in the United States, the American subsidiary of the Toyota Motor Corporation plans to start buying its first parts from the Chrysler Corporation in 1993.
The American unit, Toyota Motor Manufacturing, will use the parts -- canisters containing charcoal, which are used in emission-control systems -- at its Georgetown, Ky., plant.
That factory produces the midsize Camry model.


Republic Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ruble Support May Be Delayed to '93
A $6 billion fund to help stabilize the ruble will probably not be set up until early next year, several months later than originally planned, a senior official of the International Monetary Fund says.
Russian officials had hoped that the fund would be established this summer, saying that a stable ruble is needed as soon as possible to create an anchor for the Russian economy.


Chronicle
W.
AXL ROSE, lead singer for the rock group Guns 'n' Roses, was arrested at Kennedy International Airport yesterday on charges stemming from a brawl at a Missouri concert last year, law-enforcement officials said.
Mr.
Rose, 30 years old, was arrested by Federal Customs inspectors shortly after he stepped off an Air France flight from Paris that arrived at 8:30 A.M., said Allen Morrison, a spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
He was released on $100,000 bail after spending almost 11 hours in custody.


Sports of The Times: Golf; This Season, Nicklaus Is 'Just Walking Around'
JACK NICKLAUS usually doesn't tell jokes, but at the Masters earlier this year he told one about the golfer who brought his dog to a bar.
"The guy," he said with a wry smile, "tells the bartender that his dog is really a Jack Nicklaus fan. That when Nicklaus hits a big drive, the dog rolls over. That when Nicklaus gets a birdie, he runs around the table. That when Nicklaus sinks a long putt, he does a flip. But then the bartender asked, 'What does he do when Nicklaus wins a tournament?' And the guy says, 'I don't know, I've only had him six years.' "


Keene Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Colombian Independence Day Is Celebrated in Queens


The Last Word From the First State


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Jeffrey Hammonds, outfielder.


Police Keep a Close Watch On Black Students' Gathering
Four weeks after a beach concert here ended in a disturbance that left about 30 people injured, police officers turned out in force today to monitor a gathering of black college students, prompting resentment and complaints from many of the students.
About 70 police officers from several surrounding towns arrived in Belmar in midmorning and most spent the afternoon, nightsticks at their sides, patrolling the oceanfront boardwalk in groups of four.
About 2,500 black college students strolled and socialized among them, and the day passed with few incidents.


Anne C. Winters, Eric D. Price
Anne Carol Winters, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick P. Winters of Bridgewater, N.J., was married yesterday to Eric David Price, a son of Donald C. Price of Aurora, Ohio, and Dr.
Roslyn M. Price of Shaker Heights, Ohio.
Patrick J. Cline Jr., deacon of the St.
Bernard Roman Catholic Church in Bridgewater, performed the ceremony there.
Ms.
Winters, who is 29 years old and is keeping her name, is a legal assistant for the Interpublic Group of Companies, an advertising conglomerate in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is a retired vice president and treasurer of Mutual of New York.
Her mother, Joan H. Winters, retired as an assistant vice president of City Federal Savings Bank in Somerset, N.J.


Centura Banks reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Liza DiPrima, Matthew Cibula
Liza DiPrima, the daughter of Judith Laitman of Madison, Wis., and Richard DiPrima of Evanston, Ill., was married yesterday to Matthew Stephen Cibula, a son of Susan Kusturin of Canby, Ore., and Alvin Cibula Jr. of Redding, Calif.
Rabbi Jan Brahms performed the ceremony at the Temple Beth El in Madison.
Ms.
DiPrima, who is 24 years old and is keeping her name, is the associate articles editor at Seventeen magazine in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, from which her husband graduated cum laude.
Her father is a clinical psychologist in Chicago.
Her mother is the president of Knowledge Unlimited, an educational-publications company in Middletown, Wis.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Anne DiPrima of Evanston.


From Last to First, From Best to Worst


Cuomo Calls Back Legislative Leaders On Unsettled Issues
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has summoned state legislative leaders back to Albany on Thursday in hopes of reaching agreement on several measures left unresolved when the Legislature's session ended on July 3, a spokeswoman for the Governor said last night.
Governor Cuomo decided to call the meeting after talks between members of his staff and members of legislative staffs showed "significant progress" late last week, said the spokeswoman, Anne W. Crowley.


Hon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


South Africans Head to Olympics With Few Stars and Few Chances
Bobang Phiri burst from the blocks at the African Games in Mauritius last month to become the 400-meter champion of the continent.
Gary Lemke, the sports editor of The Pretoria News, hailed Phiri as "the finest prospect in South African athletics."
Marcel Winkler, a sprinter with the shy grace and liquid speed of an impala, could, in the estimation of the respected track master who coaches her, "quite possibly become the fastest woman in the world."


Corrections
A caption on Thursday with a picture by the Associated Press showing delegates reading a newspaper at the economic summit meeting in Munich, Germany, misidentified the Japanese officials.
They were Nobuo Matsunaga, at left, the Japanese representative, and Tsutomu Hata, center, Finance Minister.


Walter Kirschenbaum, A Radio Producer, 72
Walter L. Kirschenbaum, a former radio producer, Liberal Party leader and New York City official, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 72 years old.
The apparent cause of death was a heart attack, said William Stern, a friend.


CPC International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Looking for Candidates? You've Come to Right Place
Like the baseball season, the horse-racing season has reached the halfway point, and how's this for a tight photo: All six races in the Triple Crown series for colts and the Triple Tiara series for fillies have been run, and they have produced five winners.
The only horse who won more than one of the classics is Turnback the Alarm, who took the Mother Goose Stakes last month and the Coaching Club American Oaks on Saturday, the final two races in the Triple Tiara.
She thereby earned the right to be ranked the leader pro tem among 3-year-old fillies.
But she still has a long way to go, and so does everybody else, before coronation day.
And now the next level of tests is approaching, in the Battle of Saratoga.


INSIDE
Delay in Russian Aid
A $6 billion fund to help stabilize the ruble will probably not be set up until early next year, months later than planned, an official said.
Page A8.
Chips Across the Waters
A bitter rivalry is turning into an alliance, with Toshiba of Japan and Siemens of Germany joining I.B.M. in developing memory chips.
Page D1.
Food and Tears in Bosnia
United Nations trucks brought supplies to a grateful Sarajevo suburb that has been the site of a deadly siege-within-a-siege.
Page A6.
A Street of Despair
The 5,000 people who live on West 162d Street, where violence erupted last week, offer a glimpse into the soul of Washington Heights.
Page B7.
Hooks's Blunt Farewell
Presiding over his last N.A.A.C.P. convention, the civil rights leader assailed the Republicans.
Page A10.


Mayor Dinkins Spins at the Center of a Weeklong Whirl
Mayor David N. Dinkins, who fought hard to bring the Democratic National Convention to New York City, has begun the exhausting week of politics, boosterism and partying required of him as the host of the 4,700 delegates and 15,000 journalists who have descended on Manhattan.
On Saturday, he greeted Gov.
Bill Clinton at the airport and attended a welcoming party in Bryant Park for reporters.
In the evening, he was host at a lawn party at Gracie Mansion honoring Hispanic delegates.


Scientific American's Formula for Profits
Robert Frost once said that there were "only two really great literary magazines in the United States." The first is The New Yorker, but "the more brilliant of the two is Scientific American."
"I'd rather read the advertisements in the Scientific American than most of the literature written elsewhere," the poet said.


A Glorious History For Muirfield Course
The British Open is always at its best when it is played in Scotland, and the 121st edition will begin Thursday at Muirfield, about 20 miles east of Edinburgh in the village of East Lothian.
While the ultimate site for the world's oldest golf championship will forever be St.
Andrews, the next most magical is Muirfield.
In contrast to the festive and democratic atmosphere of the Home of Golf, Muirfield -- as the permanent home of the 248-year-old Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers (the oldest golf club in the world) -- possesses both a social and topographical remoteness that gives it an almost forbidding quality.


El Salvador's Moment of Truth
El Salvador has enjoyed a merciful but nervous peace since January, following a 12-year civil war that claimed more than 60,000 lives.
The fighting ended with an agreement by guerrillas to lay down their arms and by the Government to discharge war criminals from a brutal army.
An important milestone is fast approaching.
On Aug. 15, a special commission will present its evaluation of the officer corps to President Alfredo Cristiani for possible purging.
This long-overdue weeding-out deserves the full support of the U.S.
Government.


Democratic Convention Schedule
TODAY
5 P.M.
Convention opening: invocation, presentation of colors, "Star Spangled Banner" by Marilyn Horne.


Town Hall Given Grant To Restore Its Marquee
Town Hall has been given a $281,000 grant from the Times Square Public Purpose Fund, the Town Hall Foundation has announced.
Marvin Leffler, the president of the foundation, said the money would be used to return the hall's marquee to its original 1921 condition.
The money is the first given to Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan, as part of a campaign to raise more than $1.5 million for capital improvements, including new carpeting and elevators.


Growing Clinton Spotlight Touches Shy Chelsea, 12
Six months ago, Chelsea Clinton came to New Hampshire one weekend to see her parents and immediately found herself in the election-night spotlight that children of the candidates always occupy.
Just off to the left and a few steps back.
She did not stay there long.
Until Chelsea, 12 years old, came to New York on Saturday for the Democratic National Convention, she had seldom been glimpsed on the campaign trail.
And that has been by design.


When to Beat Up on Political TV
The first gavel hasn't even fallen on the Democratic Convention today but already the air buzzes with hot words about how crassly television is compressing its coverage of politics.
One criticism concerns the compression of hours: How dare the networks limit their live coverage so drastically?
A different criticism concerns the compression of seconds -- the steady truncation of sound bites, the on-camera quotations from candidates.


Review/Dance; Mark Morris on Dreams and Death
Mark Morris has a way of seeming to choreograph for himself.
But he is willing to share his dances and they are blessedly unobscure.
Each of the seven works on the program presented by the Mark Morris Dance Group at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival this week felt like an occasion he had given himself to enjoy something, primarily the music, in the fullest way possible.
That his involvement and pleasure are almost always infectious was evident from the cheers of the audience at the festival's Ted Shawn Theater on Thursday night.
Mr.
Morris's "Bedtime" is an imaginative and powerful response to three Shubert songs that deal with sleep and death.
Three shadowy figures slumber in a line across the front of the stage, with three other figures, as dimly perceived, standing across the back.
In the empty center space -- an area established in nearly all the program's dances as open, neutral, yet charged with possibilities -- a figure in dull gold slowly crosses.
She pauses before each sleeper, undulating in a rooted bit of solo that is like the blessing of some night spirit, her arms overarching heavily like protective wings.
As she moves on, each standing figure quietly moves forward to kneel beside the body before it, as if guarding sleep like the mother in "Wiegenlied" ("Lullaby"), to which the opening section is set.


Laidlaw Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Washington at Work; Iraq Loans Put What's-His-Name in a Public Role
In his 12 years in government, Frank M. Lemay has always strived to fit the profile of the ideal bureaucrat, working overtime to make his superiors look smart on such specialties as Colombian coffee quotas and reducing greenhouse gases, and above all never getting his name in print.
Even his self-portrait is self-effacing.


Coveted Cameo Roles in a Drama With a Forgone Conclusion
Mario M. Cuomo, Bill Bradley and Joseph I. Lieberman -- three elected officials from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut whom Gov.
Bill Clinton considered as running mates -- have been given speaking parts in this week's Democratic national convention, lending the national event a distinct regional flair.
Since the conclusion is forgone -- Bill Clinton is king, Al Gore his chancellor -- all that is left to watch is how well the others play the game at Madison Square Garden.


Books of The Times; A New Risk, Perhaps a New Buckley
Windfall  The End of the Affair  By William F. Buckley Jr.
Illustrated. 296 pages.
Random House. $25.
As he has sometimes done in his previous oceangoing books -- "Airborne," "Atlantic High" and "Racing Through Paradise" -- William F. Buckley Jr. in "Windfall: The End of the Affair" freely quotes from his shipmates' journals whenever a change of pace or point of view seems needed.


What Viewers Should Watch for at the Garden
Lamenting that the Democratic National Convention should be renamed the Democratic National Coronation, Timothy Russert, a vice president of NBC News, said, "It would be a lot easier to give the viewer a score card if this were a real convention."
Indeed, what the Democrats are offering is a carefully orchestrated event of limited value as either news or entertainment.
There will be no suspense over the choice for running mate.
There will be no platform fight.
There is absolutely no doubt who will get the nomination.


Goodmark Foods reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Corrections
A picture caption with the Advertising column in Business Day on Friday about the new CBS promotion "Bo Knows Shows," referred to it incorrectly.
It involves television commercials, not a television show.


Democrats Display a New Optimism, Reflected in Poll
Fired by new optimism about Gov.
Bill Clinton's appeal, Democrats will open a national convention in New York today that their leaders describe as a carefully scripted kickoff for a party more eager to win this fall than to argue this week.
The Democrats' new sense of possibilities was underscored by the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll, which shows Mr.
Clinton gaining ground in a tight three-way race.
Mr.
Clinton now essentially ties President Bush when voters are asked how they would vote if the election were held today: Mr.
Bush is at 33 percent, Mr.
Clinton at 30 percent, and Ross Perot, the all-but-declared independent candidate, is at 25 percent.
Improving Popularity
Even more important to the Arkansas Governor is the improvement in voters' views of him personally over the last month, after a primary campaign that left his image in tatters.
During the same period, Mr.
Perot's image continued to decline, while Mr.
Bush's ratings on job performance, economic stewardship and personal image remained remarkably weak for an incumbent President.


Bridge
The first Pan-American Championships, played a month ago in Corpus Christi, Tex., were certainly a success, with 26 countries participating from North, Central and South America.
Yet a proposal to stage a second Pan-American somewhere in South America in 1996 will meet some opposition at the world level for a curious reason.
To gain a world ranking and then improve it, a player must do well in world events, with some help from successes at the zonal level.
World Bridge Federation master points were given out generously in Corpus Christi, which means that players in the Western Hemisphere have had more opportunities for advancement than those in Europe, Asia and Australia.
Top Score on the Last Deal


Scientists See New Perils After California Temblors
Two weeks ago, one of the largest earthquakes in California history slammed through the Mojave Desert, leaving one person dead, hundreds injured and scores of scientists astonished and shaken.
Astonished because this earthquake did weird things, like setting off earthquakes more than 500 miles to the north, ripping across four existing faults to make a single larger fault, and helping give rise to a new tectonic system that is shearing California away from the rest of North America and nudging it toward Alaska.


The Metro Section
Because of today's coverage of the Democratic National Convention, the Metro Section begins on B7.


Citizens Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Schedule of Equity Issues for This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Active Noise and Vibration Technologies Inc., 3 million common shares. Paine Webber.
Ampex Inc., 3 million common shares. Lehman Brothers.


How to End the Scandal of Veterans' Hospitals; A Cruel Restriction
To the Editor:
No one would want to encourage the dangerous habit of smoking, particularly at health care facilities.
However, "The Smoke Around Veterans' Health" (editorial June 20), supporting a virtual ban on smoking at veterans' hospitals, oversimplifies a complicated problem.
Many veterans' hospitals are large suburban facilities on large campuses a distance from retail stores.
Many of the patients are old and feeble.
Some are mentally ill and kept in closed wards.
Some patients are terminally ill.
Some are living in nursing-home facilities at the hospitals.


It's Just One Do After Another
The Party has begun to party.
On the eve of a convention with nothing in doubt, what else is left to do?
Have fun.
Last night alone there were at least 42 official events.
Gay and lesbian leaders gathered at B. Smith's and the Royalton.
Texans raced to the Supper Club, where Ann W. Richards, the state's Governor and the convention's chairwoman, welcomed a sweltering crowd whose brows glistened as surely as the rhinestones and other sparkly things they wore dangling above their sundresses to her "l'il party."


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular Monday auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was at 3.21 percent and on the six-month bill 3.26 percent.


WIC Western reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Suffering in Silence No More: Fighting Sexual Harassment
Sexual harassment complaints to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission are up sharply.
Congress and the White House have responded to allegations of sexual abuse in the military in ways that would have been unimaginable nine months ago.
Employers are scurrying to hire sensitivity trainers to teach men how to treat women.
And men are wondering how they failed to notice the anger of their female colleagues.


Symetrics Industries Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Ruling Party Challenged in 2 Mexican States
Mexicans in two politically crucial states chose their Governors today in voting that the opposition has called a test of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's commitment to fair elections.
In Michoacan, where tensions were running high and the leftist Democratic Revolutionary Party faced the possibility of a devastating loss, its officials said the vote had been badly tainted.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Retail Sales . . .
June Consumer Prices . . .
June 10-day Auto Sales . . .
July  Wednesday  Industrial Production . . .
June Capacity Utilization . . .
June Business Inventories . . .
May  Thursday  Housing Starts . . .
June Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  Merchandise Trade . . .
May


Vanity Fair Is Hot Property, But Profit Is Open Question
Vanity Fair may be the hottest magazine on the market, but does it make money?
For all that has been written about the monthly magazine that Tina Brown led to prominence before being named editor of The New Yorker, almost nothing has been said about its profitability.
In her eight years as editor in chief of Vanity Fair, Ms.
Brown attracted a growing readership by producing a sassy magazine that focused on culture, politics and celebrities.


Anne Speciner and Stephen Jay Gould
Anne Speciner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jules V. Speciner of New York, was married yesterday in Great Neck, L.I., to Stephen Jay Gould, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Gould of Great Neck.
Rabbi Morris Barzilai performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El.
Mrs.
Gould, 33 years old, is a guidance counselor at G. W. Hewlett High School in Hewlett, L.I.
She graduated from Boston University and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.


Tracy L. Baron, Joel Beckerman
Tracy Lee Baron, the daughter of Harvey and Carol Baron of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to Joel Leonard Beckerman, a son of Stephen and Nancy Beckerman of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi Amiel Wohl performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Beckerman, 27 years old, is a writer and a producer of on-air promotions for WCBS-TV in New York.
She graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
Her father is a senior vice president and a creative director at Ally &amp; Gargano Advertising in New York.
Her mother is the director of programs for the Richmond Children's Center, a residence for the handicapped in Yonkers.


A Decade Later, Daly and Tripucka Swap Star Status
When a little-known coach named Chuck Daly took over the Detroit Pistons in 1983, Kelly Tripucka, a scoring machine in his third season out of Notre Dame, was already the toast of Motown.
Daly, who had been fired two seasons earlier by the Cleveland Cavaliers after a brief and unsuccessful coaching tenure there, was simply trying to make a name for himself in the National Basketball Association.
Tripucka, a 6-foot-6-inch swingman who averaged 21.6 points in his first season (1981-82) with Detroit, was coming off his best season ever, averaging 26.5 points per game.


Convention Summary
CONVENTION OPENS AS CLINTON ENJOYS UPSWING  Fired by new optimism, Democrats open their 41st national convention as a New York Times/CBS News Poll shows Gov.
Bill Clinton tied with President Bush in a three-way race.
Mr.
Clinton has enjoyed a pre-convention rebound, and avoided limping to New York as a distant third.
But while he and Al Gore hope to project empathy for the values of their generation, does their ticket represent the revenge of the baby boomers or, as some critics contend, the revenge of the nerds?
THE FUN BEGINS (HEADACHES TO FOLLOW)
Demonstrators demonstrated and party members partied as New York City became obsessed with politics.
The Democratic National Convention embarked on activities loaded with local landmarks and legends.
And, at the rate of nearly 100 a day, the parties began.
THE NEW CLINTONS: MORE FIRST FAMILY-ORIENTED
From Hillary Clinton, one hears more these days about cookies than the cabinet.
Mrs.
Clinton, who retreated from the national stage after a series of gaffes before the New York primary, comes to the floodlights of Madison Square Garden with her public persona fine-tuned.
And the Clintons' daughter, Chelsea, slips into the spotlight.
FOR ORGANIZERS, TV OR NO TV IS THE PRIME QUESTION
Recent party conventions have drawn so few viewers that this summer they will receive less network television coverage than ever.
Convention organizers are trying to attract coverage through scheduling tricks and one drastic measure: making it interesting.
Highlights include Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's nominating speech on Wednesday and Governor Clinton's acceptance speech on Thursday.


Dana A. Krug, S. Lichtenstein
Dana Alice Krug, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Krug of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Stephen Lichtenstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Lichtenstein of Monsey, N.Y.
Rabbi Jehiel Orenstein performed the ceremony at the Madison Hotel in Morristown, N.J.
Ms.
Krug, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, is the assistant director of advertising at the New School for Social Research in New York.
Her father is the chairman of the department of molecular biology and biochemistry at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J.
Her mother, Marjorie Krug, is the project director of the Middlesex County Healthy Heart Program in Colonia, N.J.


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bond Insurers Defeat A. U.S.-Backed Agency
Given their lineage, it is not a big surprise that the nation's six Government-sponsored enterprises have tended to get what they want on Capitol Hill.
But times change.
One of the enterprises is the College Construction Loan Insurance Association, known as Connie Lee.
It insures and reinsures bonds and other loan agreements for college and university improvement projects.
The private bond-insurance industry has been alert to block any inroads that Connie Lee might make in its own business, and last week Connie Lee came out on the bottom of a bruising fight in Congress with the Financial Guaranty Insurance Company, a financial insurer that is part of the giant GE Capital Corporation.


It's Intermission: Anyone Awake?
Consider it a farewell card from the Mets, who loaded their bags and broke up for the All-Star Game hiatus when the afternoon was done.
Their metaphoric card -- a 3-1 loss to the Astros -- was full of familiar particulars: There were more errors than runs, there were no clutch hits, there was yet more blindly offered bravado in the aftermath.
The question New York is left to ponder about the message from the Mets is this: Was the card merely saying goodbye to a dreadful first half?
Or was it suggesting strongly once again that New York say goodbye to the team's 1992 season?


Is It Signing Lindros, or Car Financing?
The Philadelphia Flyers and RICK CURRAN, the agent for ERIC LINDROS, are keeping the progress of their contract negotiations secret.
JOHN BLACKWELL, the Flyers' assistant general manager, said the reason for the delay in reaching an agreement was the nature of the contract.
"It's a huge and lengthy contract and there are a lot of complicated questions that have to be sorted out," Blackwell said.
"We don't expect great things from him right away. We're not trying to put a lot of pressure on him. We want him to be treated like all the other players."


Anyone Who Knows Schools Could See Falling Scores Coming
To the Editor:
For most parents and teachers, there's no debate about the cause of the drop in achievement scores in New York City public schools (news report June 26).
We recognize the pattern because we've seen it before.
When school budgets were devastated in the city's last fiscal crisis in the mid-1970's, we lost a generation of kids.
Crammed into dilapidated classrooms, without adequate books and supplies, they dropped out in record numbers and became the unemployed and unemployable adolescents and young adults of today.


Seaway Food Town reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Review/Television; 2 Kinds Of Baseball With Fun From HBO
Has the fun gone out of professional baseball?
Home Box Office, like the current hit film "A League of Their Own," certainly thinks so.
HBO's new movie "The Comrades of Summer" (tonight at 8) is about a player and manager who finds himself teaching Russians the game and rediscovering how the joys of playing ball have nothing to do with fat contracts and advertising residuals.
Then, at 10 this evening, HBO's "When It Was a Game II" returns to the seemingly more innocent and less mercenary days of Babe Ruth and Joe DiMaggio with extraordinary scenes culled from 8- and 16-millimeter home movies.
"The Comrades of Summer," a somewhat slack but amiable exercise, stars Joe Mantegna (think of just about anything David Mamet has ever written) as Sparky Smith.
Sparky's career with the Seattle Mariners comes to a sudden end when he is injured making a car commercial.
His boss (Michael Lerner) is not sorry to see him go.
His two former wives couldn't care less.
Worse, his endorsement contracts are being canceled.
Enter two agents from the Russian Sports Ministry with a job offer and insisting that "we are baseballists like yourself." The pretty one is Tanya, played charmingly by a Russian star, Natalya Negoda ("Little Vera").


Boddie-Noell Restaurant Prop reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


British Airways Chairman Is Seen Quitting
Lord King is expected to announce this week that he will step down as chairman of British Airways, a post he has held for 11 years.
The Sunday Times of London reported yesterday that Lord King, 73 years old, would be named president for life, an advisory post created for him.
The announcement is likely to be made at the carrier's annual meeting tomorrow.


I.B.M. in Chip Deal With Toshiba and Siemens
In a historic shift in what has been a bitter rivalry to dominate the world's semiconductor industry, I.B.M. will announce today that it is joining with two electronics giants, Toshiba of Japan and Siemens of Germany, to develop memory chips that are likely to be a mainstay of computers used in the next century.
The joint effort will take place at an I.B.M. semiconductor factory in East Fishkill, N.Y., which industry executives regard as a victory for both the International Business Machines Corporation and the United States, with scientists and engineers from the three computer companies working together.


A Softer Image for Hillary Clinton
A high school student in Conway, Ark., asked Hillary Clinton a question that has bedeviled her husband's Presidential campaign for months.
He wanted to know what her role would be in a Clinton Administration.
Mrs.
Clinton's answer was a preview of the kind of performance she intends to give at the Democratic National Convention.
"I want to be a voice for children in the White House," she said softly.


Chronicle
Do California shoppers have the same stamina as New York shoppers?
That question will be tested on Sept. 18 and 19 when the Seventh on Sale benefit, which had bargain hunters waiting in snakelike lines in the 69th Regiment Armory for three days in 1990, is duplicated in the San Francisco Fashion Center.
So far, STAN HERMAN, president of the Council of Fashion Designers of America, which organized the New York sale and which is overseeing a committee formed in San Francisco, said things out there look promising.


Student Loan Marketing Association reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Teledyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quotation of the Day
It will never be a joke again. -- ANN F. LEWIS, a Democratic political consultant, on sexual harassment.  [ A1:2. ]


A. C. Littlejohn, 75; Was Major Investor In Brazil's Industries
Angus C. Littlejohn, for many years a leading foreign investor in Brazil, died on Thursday at North Shore University Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 75 years old and lived in Locust Valley, L.I.
He died of complications of emphysema, his family said.


The Talk of Hollywood; Hollywood Prepares To Confront AIDS In Mainstream Films
Virtually every day, the two trade newspapers, Daily Variety and The Hollywood Reporter, carry obituaries of people who have died of AIDS.
The epidemic has cut an especially savage swath across Hollywood, but, as with so many other serious issues, the film studios have largely ignored it.
"It's a tough subject matter, and Hollywood continues to shy away from tough subject matters," said Tom Rothman, the president of production at the Samuel Goldwyn Company, which distributed one of the few films about AIDS, "Longtime Companion," which has had a modest success.


AIDS Support Groups Hail And Criticize New Pepsi Ads
THE PEPSI-COLA COMPANY introduced a television commercial last night feting Magic Johnson as he prepares to play for the United States basketball team at the Summer Olympics in Barcelona.
"We Believe in Magic" is the theme of the elaborately produced commercial, the first time Mr.
Johnson has appeared in Pepsi's national advertising since he said in November that he had tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS.
The commercials begin running tomorrow.


Telemedia Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Michigan's Singular Tax Is Studied as U.S. Model
A form of taxation in Michigan that is the only one of its type in America is the wave of the future, some politicians and economists say.
Others, particularly thousands of small businesses, would like to wave it goodbye.
For the last 16 years, Michigan has departed from all its sister states by taxing businesses according to the volume of their business activity rather than their profits, meaning that businesses owe taxes even when they lose money.
Michigan calls it the single business tax.


Hovnanian Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Blauser Pounds 3 Homers As Atlanta Sweeps Cubs
Braves 7, Cubs 4
CHICAGO, July 12 (AP) -- Jeff Blauser broke out of a slump with three homers today, including a three-run shot in the 10th inning that gave Atlanta a 7-4 victory and a four-game sweep of the Chicago Cubs.


Digital Communications Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Turning Mall Rats Into Putters
What is advertised to be the nation's largest shopping mall is scheduled to open in Bloomington, Minn., next month, and it will include what is advertised as "the largest indoor adventure-style miniature golf course ever created."


SouthTrust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bush Is Taking Seaside Break
President Bush was at his summer home here today, taking one of his last respites from politics before the grueling general-election campaign begins in earnest next month.
Since arriving late Thursday from a 52-nation security conference in Finland, Mr.
Bush and his wife, Barbara, have left their rambling oceanside home at sunrise each day for an 18-hole round of golf at a nearby course.
The President has followed that with a cruise on his speedboat, Fidelity.


Reporter's Notebook; No Burned Bridges for Carson and NBC
Wasting as little time as possible, NBC has signed Johnny Carson to a new long-term contract just seven weeks after he ended his 30-year run as host of the network's "Tonight" show.
Warren Littlefield, the president of NBC Entertainment, made the announcement of the new Carson deal at a news conference on Saturday.
He called it "a very, very important announcement for me and all of NBC."


Novetah H. Davenport, Aviation Devotee, 90
Novetah Holmes Davenport, an early pilot who became an executive in the aircraft industry, died July 3 at a nursing home in Pompano Beach, Fla.
She was 90 years old.
Mrs.
Davenport received her pilot's license in 1930, continued to fly for many years and, at the age of 60, earned a license for hot-air ballooning.
She was a friend of Amelia Earhart and was active in International Women Pilots, which Miss Earhart founded.


Alexandra Ungar, D. J. Cammerman
Alexandra Tal Ungar, a daughter of Dr.
Charles Reich and Andrea Ungar-Reich of New York, was married yesterday to Daniel Joseph Cammerman, a son of Philip Cammerman of Leeds, England, and Sheila Cammerman of Jerusalem.
Rabbi Richard Kurtz performed the ceremony at the home of Miss Ungar's parents in Tannersville, N.Y.
Mrs.
Cammerman, 22 years old, graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is a periodontist in New York.
Her mother is the corporate design director at the Bernard Chaus Corporation, a clothing manufacturing company in New York.
The bride was adopted by Dr.
Reich.


Police Pact For Nassau Is Criticized
A proposed police union contract has touched off a debate between political and business leaders over whether Nassau County, broke and in the midst of a financial crisis, can afford it.
The contract is expected to set a standard for other municipal employee unions in the New York metropolitan area.
In New York City, the police have for decades sought parity with their colleagues on Long Island and the contract could be used as a guide for negotiations between the Dinkins administration and the city's police union.
The police unions on Long Island have traditionally been powerful political forces in Nassau and Suffolk Counties, and have effectively raised their salaries to among the highest in the country.


Testing the Waters


Brown Offers No Support, Just Attacks
Even with his family indicating that he should give up, Edmund G. Brown Jr. continued to hold out yesterday against endorsing Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas for the Democratic Presidential nomination.
Mr.
Brown, the only prominent Democrat who has not endorsed the Clinton ticket, told a group of supporters at a picnic in Central Park that he was determined to "make the candidate and the party better," and he fired a volley of potshots at Mr.
Clinton and his running mate, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee.


Corrections
The About New York column on July 1 about overcoming alcohol and drug addiction referred incompletely to Wendy Kaminer's new book, "I'm Dysfunctional, You're Dysfunctional." Although the book criticizes the 12-step approach of groups like Alcoholics Anonymous and Narcotics Anonymous, it also says many people have been helped by them.


West 162d: Street of Despair -- A Special Report; Broken Dreams, Drugs and Gunfire Living Along the Cruel Pavement in Washington Heights
When Sammy Jennings came to West 162d Street in Washington Heights in the early 1940's, his singing career had begun to catch on, and it seemed only natural for a young black man like himself to move to the edge of the place known as Sugar Hill.


Mow the Lawn, Then Take Some B.P.
As a former Little Leaguer, BILL GREENEof La Canada near Burbank, Calif., was hurt when he watched Taiwan sweep the United States in the 1990 Little League World Series.
And what bothered Greene most was not that the Americans lost, but that the Taiwanese romped and hit a collective .404 in the series.
The United States loss inspired the 34-year-old Greene, an inventor by trade, to develop a machine to help Little Leaguers and other baseball players improve their hitting skills.
He calls it the Batting Tutor, a backyard pitching machine.


Women Await Chance To Improve Medicine
To the Editor:
"Bedside Manners Improve as More Women Enter Medicine" (The Week in Review, June 21) looks at whether or not women are making medicine a kinder, gentler profession.
But it may be a long time before we have a solid answer to that question.
Given the slow rate at which women are breaking into the upper ranks of the paternalistic world of medicine, society still lacks a true picture of women's potential to improve our health care system.


For Laoretti, Victory Begins at 53
He never played the regular PGA Tour and had spent most of his life as a golf pro on Long Island, with several detours in between.
Larry Laoretti was so short of money when he qualified for the Senior PGA Tour three years ago that he broke his piggy bank to pay his way to his first tournament as a senior.
Since Laoretti's piggy bank had only $110 in it, he took his pregnant wife with him so she could serve as his caddie.


Burnup &amp; Sims reports earnings for Year to April 30


Millfeld Trading Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


In Its Prime, Cable TV Gets Younger
Many cable television channels think they have found the answer to an uncertain future: children.
Executives with several cable programming companies, including Turner, Nickelodeon and Discovery, said in interviews here that children's shows were becoming much more important for cable.
Each company has plans to expand its appeal to children, specifically aiming to lure children away from the broadcast networks' prime-time shows.


A Large Buy, A Small Sale
Usually, advertising seeks to sell as many products as possible.
Yet Land Rover North America and its agency, Grace &amp; Rothschild in New York, are spending an estimated $4 million on a campaign meant to sell only 500 vehicles.
Roy Grace, the agency's president, said in a telephone interview that the new print and television campaign "plays on the exclusivity of the product," the Land Rover Defender 110, which is priced at just under $40,000.


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Little Switzerland reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Topics of The Times; Unhappy Meal
"Mommy, I want to see the Batman movie," whined the 5-year-old boy between bites of french fries.
"Me, too," his little brother chimed in.
The scene, played out in a McDonald's restaurant in Connecticut last week, was triggered by an annoying marketing misjudgment by the international fast-food giant.
Despite its comic-book origin, this summer's Batman sequel, "Batman Returns," isn't a film for young children.
In the course of the violent, sexually suggestive movie, kids are abandoned, kidnapped and threatened with death.
The PG-13 rating is a strong caution for parents.


GARDEN DIARY HEADLINE&gt;Smooth Face of Party Can't Hide the Tension
The Double Bubba ticket, as it is called, swept into New York over the weekend, determined to refashion the Democratic Party in its own white, moderate, male, youthful, smoothly ambitious image.
Conventions are no longer arenas of action and decision.
They are, instead, meticulous Kabuki dramas in which the candidates enact the themes they want to sell to the voters in November.
In this week's coronation of Gov.
Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore at Madison Square Garden, the liberal special interests who have forced the Democratic nominee to kowtow and bargain in the past are being shoved out of the spotlight.


KU Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rataul Journal; In India's Mango Heaven, There's a Worm of Sorts
Sayed Abdul Malik caressed the gnarled tree trunk reverentially.
"Antiquity says that this tree came from heaven," he said.
"This is the oldest mango tree in the village."
That tree, and its successors, have bestowed fame, moderate affluence and, more recently, frustration on the people of Rataul village, arguably the mecca of Indian mango lovers.


In Ex-Aide's Trial, C.I.A. Faces Scrutiny
When the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George begins Monday, the potential jurors will be asked which spy novels and movies they have read or seen.
The question is designed to gauge their views of the Central Intelligence Agency, where the defendant was a top official, because his trial will be as much about the agency as it is about Mr.
George.
Those chosen for the jury will see an agency that will almost certainly not match up well against most of the literary and cinematic depictions.


NatWest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Convention by the Numbers: For Each Delegate, 12 Ballons
PEOPLE 4,928 delegates and alternates. 13,500 reporters with credentials. 380 dignitaries from 87 countries. 5,000 others, including familymembers, V.I.P.'s and elected officials who are not delegates. 2,500 New York City police officers assigned to the convention site.
MONEY TRANSPORTATION 450 buses operating around the convention center. 155 private buses hired to take delegates to parties Sunday, July 12. 175 cars for ferrying V.I.P.'s.
EQUIPMENT 6,000 new telephone lines and 200 cellular phones. 500 walkie-talkies. 600 miles of electric and phone cables laid under the convention floor. 205 U.S. television stations represented. 75 media trailers.
DECORATIONS 5,000 limited-edition posters in which Bill Clinton resembles Elvis Presley on the new postage stamp. 1,843 folding chairs. 90,000 Clinton-Gore campaign signs. 25,000 Clinton campaign buttons. 60,000 balloons and 20 air tanks to inflate them. 25,000 miniature American flags.


'Tosca' Makes the Real World Its Theater via TV
At the time of early day when Rome's cobbled streets are the preserve of strutting pigeons and first light warms St.
Peter's, a handful of people gathered outside the Castel Sant'Angelo on the banks of the Tiber today because, on the terrace far above them, Catherine Malfitano and Placido Domingo were singing the final act of "Tosca".
But this was no usual opera.
The orchestra and the conductor, Zubin Mehta, were two miles away.
There were no sets, live audience or theater.
It was happening just after dawn on a cold, stone terrace.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY SUSPECT ARRESTED IN ROBBERY OF PRIESTS


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Praxair Inc., Danbury, Conn., is offering $300 million in 8.7 percent 30-year debentures at a price of 100 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The debentures, callable after 10-years, are rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's.
Preferred  *
General Motors Corp., Detroit, is offering $350 million of series D cumulative fixed-rate preference stock with a dividend yield of 7.92 percent through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
The 14 million shares were priced at $25 a share, with each share representing a quarter of a share of series D preference stock.
Common  *
IMCO Recycling Inc., Irving, Tex., is offering 1.5 million common shares at $11.25 through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.


Morris Pesin, 80, Civic Watchdog Who Founded Liberty State Park
Morris Pesin, a longtime civic leader in Jersey City who is credited as the father of the park that honors the Statue of Liberty, died on Friday at Christ Hospital in Jersey City.
He was 80 years old.
The cause of his illness was undetermined, his family said.


Annette Segal Morris, Guido Ullman
Annette Segal Morris, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Segal of Omaha, was married in New York yesterday to Guido Ullman, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Otto Ullman of New York.
Rabbi Howard Handler officiated at the New York Marriott East Side Hotel.


Market Place; Problems Emerge In New Amex List
HYPE and hoopla abounded when the American Stock Exchange opened its Emerging Company Marketplace nearly four months ago: American flags for everyone present, hundreds of red, white and blue balloons, and talk about American competitiveness from James R. Jones, the exchange's chairman.
But since then, the problems with the Emerging Company Marketplace have been large.
Publicity has focused on the less-than-pristine history of some companies listed, and the vast majority of the stocks traded have plunged since Amex trading began.


Kim Starer, Brian Landzberg
Kim Lucille Starer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Starer of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to Brian Richard Landzberg, a son of Morris Landzberg of Whitestone, Queens, and the late Beatrice W. Landzberg.
Rabbi Cecil Walkenfeld officiated at Bob Gilbert's Singers Caterers in Spring Valley, N.Y.
Mrs.
Landzberg, 23 years old, and her husband, 22, are second-year medical students at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
They graduated cum laude from Harvard University.


Parochial School Aid
To the Editor:
Could there be a connection between the Supreme Court's 1985 rejection of the Reagan Administration's argument for extending state aid to parochial schools and the Bush Administration's plan announced June 25 to grant $1,000 vouchers for fees at public, private and parochial schools of choice?
Secretary of Education Lamar Alexander, discussing the Bush plan on the MacNeil-Lehrer Newshour that evening, repeatedly alluded to parochial schools in response to the objection that $1,000 would not go far toward the costs of tuition at Exeter or Andover.
But it would, according to Mr.
Alexander, cover a significant portion of parochial school costs.


Song of the South
More than 200 people packed the National Arts Club in Gramercy Park for a glimpse of Joan Mondale, Marla Hanson, Sylvia Sidney and Whoopi Goldberg.
After the appropriate grousing about the state of the National Endowment, the artistically correct listened to Jana Robbins, who recently appeared on Broadway in "Gypsy," sing Bill Clinton's campaign song to the tune of "Won't You Come Home, Bill Bailey?":  We need you now, Bill Clinton You are the choice Though no billionaire You understand, Bill Clinton You hear our voice We need as man who's fair. . . .


2 Baby Boomers on 1 Ticket: A First, but Will It Work?
The Age of Aquarius has finally dawned in Presidential politics. Sort of.
With the first baby-boomer ticket, Bill Clinton and Al Gore hope to capture the White House by projecting youth, energy and empathy for the values and issues that matter to their generation.


Far From the Beltway
Four self-proclaimed goddesses pounded Congo drums while an unidentified crooner sang "Pongo, Pongo," to the tune of "New York, New York" to greet delegates from Samoa and Guam.
The host, Christopher Cerf, said his was the coolest delegate party.
"This is the year of the political outsider and, um, well, Samoa and Guam are pretty far away from the Beltway."


Openly Gay in Blue: Officers Tread Warily
When Officer Stacy Rabinowitz reported for duty in the 78th Precinct, everyone there knew she was gay.
Her openness about her sexual preference was, in fact, why she had been assigned there.
In an institution that is one of New York City's most macho enclaves and deeply resistant to change, Officer Rabinowitz is both an exception and a symbol.
In New York City, to be gay and to be a police officer is to struggle as an outsider against myths and misconceptions not only in the Police Department but also in gay organizations.


How to End the Scandal of Veterans' Hospitals
To the Editor:
Re "The Smoke Around Veterans' Health" (editorial, June 20):
Neither Congress nor the print media are conversant with the vastness of the veterans' health care crisis, the least part of which is smoking.


For the Newest Golfers, a Local Boost
The first Minority Business Enterprise Invitational Golf Classic will be held on Sept. 1.
Its sponsors include more than 1,200 minority-owned businesses in the New York metropolitan area, and part of the proceeds will help introduce minority-group youngsters to the sport.


Service Merchandise reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Braintree Savings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Business Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about human blood substitutes misstated the amount of Somatogen Inc.'s genetically engineered hemoglobin administered to volunteers in clinical trials.
It is as much as 11.5 grams.


U.N. Aid Convoy Reaches Desperate Sarajevo Suburb
The anxieties and hopes of 35,000 people poured forth today as a convoy of United Nations relief trucks crept across no man's land and into the devastated landscape of Dobrinja, penetrating a siege-within-a-siege that has turned the Sarajevo suburb into a ghetto of hunger and death.
For 71 days, Dobrinja has been the hardest-hit area of this besieged city, cut off from the rest of the Bosnian capital by Serbian troops who have attacked it with artillery, antiaircraft guns and sniper fire.


Printronix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Jewish Heritage Series To Be Shown in Russia
The acclaimed television series "Heritage: Civilization and the Jews" is to be broadcast in Russia in nine hourlong installments beginning Thursday.
The announcement was made jointly on Friday by Channel 13 in New York, which produced the show for the Public Broadcasting Service in 1984, and Abba Eban, a former Israeli Ambassador to the United Nations, who narrated the series.


Industrial Funding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Spirited Farewell: Benjamin Hooks Chides Bush and Defends N.A.A.C.P.
Closing out 15 years as head of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Benjamin L. Hooks called on President Bush today to form a new national commission like the Kerner Commission to address the needs of the nation's cities, called for more black self-help programs and offered an enthusiastic argument in favor of N.A.A.C.P.'s continued relevance and its accomplishments.
Presiding for the last time over the annual convention of the nation's largest civil rights organization, Mr.
Hooks, at a news conference this morning and in remarks delivered tonight, offered a spirited response to questions about the effectiveness and relevance of the organization.


World Economies


Southern National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Traffic Alert
Because of traffic congestion expected from the Democratic National Convention, New York City transportation officials have issued a gridlock alert for today through Thursday and urge motorists to take public transportation.
The Department of Transportation said these will be the most congested areas:


Elizabeth Meyer, Charles B. Gadon
Elizabeth Jane Meyer, a daughter of Mrs.
Richard G. Hewitt and Theodore R. Meyer, both of New York, was married yesterday to Charles Bennett Gadon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Gadon of Cranston, R.I.
Rabbi Douglas Sagal officiated at the Westbury Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Gadon, 32, is a vice president of USAuction Inc., a real-estate auction concern in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University and received a master's degree in business management from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Theodore Meyer Inc., a furniture manufacturing company in New York.
Her mother, Genevieve Fernandez, is an author of books on home furnishings.
Her stepfather is a partner in the New York law firm of Wormser, Kiely, Galef &amp; Jacobs.


Anne Kissel, David Elliot
Anne Debra Kissel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Kissel of Shorewood, Wis., was married yesterday to David Alan Elliot, the son of Dr.
Max Elliot of Valley Stream, L.I., and Mrs.
Myron Levenson of New Hope, Pa.
Rabbi Helene Ferris officiated at the home of the bridegroom's mother.
Mrs.
Elliot is the director of sales and affiliate presentations at ABC Television Network in New York, where her husband is the director of broadcast-center operations.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin.
Her father, who is retired, was the news editor of The Milwaukee Sentinel.


Leonard Dalsemer, 85, A Retired Executive
Leonard Dalsemer, a retired president of the International Paper Company and a philanthropist, died on Wednesday at his home in Montecito, Calif.
He was 85 years old and also lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure after suffering a stroke, his family said.


Ms. Greenberg, Michael J. Wacks
Phyliss Lynn Greenberg, a daughter of Aaron Greenberg of Brookline, Mass., and the late Shirley R. Greenberg, was married yesterday to Michael Jonathon Wacks, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Wacks of Deerfield Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Ben-Zion Gold performed the ceremony at the Longwood Towers in Brookline.
Ms.
Greenberg, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is a French instructor at New York University.
She graduated from Wellesley College.
Her father, who is retired, and her mother were administrators for the New York State Department of Labor in Brooklyn.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Peoples Backs Into Title
David Peoples bogeyed three of his last five holes but won the Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic in Williamsburg, Va., yesterday when Ed Dougherty missed a 5-foot birdie putt on the final hole.
Peoples, who got his first career victory in last year's Southern Open, earned $198,000 for No. 2, which came after rounds of 66, 69, 67 and 69 at the Kingsmill Golf Club. (AP)


Two Jail Workers Face Smuggling Charges
A guard and a cook at Rikers Island were arrested yesterday on charges that they attempted to smuggle cocaine to inmates at the jail, law-enforcement officials said.
The arrests were the second in a week involving employees at the city's jail complex.
On Thursday, a 35-year-old guard was arrested on charges that he had smuggled a loaded gun and what he thought was cocaine to inmates on Rikers Island.
The gun was used to shoot three inmates last month.


Teledyne Canada Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


MORE ON THE CONVENTION
Before the Camera Blinks, Convention Goes On Again
As the television networks open live coverage of the Democratic National Convention, more and more viewers are skipping the blandly staged affair.
Experts say this may be the last time it is broadcast live.
Page B1.
A New Hillary Clinton
After being a lightning rod and attracting several bolts early in the campaign, the candidate's wife returns to the floodlights with her public persona fine-tuned.
Page B1.
New York, New York
The place the Democrats chose for their convention will have on its best attire, but it may still play to images they have tried to shed.
Page B5.
Let the Social Whirl Begin
With everything about the convention already decided, delegates are starting their days of fun.
Page B3.
Diary of a Convention
Day 1: Plans are set, but liberal leaders feel slighted and are fuming in the corners.
Page B1.


The Twins' Silent Partner
After bumpy going early this season, the Minnesota Twins, the defending World Series champions, find themselves in first place in the American League West, and, as usual, the manager isn't taking any credit.
Some people have had it up to here with Tom Kelly's self-effacement as he proclaims, "I just sit in the corner of the dugout and don't bother anybody." But sometimes, sometimes it's true.
On the bench he may in fact impersonate a mummy swathed in double-knit.
Incident: The Twins are losing recently to the Angels, 3-0, in the middle innings when first baseman Kent Hrbek, who has been given a day off, says to his manager, "You ain't doin' diddly, T. K." The manager says, "Think you can do better, Herbie?" and Hrbek says, "Can't do worse."


Frankenberry Back At Cramer-Krasselt
Dennis W. Frankenberry, who unexpectedly left Frankenberry, Laughlin &amp; Constable Inc. of Milwaukee last month, has joined another Milwaukee agency that previously employed him.


Davis Water &amp; Waste Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Anyone Who Knows Schools Could See Falling Scores Coming; Fallacy of Rank Order
To the Editor:
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez deserves applause, not criticism for proposing an end to the annual ranking of New York City schools based on reading test scores.
Not only is New York the only city in the state bound by a mandate from Albany to test and rank order schools each year, but also publishing a school-by-school list has given the public the illusion that test scores say something meaningful about what goes on in classrooms.
We believe schools must be accountable to the public.
Scores from a once-a-year multiple-choice test are not enough for evaluating programs or making important educational decisions.


CYCLING: Biking in the U.S.A. -- Day 34; Chance Encounters
A camaraderie of the road connects touring bicyclists everywhere, even if it is only for a few seconds as riders wave to one another while passing on opposite sides of a highway.
Along the 2,300 miles we have traveled so far, I have spoken to dozens of cross-country pedalers, including a pack that was with Cycle America, a commercial coast-to-coast tour outfitter, and two middle-aged men from Indianapolis on their way to Alaska.
In Montana, I got advice on rain gear from Sue Hofer of Woodstock, N.Y., and Geri Muckelbauer of New Paltz, N.Y., who were cruising east to west with their own personal support van.
In North Dakota, a solo tourist from the Netherlands, Marcel Van Den Bos, claimed he had slept indoors free every single night by chatting up clergy at small-town churches.
My favorite fellow travelers were Bobbi Walker of Bellingham, Wash., and Kathy Walker of Denver, two former nurses who had quit their hospital jobs in order to cycle to Bar Harbor, Me.
Bobbi, Kathy and the "triplets," -- Chris, Armen and Greg, the three Yale Medical School students on our tour -- formed a quick friendship, riding and camping as a quintet.
Alas, it broke up when our tour director refused to allow the two women to pitch their tents next to ours in the city park in Shelby, Mont.
His special permit for camping there, he said, only covered members of his group.
Not only didn't that seem fair, banishing the Walkers also seemed to violate the camaraderie of the road.


Citizens Banking reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Suspect in 50 Robberies Arrested by Texas Police
A New York man considered a suspect in more than 50 armed robberies in Queens and Nassau County, including the robbery of four priests Friday night, was arrested early yesterday walking through an apartment complex in Texas, the police said.
But it was unclear how long the man had been in Texas, and his lawyer said yesterday that he had talked with the man by phone from Texas during the day on Friday, hours before the priests were robbed near St.
John's University.


Hibernia Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kurds Died for Bush's Iraq Machinations
To the Editor:
President Bush defends only a small part of his controversial Iraq policy when he states that the White House had no evidence in 1989 that President Saddam Hussein was misusing federally guaranteed bank loans to buy nuclear-arms technology illegally (front page, July 2).
What President Bush neglects to explain is why his Administration extended an additional $1 billion in loan guarantees to an Iraqi Government known to have used chemical weapons against innocent Kurds, as well as gruesome torture and execution against political opponents.


Bright Lights, No Shadows
Gay and lesbian leaders were taking America back at B. Smith's.
In numbers never before seen at a Democratic convention, they celebrated their victory over the closet.
"We are out like we have never been before," said Urvashi Vaid of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force.
"We are so visible and so active and so happy to be both."


Rhonda Chadow, L. A. Kurzweil
Rhonda Stacey Chadow, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin E. Chadow of Manhasset, L.I., was married last night in Merrick, L.I., to Dr.
Lawrence A. Kurzweil, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin P. Kurzweil of Merrick.
Rabbi Nathan Horowitz performed the ceremony at the Merrick Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Kurzweil, 27 years old, is the office manager of Advanced Care Inc., a home health-care concern in Jericho, L.I.
She graduated from the New York Institute of Technology.
Her parents own Chadow Brothers, a haberdashery in Port Washington, L.I.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; Newspapers Try to Regain Political Ads
FOR newspapers, national elections have become a time for fuming in impotence as they watch candidates spend millions of dollars on television advertising, while only a relative pittance goes for buying space in the nation's dailies.
Even candidates in state and local campaigns, where newspapers have traditionally been much stronger, have increasingly deserted newspapers as their prime forum for selling themselves to voters.


Dividend Meetings


O'Sullivan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Miscellany
*
The Publishers Information Bureau, New York, said magazine advertising revenues for June rose 6.7 percent from June of last year, to 13,835.4 pages.
For 1992's first half, ad pages rose 1.6 percent to 78,613.2. *
Chrysler Corp. will sponsor Sports Illustrated's collection of Olympic Games video tapes.


Vincent, the Owners And a Mysterious Fax
Add the case of the elusive fax to Fay Vincent's portfolio of problems.
A group of owners has been circulating a fax that asks colleagues to sign a letter intended to induce Vincent to resign as baseball commissioner, according to several other owners and Vincent himself.


As Gun Ban Erodes, Japanese Worry
One American import that Japan has long prided itself for banning is handguns, which the Government strictly prohibits Japanese from owning.
But a series of shootings here in recent days has left several people dead and raised questions over whether Japan's affinity for American ways is spreading to a new field: violent crime.
On Wednesday, a 23-year-old man wanted on a number of charges was cornered at a hotel outside of Tokyo but shot his way to freedom, killing one policeman and severely wounding another.
He led the police on a televised chase for another day, until he was captured after taking an elderly couple hostage.


Review/Music; Mostly Mozart Presents Beethoven, Flexibly
The soloists set off fireworks at the Mostly Mozart Festival in Avery Fisher Hall on Friday evening, but the glitteriest moments were not always the most rewarding.
In fact, the finest performance overall came in a work of understated eloquence, Beethoven's Piano Concerto No. 4, despite a slightly shaky start by the Mostly Mozart Orchestra under Gerard Schwarz.
The veteran pianist Shura Cherkassky spun out a mellow, flexible interpretation with a technical aplomb that continues to belie his 80 years.
He could have made more of certain events, as, for example, Claudio Arrau used to do with the low isolated eighth notes in the subsidiary theme of the finale, firmly planting the root for the episode to follow.
Mr.
Cherkassky impressed instead with his grasp of the whole and with the continuity and coherence of his argument.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. is joining with Toshiba and Siemens to develop memory chips that are likely to be a mainstay of the computers used in the next century.
The venture marks a historic shift in the bitter rivalry for domination in the world semiconductor industry.  [ Page D1. ]
Conagra is expanding its highly successful Healthy Choice products into snacks and desserts, but some food industry experts say the company may be jeopardizing the success of the three-year-old line by moving too fast.  [ D1. ]


New York: The Good, The Bad and the Political
From the moment the Democratic Party picked New York City as its 1992 convention site, Republicans chortled and even some Democrats wondered whether the choice risked reinforcing the very image they were trying to shed, as the party of big cities, big labor and big problems.
"In so many ways, the liberal Democrats chose the perfect site for their convention," Vice President Dan Quayle said last month, homing in on the theme.
"Almost as if they feel a strange compulsion to return to the scene of the crime."


Cuomo and What Might Have Been
Compare the eloquence that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo will demonstrate again Wednesday night when he nominates Bill Clinton for President to this response last week about whether he was opening or closing the door to becoming Mr.
Clinton's running mate.
"If you try shutting the door absolutely, it opens the door because it's just an unreasonable position," Mr.
Cuomo explained.
"Why would you say, 'Absolutely under no conditions'? Is it beneath you? Well, of course not. You don't like Clinton? Of course not. Well, then what is it, Governor?"


Yankees Spoil Showalter Trip
Buck Showalter took a flight that was scheduled to make three stops late last night before reaching San Diego.
There were several hours for Showalter to ponder the plight of the slumping Yankees as he journeyed to the All-Star Game.
Pity the poor passengers who sat beside him.
The manager has not been able to disguise his disgust lately and the Yankees sent him west with more reason to be upset yesterday after a crushing 7-6 loss to the Mariners at Yankee Stadium.


GOEBBELS DIARIES SET OFF TEMPEST
Previously unpublished parts of the diaries of Hitler's Minister of Propaganda, Josef Goebbels, have been printed in two British newspapers in the last few days, generating protests by historians, Jewish groups, politicians and others about how one paper got its material.
While the material contains no great revelations, it offers new details about the rivalries and thoughts of Nazi leaders.
But historians caution that Goebbels, the Third Reich's master distorter of the truth, wrote the diaries with the intention that they would eventually be published.


Topics of The Times; Mail Tale
For a brief moment, it looked as though House members had finally agreed to relinquish a widely abused perquisite: the right to mail self-promotional literature free to newly redistricted areas.
No such luck.
After stalling for months, the House Appropriations Committee agreed in mid-June to prohibit this shabby practice, but postponed the effective date until after September.
In late June, however, when pressed by Representative William Thomas, Republican of California, the House overwhelmingly voted to make the ban effective immediately upon signature by the President.


Too Often, No Hits, No Runs and No Fun
The reasons are plenty, but the result is always the same: No one ever scores in the All-Star Game anymore.
In the last six games, the National Leaguers have gotten a grand total of 10 runs.
In that time, they've hit one home run.
In the last eight All-Star Games, only once has the loser scored more than two runs.
In that span, only twice has a team gotten as many as 10 hits.


Essay; Wildflowers in N.Y.C.
My first job in journalism was folding the "guts," or weekend sections, of The New York Times into the main news section on Saturday nights behind the subway kiosk on 91st Street and Broadway.
The pay was half a buck an hour, only fair for a 12-year- old in 1942, but a fire in an oil drum kept us warm on early November nights and there was the thrill of being in the newspaper business.
Across the street was a political storefront for the Democratic Congressman, but the pols there were chary about handing out literature and doodads to hang around your neck to kids.
My buddy Marty and I preferred the upstairs headquarters of the American Labor Party candidate, Vito Marcantonio, who may have been a Communist but was great on distributing buttons, which we would take in fistfuls and pass out to friends who had no political or media connections.


A Bridge Over Bosnia's Desperation
After three months of shooting, shelling, fire and siege, residents who had not yet fled congregated today around a remarkable 425-year-old arched bridge, one that gave this city its life, its name and its prominence as a link between East and West, Byzantium and Rome.
Since April, when Serbian forces began an assault from the surrounding mountains, nearly 90,000 of the city's 120,000 people are thought to have fled as refugees.
No one here could say how many have been killed.
The city is rubble, but at its heart, the bridge over the Neretva River still stands.


A Museum of American Art That Quietly Thrives
Small American art museums in small American cities have always had to struggle against obscurity, and recent cuts in both public and private grants have hit them particularly hard.
Against this backdrop, it might seem surprising that such a museum could quietly thrive and grow, particularly in a New England industrial town whose glory days are decades past.
But that is what is happening at the New Britain Museum of American Art, and its low-key success is illustrated by a bequest it received last month of 26 works by Edward Hopper, George Tooker and 10 other early-20th-century Realist artists.


Dean Foods reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Merry Land &amp; Investment Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Anger and the Democrats; Giving Up Something
There's startling language near the top of the 1992 platform that the Democrats expect to adopt tonight.
After only four paragraphs of the usual partisan heavy breathing, it declares: "We hear the anguish and the anger of the American people. We know it is directed not just at the Republican Administrations that have had power, but at government itself." This is the platform of a party that wants to be believed.
It faces up to the public disgust; it's substantially more moderate than fiery platforms of recent years.
And yet this platform, too, soon degenerates into promises to give, give, give to everyone -- even though its drafters know that the only credible way to answer the mistrust is to tell what Americans will have to give up.


Review/Cabaret; Becoming the Candidates
The comedian Jim Morris made his name in the mid-1980's with a brilliant stage impersonation of Ronald Reagan as an endearing old con man on the verge of senility.
After George Bush succeeded Mr.
Reagan, Mr.
Morris aimed his guns at the harder-to-skewer 41st President.
And in his new show at the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, through July 25), he has widened his targets to include Gov.
Bill Clinton and Ross Perot.
What distinguishes Mr.
Morris's impersonations from those of previous Presidential parodists is the seriousness with which he approaches his task.
In the age of sound bites and handlers, Mr.
Morris's parodies are much more than personal demolition jobs.
They are surreal exposes of the emptiness and equivocation of contemporary political rhetoric that makes candidates of every ideological stripe appear ridiculous and untrustworthy.


Pooper-Scooter
New York and other cities have long confronted a daily annoyance: dog droppings on the street.
Gotham has responded with the famous pooper-scooper law, requiring owners to pick up after their pets.
It has helped, but compliance varies with the neighborhood.
Now the French have come up with what may be a better response -- a pooper-scooper right out of Hell's Angels.
The JCDecaux company, which developed the street toilets installed recently as an experiment in Manhattan, has invented the caninette, a vacuum device mounted on a motorcycle.
The rider covers the droppings with the flared end of a hose; a liquid solution whirls the deposit into a holding tank and disinfects the sidewalk.


Mexican Site Is Linked To Demise of Dinosaurs
A GEOCHEMICAL analysis of rock buried in the Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico has produced further evidence that this is apparently the place where a huge object from outer space crashed to Earth 65 million years ago, contributing to a mass extinction of life and the end of the age of dinosaurs.
The new findings, reported by scientists last week, seem to confirm that a crater near the present-day town of Chicxulub was caused by an asteroid or comet and that the impact coincided with the time of the mass extinctions.
The 110-mile-wide crater, long since covered by sediment, was discovered 10 years ago on the basis of magnetic mapping that exposed circular patterns in underground rock formations.
Over the last year, the crater has gained scientific support as the most probable site of the catastrophic event that most likely punctuated the end of the Cretaceous geological period.


Federal National Mortgage Association reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Iraq Again Defies U.N. Inspectors On Search of Building in Capital
The confrontation between Iraq and the United Nations Security Council deepened today when Iraq again adamantly refused to allow United Nations inspectors to search the Agriculture Ministry for secret military plans.
A team of United Nations inspectors has been waiting in air-conditioned cars outside the Agriculture Ministry for nine days now, demanding permission to enter.
United Nations officials say they have received a tip that plans related to Iraq's ballistic missile program have been hidden there.


Franklin Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Kaydon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Tensions Continue at Hindu Construction Site at 400-Year-Old Mosque


Dinkins Places Emphasis on Ills That Cities Face
Mayor David N. Dinkins welcomed the Democrats to New York last night, and instead of trying to disguise the city's problems, he chose to concentrate on them for a decidedly political purpose.
He asked delegates to try to feel the pain of people suffering from AIDS and of babies born to drug-addicted mothers, and then told them where to place the blame: on 12 years of Republican leadership in the White House.


U.S. Says Mexico Will Allow New Foreign Role in Finance
As part of a push to complete a free trade agreement with Mexico and Canada within several weeks, the Bush Administration has struck a deal with Mexico to open up the banking, insurance and securities industries there to American and Canadian companies, Administration and industry officials said today.
President Bush and President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico are scheduled to discuss the overall trade agreement during an hourlong meeting on Tuesday in San Diego before the All-Star baseball game, Administration officials said.


Excerpts From Dinkins's Remarks to Convention
Following are excerpts from the speech delivered last night at the Democratic National Convention by Mayor David N. Dinkins, as transcribed by The New York Times.
Welcome to New York City, the city even Dan Quayle could love, if only he could spell it.


Rethinking the National Chip Policy
A short five years ago, as America's semiconductor industry recoiled at the threat of Japanese domination, I.B.M. quietly helped create with the Federal Government an industry consortium to rebuild the nation's chip-making technology base.
The result was Sematech, in which the Government has poured a half-billion dollars since 1987, and U.S.
Memories Inc., a private effort to assure United States computer makers of a steady supply of advanced memory chips for computers.


Review/Opera; Mormons in Crisis After Their Founder's Death
If the current trend toward basing opera plots on recent events has led you to suspect that composers have exhausted the historical and mythological past, think again.
"Emma," an opera composed by Murray Boren, with a libretto by Eric Samuelson, is about the crises and conflicts faced by the Mormons after the lynching of the sect's founder, Joseph Smith, in 1844.
The work was given its New York premiere by the Hell's Kitchen Opera Company on Friday evening in the auditorium of St.
Paul the Apostle Church (415 West 59th Street), where it is running through Sunday.
The subject has possibilities: Smith died without a clear successor.
His wife, the Emma of the title, was disinclined to take up the leadership of his church.
Smith's followers felt compelled to make their way westward from Nauvoo, Ill., where they were based at the time of his death, and Emma's dilemma, through the opera's three acts, is whether to join Smith's followers or to remain in Nauvoo.


Tucson School Issue Priced
The Tucson Unified School District No. 1 of Pima County, Ariz., yesterday priced for offering to the public about $155.3 million in tax-exempt debt securities through a group of underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
Underwriters said a policy issued by the Financial Guaranty Insurance Company to cover interest and principal payments gave the financing a triple-A credit rating from both Moody's Investors Service and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


CCB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Democratic Platform Shows Shift in Party's Focus
Once organized labor and civil rights groups were the fulcrum of the Democratic Party, and the Democratic candidates, men like Hubert H. Humphrey and Walter F. Mondale, campaigned for poor people and workers and higher taxes to pay for Government programs that could solve the problems of the country.
But the views that dominated the party for so long, what was once proudly called liberal, are hardly in evidence in Madison Square Garden this week.
The party platform the delegates plan to adopt tonight has whole sections that would have been hooted down not too many years ago.


Thomas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Van Gordon Sauter to Head Fox News
Fox Inc. today named Van Gordon Sauter, a former president of CBS News, as the president of its new Fox News division, which is to serve both the seven Fox-owned stations and the Fox network.
In his new position, Mr.
Sauter will coordinate local newscasts on Fox stations and supervise Fox's effort to build a national news organization, Fox said.
He will also be in charge of creating a news magazine for the Fox network.


For the Pleasure It Gave and Can Still Give, Save the Band Shell; Honeysuckle Corps
To the Editor:
Russell Baker writes in his piece "The Perfumed Workout" (June 20) that New York City would be "even better with some honeysuckle vines in bloom." I have good news for Mr.
Baker: right now honeysuckle is in bloom throughout much of the city's 26,000 acres of parkland -- and the Parks Department could use help weeding it.
For those who agree with Mr.
Baker that for exercise nothing beats tearing honeysuckle vines, there is no need to leave the city in the summer.
Gardens throughout the five boroughs' parks would benefit from more volunteer gardeners.


Charles Digangi, 83, Founder of Law Firm
Charles Digangi, a longtime lawyer in New York City and former trustee of the Town Hall Foundation, died on Thursday at the DeWitt Nursing Home in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old.
Mr.
Digangi died of cardiac arrest after suffering several strokes, said his wife, Elizabeth.


Hearing Today on Signing Of Grant
A hearing is scheduled to begin at 9 A.M. today in Manhattan to determine if the Knicks tampered with the restricted free agent forward Harvey Grant in connection with the offer sheet he signed with New York.
The Washington Bullets filed tampering charges last week, claiming the Knicks had negotiated with Grant before the July 1 deadline.
Under National Basketball Association rules, no team can negotiate with free agents from another team before July 1.


Alcan Aluminium Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Emotional Finale for 'Bluebeard' in Berlin
Sunday's season-ending performance by the Komische Oper, one of Berlin's three opera houses, was sadder and more significant than most such finales.
The evening offered what was almost surely the final performance ever of one of the most famous stage productions in the world: Walter Felsenstein's version of Offenbach's operetta "Ritter Blaubart" (originally "Barbe-Bleue," or "Bluebeard").
This was the last Felsenstein production still in the repertory of the company he founded in 1947.
Despite the sense of loss, the performance was a joyous occasion, with 20 minutes of standing ovations at the end and flowers hurled back and forth across the orchestra pit.
But the farewell came accompanied by controversy, and the leading characters spiked their dialogue with barbed references to the decision to end the production's 29-year run.


On Fetal Tissue, Bush Shows He's Pro-Death; Alzheimer's Drug
To the Editor:
Re "Mr. Bush Fights the Right to Life" (editorial June 27): At best, fetal tissue treatment of Alzheimer's victims might help a few dozen patients each year for decades to come.
But there are 5 million victims of Alzheimer's in the United States alone -- with 200,000 new cases diagnosed each year.
For the vast majority of these victims, and their families who live a daily funeral, fetal tissue treatment is only a dream.
But there is a drug that has been used safely and effectively to give Alzheimer's victims a useful quality of life.
However, the Food and Drug Administration, even after five years of proof that this drug is safe and effective in studies in this country and Britain, rejects it as "possibly" unsafe and ineffective.
The F.D.A. continues its "import alert" ban on this Alzheimer's drug use in the United States -- with one exception: Any victim who has the money to begin therapy with this drug overseas can, once back home, import the drug and continue the therapy.


Zilog Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


CenCor Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Audrey P. Holden, 77, Active in Philanthropy
Audrey Phipps Holden, a philanthropist long active in New York and Connecticut, died on Sunday at New York Hospital while on a visit to the area.
She was 77 years old and in recent years lived in Hobe Sound, Fla.


Researcher Accused Of Fraud in Her Data Will Not Be Indicted
A prosecutor in Maryland today declined to prosecute Dr.
Thereza Imanishi-Kari of Tufts University, the scientist who has been accused of faking data in a celebrated scientific misconduct case.
He said the evidence was persuasive but might prove too complex for a jury.
The decision not to indict Dr.
Imanishi-Kari drew cheers from her lawyer and from Dr.
David Baltimore, the senior author of the article containing the disputed data supplied by Dr.
Imanishi-Kari.
Dr.
Baltimore, a professor at the Rockefeller University, said the action was a vindication of his position that there had been no fraud.


Observer; Against the Grain
It becomes harder and harder for press and television to play any role in Presidential politics that is not utterly contemptible.
Eric Sevareid, who died the other day, always seemed more aware of this than most of us, and more uncomfortable about it, and therefore more honorable in some way you couldn't define, but could only feel when he walked into a room.
He made you feel better about being in the same business.
He was tall, square-shouldered and handsome, not in the cheap Hollywood leading-man style, but in the way that attracts sophisticated women.
I once met a mature woman half his age who was not kidding when she said she had wanted to marry Sevareid ever since she had been a 12-year-old listening to his voice on the radio.


Community Banks-Pa. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Speaking as One in Search of a Constituency to Combat AIDS
They are at once very similar and very different -- a well-to-do mother in her spacious home near the ocean, packing her 7-year-old son off to summer camp with a peck on the cheek; a gay environmental advocate, punctuating each sentence with "cool, that's cool" as he shouts into the phone in his cluttered, cramped downtown office here.
Together they will be the voice of AIDS on Tuesday night, the first people who are open about having the disease to address a national political convention.


COMPANY NEWS
DATA SYSTEMS, Van Nuys, Calif., a division of Litton, a military systems company, was awarded an $8.4 million contract by the Air Force to produce 80 battlefield command terminals for upgrading a command, control and communications system for air support.
ECHELON CORP., Palo Alto, Calif., a supplier of products for development of control networks, and SILD, a joint venture between Schlumberger Industries and Lyonnaise des Eaux-Dumez, have announced a building- and home-automation system for the multitenant-building market.


Capstead Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Chicago Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


On Fetal Tissue, Bush Shows He's Pro-Death
To the Editor:
President Bush has vetoed legislation that permits financing for fetal tissue research -- today's best hope for treatment of diabetes, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's and other conditions (news article, June 24).
Despite resounding support for such research from Congress, the medical establishment and the public, Mr.
Bush clung to his inaccurate claim that lifting the funding ban would "encourage" women to have abortions.
Research on fetal tissue has gone on for more than 30 years, with no evidence that it has affected the ability of women to make independent, principled decisions.


Schulman (A.) Inc. (O) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Alabama's Female Delegates Choose Clinton


This Man Whispers in Dinkins's Ear (a Lot)
At first glance, they are a most unlikely pair: the proper, tennis-playing grandfather and the hip bachelor whose name often comes up in the gossip columns as he escorts famous actresses around town.
The grandfather is the Mayor, David N. Dinkins, and the sidekick is Arnaldo Segarra, a longtime friend whose constant attention to the Mayor has made him one of the most recognizable figures at City Hall.
Although few people know his name or exactly what he does, Mr.
Segarra is perhaps the Mayor's most trusted confidant.
When the chips are down, it is Mr.
Segarra whom the Mayor ultimately turns to for counsel and moral support, aides to Mr.
Dinkins said.


Women Are Triumphant in Their Gains, but Cautious
Gov.
Ann W. Richards's black-tie preconvention party was one of the hottest tickets in town.
The Democrats literally spotlighted six female Senate nominees at the National Convention last night.
And Emily's List, the political action committee, plans to give a record $5 million to women this year.
Around Madison Square Garden, political strategists talked about the power of women's votes, enhanced by the emergence of "family values" as an issue, the quest for outsider candidates and the prospect of a three-way race in which swing votes would be crucial.


Nederlander Vice President Resigns
Arthur Rubin, the executive vice president and general manager of the Nederlander Organization, resigned yesterday, the theater chain announced.
Through a spokesman, Mr.
Rubin said that he had resigned "in order to pursue other personal business interests," and that he would continue to serve as a consultant to the organization.
His interim replacement is Leo K. Cohen, the operations manager for the Nederlanders.


U.S. Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Transforming Vacant Buildings Into Communities; Social Services and Resident Involvement at Heart of South Bronx Housing Program
From their perch on the front stoop of their new home in the Highbridge section of the Bronx, Edwin John and Ray La Ruy can look to the left and see the drug dealers who congregate down at the end of their block.
But when they look straight ahead, there are children at play on the street, safe under their watchful eyes.
Self-appointed sentries, they are trying to keep the despair of the surrounding neighborhood at bay from their fledgling community, a gleaming, newly refurbished building that offers hope for this part of the South Bronx.
Housing advocates say the community is a model of a more enlightened strategy for providing housing to those who need it most.


E.P.A. Is Planning Strict New Testing Of Auto Emissions
Responding to a court order, the Bush Administration today issued a rule that will require about one-third of the nation's 180 million cars and light trucks to undergo tougher and more expensive emissions tests.
The rule, required under the 1990 Clean Air Act, is intended to clear urban skies of smog and other pollutants.
Under the Environmental Protection Agency's proposal, approved by the White House, 55 urban areas nationwide that now have no auto emissions tests will be required to start them by next July.
The rule is not expected to be significantly changed when it becomes final after a 90-day comment period expires in November.
Smog Reduction Expected


Bridge
Chess is a game of perfect information; at every stage each player knows as much as his opponent.
It is quite different in bridge, where crucial information is often unavailable to the opposition.
As an example, consider the diagramed deal offered by Marshall Miles in a recent article in The Contract Bridge Bulletin.
South reaches three no-trump by a brisk route that gives little away to the defenders.
The opening lead of a diamond gives him no pain, but he is some distance from nine tricks.


Intel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


UAL Offers Certificates
The UAL Corporation, the Chicago-based holding company for United Airlines, entered the debt market yesterday with a $203 million financing consisting of pass-through certificates underwritten by Lehman Brothers as sole manager.
The certificates were divided into two maturities, one of which was $181 million in pass-throughs due in 2015, priced at 100, or par, to yield 9.08 percent.
The yield spread to the investor on the 23-year pass-through certificates is about 141.5 basis points more than the yield of a 30-year Treasury bond.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Savoring July's Euphoria
Sometime in the last three or four weeks, a lot of Democrats changed their minds.
They stopped going through the motions, stopped thinking about defeat while they talked about victory, and allowed themselves to believe that they actually had a chance to win the Presidency with Bill Clinton.
"The planets are coming into alignment," said Vernon Jordan, a big-time Washington lawyer.


Patterns
All Hail Long
When you find yourself in broad daylight walking behind a woman whose skirt is so short the control top of her panty hose is showing, you know it's probably time for a change.
As the unscientific theory goes: in the cycle of fashion, when a style is adopted by the tackiest people, it's over.
So, as the fall clothes begin to trickle into the stores, fashion change is in the wind.
Long is good, short is bad.


Jury Is Shown Rigged Briefcase With Gun Meant for Prosecutor
A Federal prosecutor known for her toughness in pressing drug cases received a booby-trapped briefcase in the mail as a "gift of death," a Federal jury in Brooklyn was told yesterday.
The statement came in opening statements as David Kwong, a Queens man described as a drug informer, went on trial for attempted murder, accused of sending the briefcase to the prosecutor, Catherine E. Palmer, in 1990.
The incident drew widespread attention and led to the tightening of security at the United States Attorney's offices in Brooklyn, particularly for screening incoming mail.


Canadian Driver Will Replace Mears
ROGER PENSKE said yesterday that PAUL TRACY, a 23-year-old Canadian, would replace RICK MEARS in next weekend's Indy-car race in Toronto, Tracy's hometown.
Mears, who injured his wrist at Indianapolis in May, is taking the weekend off at the advice of his physician, Dr.
TERRY TRAMMELL, Penske said.
Tracy, a test driver for Penske's Indy-car team, sat in for Mears at a race in Detroit on June 7 and led several laps before his car broke down.
He will join Mears's regular teammate, EMERSON FITTIPALDI of Brazil.


First National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Probable Black Hole Is 100 Times Bigger Than Any of the Others
USING a novel technique of "weighing" mass at the center of galaxies, astronomers have detected what they say may be the most massive black hole ever discovered.
It has the mass of a billion suns, making it a hundred times bigger than any other observed black-hole candidate.
The discovery adds to the rapidly accumulating body of evidence for the existence of the theorized black holes, those regions at the core of some galaxies where matter must be so dense and the pull of gravity so powerful that no light can escape.
Several dozen likely black holes have been identified in recent years, including two others this year.


After State Cutbacks, What One Theater Is Doing to Survive
One morning last July, Miriam Colon, the diminutive, intense founding director of the Puerto Rican Traveling Theater, opened her mail and thought she would faint.
A letter from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said the state contribution to the bilingual theater Ms.
Colon had nurtured for nearly a quarter of a century would be cut by $36,000.
"I went limp; I went numb; I went dizzy," said Ms.
Colon, a former actress who supplements her vocabulary with emphatic gestures.
"But soon my mind was racing a mile a minute trying to figure out how we're going to fill the void."


On Fetal Tissue, Bush Shows He's Pro-Death; Tissue Bank Is Needed
To the Editor:
"Mr. Bush Fights the Right to Life" (editorial, June 27) concludes that the new Government fetal tissue bank is a "sham program." You have been bamboozled by misstatements from proponents and opponents of lifting the ban on Federal financing of transplant research using fetal tissue from induced abortions.
The top transplant research questions of the day require fetal tissue from induced abortions, as well as miscarriages and ectopic pregnancies.
Induced abortions are usually performed early in pregnancy, typically before 12 weeks; miscarriages generally happen at later stages.


Testing Waters for a Clam Business
Gambling on the public's willingness to pay a bit more for clams that are cleaned, a Long Island entrepreneur is planning to open a depuration plant, New York's first in more than a decade.
There are only a handful of depuration plants in the country, and only three in the Northeast, one of which has been owned and operated by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts since 1925.


Transactions
Baseball  National League
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Recalled Bill Landrum, pitcher, from an injury-rehabilitation assignment at Indianapolis of the American Association.
Basketball  Global Basketball Association
MISSISSIPPI GULF COAST -- Traded Keith Lee and Randy Henry, forwards, to the Jackson Jammers for Anthony Blakely and Jervis Cole, guards, a 1992 first-round draft pick and a player to be named later.


Onbancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Barnett Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chilean Engineers Find Water for Desert by Harvesting Fog in Nets
ATOP this 2,600-foot mountain, they call it harvesting the clouds.
One moment, the air is clear, dry and sunny.
Then the Pacific Ocean fog rolls in, thick, wet and cold.
As it passes through huge sheets of plastic mesh set along the mountain ridge, a drop of water forms, then another and another.


Provident Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


J. &amp; J. Names New Chief For Consumer Products
Johnson &amp; Johnson yesterday named a new chief for its consumer-products business, the biggest of its three major business groups.
Peter N. Larson, currently chairman of the company's sanitary-napkin business, will succeed Pierre Dupasquier, as the head of the company's consumer-sector operating committee, on Aug. 1.
The 61-year-old Mr.
Dupasquier will retire at the end of the year, but will stay on to assist during the transition period.
Mr.
Dupasquier joined the company in 1985 and was appointed chief of the consumer sector in 1989.


McGovern Wishes the Ticket Well
Far from the madding crowd at Madison Square Garden -- 21 blocks to be exact -- the man accused by many of driving the Democrats into the political wilderness from which they are still struggling to emerge, stood briefly last night at the center of strobe lights and adulation once again.
He felt fine, and it had all been a grand adventure, George McGovern said at a 20th anniversary reunion party in his honor at Tatou restaurant in midtown Manhattan.


4 Of Nation's Biggest Banks Post Higher 2d-Quarter Nets
Four of the nation's largest banks reported higher second-quarter earnings yesterday, demonstrating that lower interest rates have helped them more than a weak economy has hurt.
The biggest surprise to industry analysts came from J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, where profits rose 66.7 percent from the second quarter of last year on broad-based improvements, including stronger trading and corporate finance.


Excerpts From Addresses by Keynote Speakers at Democratic Convention
Bill Bradley  Senator From New Jersey
People are angry, and so am I.
For 12 years, I've seen kids kill kids in our cities and people sleep in the streets.


Temple-Inland Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Cabaret; An Irving Berlin Pastiche With a Patriotic Motif
In "Say It With Music," an effervescent new revue at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th floor, in midtown Manhattan), 47 Irving Berlin songs have been compressed into a one-hour show whose amiable razzle-dazzle is matched by the decor of tiny American flags and other patriotic doodads strewn around the tables.
The show, which plays through Aug. 29, is the cabaret's fourth salute to a Broadway composer by the producers Steve Paul and Greg Dawson, and it is somewhat of a return to form after the team's disappointing tribute to George and Ira Gershwin.
The difference between the lifeless Gershwin show and the animated Berlin anthology lies in the vocal chemistry among the leading performers.
In the new show, Kaye Ballard, who is making her first New York club appearance in four years, plays a warm-hearted den mother to a cast that features Ron Raines, Jason Graae and Liz Callaway.


New York Police Try Old Idea: Bicycles Built for Blue
In a city that wears indifference like a badge of honor, Police Officer Jose Brizuela is getting a lot of second looks.
Gliding over potholes and around pedestrians atop 21-speed mountain bikes, he and 27 other officers in the 24th Precinct on the Upper West Side are providing New Yorkers with a vision they have not had since the days of Babe Ruth: police officers on bicycles.
As he and Officer Robert Reimertz peddled along Amsterdam Avenue in Manhattan on a recent day, their blue uniforms ruffling in the wind, helmets slightly askew, only the "Ride of the Valkyries" was missing as they were cheered on and hooted at by startled pedestrians.


INSIDE
New Policy on Bomb Material
Turning practice into policy, the U.S. will stop making plutonium and enriched uranium, but the impact on the arsenal will be negligible.
Page A18.
Computer-Chip Linkup
Advanced Micro Devices and Fujitsu announced a $700 million venture to develop a type of chip with the potential to replace disk drives.
Page D1.
Mexican Opposition Gains


Sports of The Times; Behind the Old Boxer's Dark Shades
IT was Monday morning, five days after the savage fight.
The former champ was wearing dark glasses as he slid into the booth of the coffee shop in the Bronx, where he was born and raised and where, after traveling and boxing around the world for 23 years, sometimes followed by adoring crowds, he still lives, in a modest apartment.
When the companion he met at breakfast asked to see the left eye, the one that had absorbed such a beating, the former champ removed the shades.
The eye was still a little closed and very much black and blue, looking like a terrible tattoo.


Abortion-Rights Advocates Rally at Garden
Chanting "Keep abortion legal!" and "Women fight back!" several thousand supporters of abortion rights marched through mid-Manhattan and rallied outside Madison Square Garden for more than an hour last night.
The march came as a Federal District judge lifted his earlier order preventing the anti-abortion group Operation Rescue from blocking access to the Garden, the site of the Democratic National Convention.


Mexico's Ruling Party Loses a Vote, Faces Fight in 2d
For only the second time since Mexico's governing party was founded in 1929, an opposition candidate emerged victorious here today in state elections.
But while the governing party accepted the conservative National Action Party's claim to the Chihuahua governorship, it appeared to be headed for confrontation with its leftist opposition in the western state of Michoacan.


Hancock Holding reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Omission Impossible: Fielder Is Not on the Squad
Reggie Jackson, never at a loss for the flair for the dramatic, stepped to the plate yesteday to face Bob Gibson with the bases loaded and put the Hall of Famer's first pitch over the wall.
No, it was not a dream, or a Rotisserie league fantasy.
It was just one of those memorable moments, in this case in an old-timers' game, that baseball is still more than capable of manufacturing.


Second-Quarter Report: Yankees
If you are a Yankee fan, a real Yankee fan, the type who spends $59.99 for a Matt Nokes autographed bat and thinks Phil Rizzuto is an objective announcer, then you obviously have too much swimming in your mind these days.
When is George returning?
Is Buck going to stay?
Can Stankie keep sizzling?
How about Mattingly?
Is this the pitching for the rest of the year?
Repeat that one.
Is this really all the pitching?
Where is this team going?
You have probably asked everyone from your boss to your bus driver these questions.


Jordan Planning Political Reform As Prelude to Multiparty Election
In a move that some believe could strengthen the country's Islamic militant movement, Jordan has instituted political changes that are transforming this nation of 3.5 million into one of the most democratic Arab nations.
"It's not going to be very smooth," Prime Minister Sharif Zayd Bin Shakir said in an interview today.
"We are all learning, but while it may not be easy, I am optimistic and proud about what we are doing."


A Bird? A Plane? No, It's Only Indurain
Anybody wondering where Miguel Indurain had been hiding for a week got the answer today: He was in a telephone booth changing into a bicycle racing jersey with a very big letter S on it.
Absolutely overpowering in a long time trial, Indurain finished more than three minutes ahead of the rest of the 179 riders still in the 1992 Tour de France to jump from 12th place to second over all.


Chess
The best known facet of Gary Kasparov's play is his brilliant speculation in attack.
Yet there is also an austere positional side to the world champion.
And it is a good bet that even he has never totaled up which of the two earns him more points in the long run.
It is natural for tempestuous performances to catch the eye of the public; there is the suspense of not being sure up until the very end whether the bold effort will crash against the defender's rocks or sail through to glory.
But on the other hand, there is a subtlety in the virtually undetected submarine warfare in which a balmy surface is all subterfuge.
And this rightfully deserves its devotees, too.


Ross Perot's 'People'
Ross Perot likes to brag about his lack of political experience.
That inexperience showed this weekend during his speech before the N.A.A.C.P. convention in Nashville.
Mr.
Perot referred to blacks as "your people" -- a code phrase long used by racists.
He further jolted his listeners by preaching about how his mother fed black hobos during the Depression, and how kindly his cotton-broker father treated the blacks who worked for him.


Books of The Times; Seeing Freud as the Root of All American Evils
Freudian Fraud  The Malignant Effect of Freud's Theory on American Thought and Culture  By E. Fuller Torrey  362 pages.
HarperCollins. $25.
"Freudian Fraud: The Malignant Effect of Freud's Theory on American Thought and Culture": the portentous, melodramatic title of Dr.
E.
Fuller Torrey's new book sums up not only its message but its tone, approach and style as well.
Dr.
Torrey, a clinical and research psychiatrist and the author of a critically acclaimed biography of Ezra Pound ("The Roots of Treason: Ezra Pound and the Secret of St. Elizabeths"), is not interested in conducting a judicious, open-minded inquiry into the social consequences of Freud's theories.
His aim is a far simpler, more hostile one: he wants to place the blame for many of America's current problems firmly on the shoulders of the father of psychoanalysis.


Rogers Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 20


CHRONICLE
You never know who's behind that tinted limo window.
STEPHEN BRUCE, the owner of Serendipity, was in the throes of decorating the windows of his restaurant and boutique on East 60th Street with baseball paraphernalia last week, when a limousine came to a screeching halt outside.
A young man popped out and said, "There is someone in the car who wants everything in the window," Mr.
Bruce said yesterday.
"So I dismantled the window and gift-wrapped everything," he continued, explaining that the haul included eight T-shirts with baseball slogans, eight sequined baseball caps and some bats.


Business Scene; In Russia, Power To the Managers
VERY slowly, a corps of company managers is emerging in Russia that behaves like Western management, even gaining from President Boris N. Yeltsin's Government the right to run dozens of major state enterprises as if the managers themselves were almost the owners.
They got a boost in late June with Parliament's approval of President Yeltsin's privatization program.
By Nov. 1, ownership of most industrial companies is to pass from the state to newly formed joint stock corporations -- with the managers of each company awarded considerable power.
Like top executives in corporate America, top management here might end up running corporate Russia with minimal interference from stockholders.


Despite U.N. Embargo, Baghdad Heals Its Wounds
Last year, a United Nations report warned that the damage done to Iraq by allied bombs and missiles, combined with the Security Council's punitive trade embargo, threatened to push the country back into what it termed a "pre-industrial" stage of development.
That clearly has not happened in Baghdad, which now seems to be pulling itself up by its bootstraps.
For a reporter returning to Baghdad after a year's absence, the most striking first impression is of the scale of Iraq's post-war reconstruction effort.


By Design; Oh, to Find Summer Wear in July
When the weather is this sultry, it's understandable that the mind remains fixed on summer clothes.
They are hard to find, though, now that it is midseason.
With stores all revved up for fall, it takes searching to turn up fresh, good-looking summer wear.
But some basics are still in stock.
Bergdorf Goodman is continuing to reorder its best-selling bathing suit.
It is by Calvin Klein, looks like a miniskirted evening slip of black stretch jersey and costs $95.
Henri Bendel is still loaded with cotton knit T-shirts and tank tops in every color of the rainbow.
What's more, both are now on sale for $29 each.
Galeries Lafayette stocks the flared three-tiered Souleiado skirts.
These colorful imports from the South of France are a mix of cotton patterns and cost $625 for mid-calf length.
Banana Republic, as always, is the place to find crisp white cotton shirts for $42 and poplin fly-front shorts, also $42.
The Gap, meanwhile, never seems to run out of poplin tailored pants for $38.


NOW IS THE MOMENT TO ACHIEVE PEACE, RABIN TELLS ARABS
Yitzhak Rabin took over as Israel's Prime Minister tonight, pledging to waste no time in the search for Middle East peace and appealing to Palestinians to take Israeli offers of limited self-rule seriously and not "lose this opportunity that may never return."
The need for bold, swift strides toward peace -- including a proposed exchange of visits with Arab leaders -- formed the core of Mr.
Rabin's message to the new Parliament hours before it approved his Government, the first one in 15 years to be dominated by the Labor Party.
His coalition holds 62 of the 120 seats in the Parliament.


Gradually Picking Up Neighbors' New Tune
MANY people fear change, especially in their own neighborhood.
Here in Lawrence, with its winding village golf course and glistening white yachts moored in the village marina, change has brought with it measures of fear and possibility.


The Spirit Is Krizia, and the Prices Are Friendly
First there were designer collections.
You know, Yves Saint Laurent, Bill Blass, Calvin Klein and such.
Then as prices headed for the stratosphere, designers started knocking themselves off in less expensive secondary, or diffusion, lines.
As those prices started nudging the four-figure bracket, some designers brought out still lower-priced collections, like Emanuel by Emanuel Ungaro, introduced last year, with a top price around $500.
Even those prices are too high for the vast majority of women, but when a designer brings out a less expensive line, it is usually weekend wear, like Donna Karan's DKNY and A/X Armani Exchange.


Society Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Mexico agreed to allow American and Canadian companies to enter its banking, insurance and securities industries, under a deal struck by the Bush Administration to complete a North American free trade agreement.  [ Page A1. ]
Advanced Micro Devices and Japan's Fujitsu announced a $700 million joint venture to develop, build and market flash memory chips, one of the fastest growing products in the industry.  [ D1. ]


Police Union Says Dinkins Fueled Unrest
Police union officials yesterday accused Mayor David N. Dinkins of treating a Dominican man slain by an officer like "a martyr," and fueling the violent protests in Washington Heights.
The criticism, the sharpest yet in an escalating war of words, came as law-enforcement officials confirmed that the autopsy of Jose Garcia, whose death ignited the disturbances last week, showed he had cocaine in his body when he died.


4 WOMEN DELAYED IN RISE TO BENCH
This elec tion year, just about everybody White House officials, Senate Republicans and Democrats -- is eager to put more women on the Federal bench.
But a complicated political fight has made casualties, at least temporarily, of four female candidates for judgeships, all of whom are highly regarded lawyers with strong ratings from the American Bar Association.


Jonathan Silver, 54, a Sculptor Known for Mixing Forms, Dies
Jonathan Silver, a figurative sculptor known for infusing classical forms with an extreme, implicitly modern sense of emotion, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 54 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Barbara.


Marketers in Election Year Giving Up Politics as Usual
EVERY four years, marketers hope to exploit the nation's interest in the Presidential election by using political themes in advertising for distinctly nonpolitical products.
Yet this time around, reflecting the public's cynicism about politics as usual, such ads are starkly different.
Typically, commercials and print advertisements using political themes have been innocuous and whimsical, offering some red, white and blue bunting; a pun or two, and a softly selling product pitch.
In the 1960's, for instance, Anheuser-Busch called Budweiser "our can-to-date," while Nabisco presented shopping lists for its cookie and cracker brands in the form of make-believe ballots.


Today's Schedule
4:30 P.M. -- Call to Order by Representative Edward R. Roybal of California.
4:45 P.M. -- Convention business, including platform presentations and discussion.


Plan Would Cover Policyholders of Failed Mutual Benefit
The policyholders of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company would be covered in full under a proposal announced yesterday to rehabilitate the New Jersey insurer.
Negotiators of the $800 million bailout, among the largest ever of an insurer, include a group of insurance companies led by the Prudential Insurance Company of America and the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.
The group would be required to finance the plan in part.


Dukakis Views Clinton as G.O.P.'s Worst Nightmare
What is Michael S. Dukakis doing these days?
"Mike Dukakis is growing tomatoes, of course," the 1988 Democratic Presidential candidate said, gently mocking his once well-chronicled penchant for gardening.
As Mr.
Dukakis spoke, he was sitting in his cramped office in a converted industrial building at Northeastern University.
With his opponent of four years ago, George Bush, in the White House, and the man who nominated him, Gov.
Bill Clinton, ready to accept the Democratic mantle in New York, Mr.
Dukakis is teaching political science at this working-class institution that is usually overshadowed by its neighbors, Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


WPP to Appoint A New Chairman
WPP Group P.L.C. in London, as expected, plans to name a new chairman to succeed David Ogilvy, in conjunction with an extensive restructuring of its debt.
Gordon Stevens, 66 years old, was nominated yesterday to become chairman of WPP, which owns agencies like Ogilvy &amp; Mather and J. Walter Thompson.
Mr.
Ogilvy, 81, who came out of retirement to become WPP's chairman in 1989, would become president emeritus and a consultant.


Sea Lions To Report On Behavior Of Whales
WHEN Jenifer Zeligs strolls past the pools where the California sea lions are kept, the animals haul themselves out of the water and waddle toward her, their snouts snuffling in excitement, their blubbery bellies quivering like buckets of chocolate pudding.
They bark to get her attention, but they are not barking for fish; the sea lions have already been fed.
No, they want her, their blond trainer, their camp counselor, their bipedal and terrestrial best friend.
They love Ms.
Zeligs because she plays games with them.
She shows them new tricks.
She scratches their fur, grooms them, cleans their teeth and takes them for walks around their enclosures.


New Hampshire Thrift Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Safe, Says the Commissioner. Out, Say Some of the Owners.
Faced with a move by some major league owners to induce him to resign, Commissioner Fay Vincent has made it clear he will resist the attempt even if an overwhelming majority of owners want him to leave before his term expires.
One of the owners who is said to be deeply involved in the ouster effort said yesterday that that position wasn't always Vincent's view, but the commissioner disagreed.
The dispute between some owners and Vincent has also raised questions about the owners' ability to fire a sitting commissioner.


Advice On a Disk: The Doctor Is Really In
MANY households have a layman's medical book, a source for suggestions for treating minor ailments and for background information on more serious ones.
Doctor Schueler's Home Medical Advisor puts a medical encyclopedia on a computer.
There really is a Dr.
Schueler.
He is Dr.
Stephen J. Schueler, a board-certified emergency medicine physician who, with more than 40 other physicians, wrote the database the program uses.
The database is divided into seven files: symptoms, diseases, injuries, poisons, tests, drugs, and health and diet.


Chase Manhattan reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Calcium for Bone Mass
GRANDMA may have been proved right again.
First, it was chicken soup for the flu (hot liquids saturated with high-calorie chicken fat actually do reduce flu symptoms); now it is milk for strong bones.
A study in the current issue of The New England Journal of Medicine has concluded that dietary supplements of calcium, a major component of milk, can significantly increase the bone density of children below the age of puberty.
In the study, Dr.
Conrad Johnston and his colleagues at the Indiana University School of Medicine monitored 71 pairs of identical twins for three years.
All had good diets that included the daily recommended allowance of calcium, but one twin from each pair received double that; the other was given a dummy pill.


Supply and Demand Rule Baseball Cards
To the Editor:
In "I'm a Minor League Father" (Op-Ed, June 23), Laurence Goldstein laments discarding now-valuable baseball cards that he collected as a child, a catastrophe of which, he writes, his son has not neglected to remind him.
Mr.
Goldstein should consider that had he and all his fellow lamenters maintained their collections, the rookie Mickey Mantle card now selling for $30,000 would not fetch 30 cents, and likewise all the other old cards now rare and valuable.


First Florida Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Earliest Upright Plant
The earliest known common ancestor of all upright land plants lived 200 million years before the dinosaurs, according to a new study.
Scientists found fossil evidence that the plant, which was essentially a stem topped with a spore capsule, contained a specialized cell that functioned to conduct water up stems.
That cell, called a tracheid, is the definitive feature that enables land plants to grow upright, unlike mosses and liverworts, which stay close to the ground.


Hilton Hotels reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FirstTier Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


DEMOCRATS PLEDGE CHANGE, FOR BOTH PARTY AND NATION, AS THEIR CONVENTION BEGINS
Democrats opened their convention last night with the traditional brass bands, balloons and hoopla, while a parade of leaders tried to assure the television audience that the party had moderated its policies and could be trusted to govern again.
The Democrats repeatedly denounced President Bush as a failed President who had let the country drift into recession and division and was utterly unequipped to steady its course.


New York Invites the Delegates to Make Themselves at Home
With the ease that 24 hours of familiarity can breed, the 4,928 Democratic delegates settled into their second day of parties yesterday, and the host city relaxed a little too.
As 56 restaurants served lunch to local celebrities and delegates, the pomp of catered affairs was eclipsed by the intimacy of shared humiliation when waitresses at the Second Avenue Deli on the Lower East Side squawked "Ah right, who's got the corned beef?" to delegates from Utah.
Humbling continued as local celebrities like Dr.
Ruth Westheimer and the actor Peter Boyle waited nearly an hour for their delegate lunch dates to appear.
Delegates from California did not show up for their lunch with DianneBrill, the downtown doyenne.
"I think it is important that they get organized if they want to win the election," sniffed Ms.
Brill, who wore a platinum wig and orange suit.
"Never before have I been stood up for lunch."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.18
3.20
5.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.21
5.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.31
3.26
5.70
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.45
6.42
8.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.67
7.62
8.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.60
8.60
9.48
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.28
6.28
7.15
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


POWER AND WATER LOST IN SARAJEVO AS ATTACKS MOUNT
Despite repeated assurances that they are maintaining a cease-fire, Serbian nationalist forces marked the 100th day of the Sarajevo siege today by dynamiting four power-transmission lines that served the city, knocking out electricity to the 400,000 people who remain here and idling the pumps that provide the residents with running water.
"It is a disaster," an official said.
"Without power, Sarajevo will die quickly. Please tell the world, only military intervention can save us now."


Agencies Face Language Barriers
Clutching forms in one hand and children in the other, scores of Spanish-speaking women trudged through a sprawling welfare office in Washington Heights the other day for a lengthy round of bureaucratic rituals: waiting in crowded rooms, filling out applications, meeting with caseworkers, waiting some more.
Amid the sluggish lines and piles of paper, a shy 23-year-old immigrant from the Dominican Republic seemed bewildered.
But she was soon rescued by Ramon D. Alfonso, a bilingual caseworker, who spoke in soothing tones in Spanish as he showed her how to renew her welfare payments.


Secom General reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Perot Adviser Threatens to Quit Over Frustrations With Campaign
Frustrated that Ross Perot was not paying attention to his advice, Hamilton Jordan, co-manager of the Perot for President Committee, recently threatened to resign, campaign officials said.
An official, who spoke only if promised not to be named, said that Mr.
Jordan remained with the campaign and was not thinking of leaving.
"There is no truth to his quitting," the official said. "Is he frustrated? Yes."


Market Place; Growing Revolt Of Centel Holders
THE revolt against the Centel Corporation by some of its largest shareholders continues to simmer.
Moran Asset Management of Greenwich, Conn., one of Centel management's most vocal opponents, announced yesterday that it was going to vote against the Sprint Corporation's planned acquisition of Centel and would urge others to do the same.
Moran, which owns about 500,000 Centel shares, said "it intends to seek to focus shareholder opposition" to the merger and force management to investigate alternatives like selling a part of Centel and use proceeds to reduce debt, as well as spinning off its cellular telephone business to shareholders.


Rhode Island Banker Is Indicted in '91 Crisis
Joseph Mollicone Jr., the bank president accused of triggering Rhode Island's banking crisis, was indicted yesterday on 47 counts of embezzlement, bank fraud and conspiracy.
The indictment, which charged Mr.
Mollicone with embezzling $15.8 million from the bank he headed until he disappeared last Nov. 8, was the result of a 19-month state grand jury investigation.
It clears the way for the state to bring its case against Mr.
Mollicone to trial, said James E. O'Neil, the Attorney General of Rhode Island, in a telephone interview.


Capriati Is in New Jersey But Dreams of Barcelona
Still coach-less, and temporarily parent-free, Jennifer Capriati breezed into New Jersey yesterday to combine a mini-vacation on the beach at Manasquan with the task of defending her title at the Pathmark Classic, the yearly Mahwah exhibition.
The Olympics-bound Capriati said she was hoping to ease the pain of going title-less on the Kraft Tour thus far in 1992 by bringing home a medal from Barcelona.


Today's Television
Major Networks  ABC (Channel 7 in New York) 10 P.M. to 11 P.M. 11:30 P.M. to midnight, "Nightline," live from Madison Square Garden.
CBS (Channel 2 in New York) Updates during the All-Star baseball game.
NBC (Channel 4 in New York) 10 P.M. to "the completion of the last major even of the night," or about 11 P.M.
PBS (Channel 13 in New York) 8 P.M. to 11 P.M.
Other Networks CABLE NEWS NETWORK (Channel varies by cable system) 6 P.M. to the end of the session.
C-SPAN (Channel varies by cable system) Gavel to gavel, or about 4:30 P.M. to 11:30 P.M.
CROSSWALKS (Available only in New York City; channel varies by borough)  From 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. the city's municipal access channel will rebroadcast the previous night's events.


Q&amp;A
Ear to the Ground
Q.
Did it really work when the Indians in old movies put their ears to the ground to find out if the cavalry was coming?
A.
Yes, and depending on variables like the size of the troop and the type of terrain, they may have been able to hear the troops from quite a distance, said Leonard Seeber, a seismologist at the Lamont Doherty Geological Observatory in Palisades, N.Y.


Chrysler Sets the Prices Of Its New Midsize Cars
The Chrysler Corporation announced suggested retail prices today of $17,500 to $22,500, including popular options, for its important new L/H line of midsize sedans, which have been in production for two weeks and are to begin appearing in dealer showrooms within the next two months.
The Dodge Intrepid, Eagle Vision and Chrysler Concorde are Chrysler's first substantially new mass-market car models in a decade.
They are aimed at the heart of the family midsize market, now dominated by the Ford Taurus, Honda Accord, Toyota Camry, Chevy Lumina and others.
Chrysler has succeeded in mini-vans and Jeeps, but been weak in cars.
Hence, Chrysler's profitability has been weak for the last three years.


Morgan (J.P.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chicago Suburb Finds Truth in Arson Rumors
The fear came to William McCoy with the night.
It got so bad he couldn't sleep.
The slightest noise sent him jumping out of bed to check the front hall for smoke.
In one two-week period in the fall of 1984 there were nearly a dozen fires at Mr.
McCoy's apartment building, in a largely white neighborhood of this blue-collar suburb 30 miles south of Chicago.
No one could explain the rash of fires, but Mr.
McCoy had heard the rumors -- crazy, it-can't-happen-here rumors that the city was paying people to start the fires to chase the mostly black and poor tenants out of the neighborhood.


Commerce Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEW A.T.&amp;T. GROUP FOR PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS
A.T.&amp; T. Microelectronics said it was starting a Personal Communication Systems unit.
The unit will develop technology, including semiconductor products, development tools, and software based on the Hobbit microprocessor, for a new class of small mobile communication devices with which users can enter information with special electronic pens.
Ahmed Nawaz has been named senior director for the unit, which will be based in Sunnyvale, Calif.
Mr.
Nawaz will be responsible for product planning, design and development, applications engineering and product marketing.


Peter R. Chase, 70; Was in Foreign Service
Peter R. Chase, a former Foreign Service officer and Mobil Oil Corporation executive, died last Friday at his house in Rockport, Mass.
He was 70 years old and also lived in Cambridge, Mass.
Mr. Chase died of lung cancer, his wife, Caroline, said.


Executive Changes
GALBREATH CO., New York, a real estate company, named Richard Feldman managing director.
INTERNATIONAL MOBILE MACHINES CORP., King Of Prussia, Pa., named David L. Smith senior vice president for strategic planning and corporate communications.


Ecological Menace Could Shatter Hawaii's Freedom From Snakes
ON the peaceful tropical isles of Hawaii, military and civilian forces alike are gearing up to fend off a deadly invader.
The menace is the brown tree snake, infamous for having wiped out most of Guam's forest bird species.
This five-foot-long serpent first descended like a plague on Guam just 30 years ago, but it has bred so fast that there are now as many as 30,000 snakes per square mile in some areas.


Jobs Data Distort Minimum Wage Story; Ignoring Christmas
To the Editor:
The study by Lawrence H. Katz and Richard B. Kreuger that you report on (Business Day, June 29) compared employment in Texas fast-food outlets before and after the minimum-wage increase.
Unfortunately, the researchers compared December employment, a time when restaurant employment is near its seasonal low, with that in July, when employment peaks for the year.
Since 1985, December employment in Texas restaurants has consistently been 95 percent to 97 percent of July employment.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Curran Advances in Washington
Kevin Curren rallied to beat Alexander Mronz, 6-7 (5-7), 7-6 (9-7), 6-4, yesterday in the opening round of the NationsBank Classic in Washington.
Curren, a South Africa native who lives in Austin, Tex., was not broken after the opening game of the second set.
Curren was down 0-30 in two games in the final set, but each time came back to hold serve.
He faced triple break point in the final game of the match, but won five straight points to move on to the second round.
Curren's next opponent will be the Wimbledon champion, Andre Agassi, who has won the last two years in Washington.
Agassi had a first-round bye.(AP) el3 U.S.
Women Start Smartly in Cup: Even without Martina Navratilova and Jennifer Capriati, the United States team at the Federation Cup tournament in Frankfurt got off to an impressive start.
The Americans cleared the first hurdle with a 3-0 sweep of Britain in the first round of the event, the women's equivalent of the Davis Cup.
Next up for the Americans is Denmark, which beat Chile, 2-1.
Mary Joe Fernandez, who spent the night on a plane from Japan, went out less than six hours later and beat Monique Javer, 6-4, 6-1.
Trailing by 4-1 at one point, Fernandez rallied to win 10 games in a row.
Lori McNeil clinched the American victory by beating Jo Durie, 7-5, 6-3, and Pam Shriver and Debbie Graham beat Durie and Clare Wood, 6-4, 7-6, in doubles.
Steffi Graf, playing her first tournament after winning her fourth Wimbledon singles title, paced top-seeded Germany to a 3-0 victory over New Zealand. (AP) Bruguera Wins Swiss Open: Sixth-seeded Sergi Bruguera of Spain defeated his compatriot Franciso Clavet, 6-1, 6-4, in the rain-delayed final of the Swiss Open in Gstaad.
The 21-year-old Bruguera, making his third consecutive appearance in the championship match of the clay-court event, earned $43,000 for his first victory in the tournament and second of the year. (AP) GOLF  Crenshaw Misses Spot in British Open
Ben Crenshaw failed yesterday in his second attempt to qualify for this week's British Open at Muirfield, making him 0 for 2 this year in bids to win a spot in golf's major championships.
Crenshaw, who also failed to make the field for the United States Open at Pebble Beach last month, had rounds of 79 and 71 at North Berwick in Gullane, Scotland, for an eight-over-par 150 total.
Crenshaw, who won the Western Open in his last PGA Tour start two weeks ago, came to Scotland last week and competed in the Scottish Open, trying to earn one of the five British Open berths available with a top-five finish.
He didn't make it that way, either.
Rookie left-hander Phil Mickelson also failed to make the 156-man field after shooting 80-68 in qualifying. (AP)


A Few Swift Kicks From an Edgy Market
Brokers on Wall Street are calling them the stocks from hell.
The bruised investors who own them are just calling them a mistake.
They are a dozen or so stocks, including Filenet and Micrografx, that have fallen sharply since July 1.
Some of them have plunged as much as 40 or 50 percent, in a period when the Dow Jones industrial average fell only 17 points.


A Beleaguered Berlin Loses Ground in Race To Stage 2000 Games
Less than a week after Germany was reunified in October 1990, jubilant Berlin officials announced that they would seek to cap a decade of reconstruction by staging the Olympic Summer Games in the year 2000.
The lavish spectacle, they said, would show the world how two halves of a long-divided nation could be successfully reunited.
Olympic officials often seek to award the Games to a city that is reaching or aspiring to a high level of international prominence.
Berlin, where the wall that symbolized the Cold War was finally breached, seems to fit that role perfectly.


WIC Western reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Aluminum Co. of America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Czech Republic Now Hints at Independence
Saying it was reacting to moves by Slovakia toward independence, the new Government of the Czech Republic said today that it was laying the groundwork for an independent Czech state, including a new post of Czech President.
Laying out the program of the new Czech Government, Vaclav Klaus, its new Prime Minister, suggested that a breakup of the 74-year-old Czechoslovak federation was likely.


Jobs Data Distort Minimum Wage Story
To the Editor:
"Forging New Insight on Minimum Wages and Jobs" (Business Day, June 29) reports on two studies by Harvard and Princeton economists that conclude rising minimum wages do not destroy jobs.
The figures, however, do not support this conclusion.
When teen-agers and other minimum-wage workers cannot find jobs, many give up and just don't bother to look for work.
Thus they are not considered unemployed by the Department of Labor, which counts only those actively looking for a job.


Second-Quarter Report: Mets
Maybe Braniff Airlines had a worse last quarter than the Mets.
Maybe the Major Indoor Soccer League did.
In any case, the list is short and bittersweet.
So maybe Mayor Dinkins, who knows something about falling in and out of favor in New York, can work out a deal to have flight patterns adjusted at LaGuardia so that all planes go directly over Shea Stadium.
The place could be starved for noise by early August.


Bush's Ads Will Avoid Some Television Shows
Like Vice President Dan Quayle, the executives shaping President Bush's re-election campaign seem unlikely to be counted as fans of "Murphy Brown."
The November Company, the private firm formed by Madison Avenue advertising executives handling ads for Bush-Quayle '92, has informed the broadcast television networks that it would decide where to buy commercial time based the "good taste" and "moral values" of the programming they run.


Boston Acoustics reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Tokyo Journal; Shoguns' Foe Takes a Page From Past (and Perot)
If Japanese history had taken a different turn more than a century ago, Morihiro Hosokawa, the scion of a family of feudal warlords who were always staving off more powerful shoguns in the capital, would probably be ruling over a good part of the country today.
Instead, Mr.
Hosokawa is the newest and most visible political challenger in Japan in years, reveling in his role as an outspoken defector from the governing Liberal Democratic Party.


U.S. Maker Of Chips In Alliance
In the latest in a recent rash of international alliances that could transform the semiconductor industry, Advanced Micro Devices Inc. and Fujitsu Ltd. of Japan today announced a $700 million joint venture to develop, build and market flash memories, a new type of chip that has the potential to replace disk drives in computers.
The agreement, announced here, came on the same day that the International Business Machines Corporation, Toshiba of Japan and Siemens of West Germany announced a three-way collaboration to develop a different type of memory chip.


CBS Adds Hour for Cuomo
Score one for the Democrats in Round 1 of the battle between the party and the television networks.
Minutes before the convention opened last night, CBS News retreated from its vow to cut prime-time coverage in half this year, deciding to devote two hours on Wednesday night to the convention.
Officials at NBC and ABC said they were thinking about doing the same thing.


Weis Markets reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY AN ENDORSEMENT OF PEROT DRAWS FIRE
Three days after endorsing Ross Perot for President, the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d, pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem, has come under fire from some local black political leaders who expressed dismay over the minister's choice of candidate, following Mr.
Perot's reference to blacks as "you people" in a speech last week.
B3.
A MAYORAL CONFIDANT WHO IS MUCH MORE
Wherever Mayor Dinkins goes, Arnie Segarra is never far behind.
He is often seen whispering in the Mayor's ear, shepherding him through crowds, carrying his belongings or just standing in the background watching over the city's chief executive.
Mr.
Segarra is perhaps the Mayor's most trusted confidant.
B3.
WANTED: BILINGUAL GOVERNMENT WORKERS
As more and more immigrants from many different countries settle in New York City, city agencies are taking steps to prevent the Babel of languages filling their offices from paralyzing their work.
They are hiring bilingual staff and interpreters, translating forms and pamphlets into a jumble of languages and teaching their employees to be more sensitive to people who do not speak English.
B8.
TRIAL OPENS IN CASE OF RIGGED BRIEFCASE
A Federal prosecutor known for her toughness in pressing drug cases received a booby-trapped briefcase in the mail as a "gift of death," a Federal jury in Brooklyn was told.
The statement came in opening statements as David Kwong, a Queens man described as a drug informer, went on trial for attempted murder, accused of sending the briefcase to the prosecutor, Catherine E. Palmer, in 1990.
B3.
REGION
TRENTON G.O.P.  IS CHALLENGED
Blaming what he called "right-wing extremists" within the Republican Party, the New Jersey State Senate Democratic leader, John A. Lynch, accused the Republican legislative majority of trying to undermine the State Constitution.
During a half-hour news conference, Mr.
Lynch made a partisan attack on the Republicans, charging that if they succeeded in amending the Constitution it would create two separate New Jerseys divided along geographic and economic lines.
B6.
PAYING MORE FOR CLEANER CLAMS
Gambling on the public's willingness to pay a bit more for clams that are cleaned, a Long Island entrepreneur is planning to open a depuration plant, New York's first in more than a decade.
There are only a handful of such plants in the country, and only three in the Northeast, one of which has been owned and operated by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts since 1925.
B6.
PRAISE FOR TRENTON'S RECORD
Refineries, crowded highways and hundreds of toxic sites may rank New Jersey among the most polluted states in the country, but a new survey finds the Garden State is No. 1 in dealing with environmental problems.
B6.
AU PAIR CASE PROMPTS CRIME TASK FORCE
A week after a Swiss au pair was acquitted of killing the infant in her care, Westchester law-enforcement officials said that they were forming a group to look at the way major crime investigations in the county were handled.
During the trial of Olivia Riner, her lawyer repeatedly raised questions about how the Police Department in Mount Pleasant investigated the fire that killed 3-month-old Kristie Fischer.
B5.
Chronicle B18  Our Towns by Josh Barbanel B6


It's Official: U.S. Stops Making Material for Nuclear Warheads
President Bush announced today that the United States would no longer produce plutonium or enriched uranium used in nuclear warheads, codifying as policy a suspension that had been in effect for years because of arms cuts and problems within the nuclear weapons complex.
Mr.
Bush described the move as one of a series of steps intended to stem the spread of nuclear weapons.
By renouncing the production of fissionable material, the United States hopes to add weight to its efforts to persuade nations in the Middle East, South Asia and other potential flash points, to take similar steps, Bush Administration officials said.


Man in Town for Convention Is Mugged
Ron Squires, a Vermont state legislator, received one of the less civil New York City welcomes afforded delegates and visitors to the Democratic National Convention.
Early yesterday he was punched in the nose, knocked to the sidewalk and robbed of his wallet by two men.
But, as he was quick to tell everyone with much good humor, he still loves New York.
As the 40-year-old Mr.
Squires spoke by telephone from his room in the Roger Smith Hotel about the mugging that began with a craving for a post-midnight snack, the hotel operator interjected, saying, "Mr. Squires, I have Mayor Dinkins on the line."


MORE ON THE CONVENTION
Caution Among Women
Democratic women greeted their new prominence and power with both triumph and wariness.
Page A9.
Excitement in a New Home


Mercantile Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


E-Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hubco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Arts Fund Makes Grants to 80 Groups
Eighty nonprofit arts organizations in New York City will share $1.5 million in grants from a new group of private and corporate donors.
The group, the Arts Forward Fund, has announced its first awards, ranging from $5,000 to $25,000, to support new creative projects over the next two years.
Recipients include major institutions like the New York Shakespeare Festival and Symphony Space as well as lesser-known groups like Arts Connection, the Ontological-Hysteric Theater, the Asian American Arts Alliance, the Association of Hispanic Arts and Dancing in the Streets.


Kidder Fills Brokerage Post
Kidder, Peabody, the Wall Street investment banking and brokerage firm, plans to name Mark Sutton as managing director and chief operating officer if its 1,200-member brokerage unit.
Mr.
Sutton will be responsible for the daily operation of the 45-office Investment Services division, which focuses on high-net-worth individuals, small to medium corporations and smaller institutions.


Jets Close to Signing Mitchell as Start of Camp Looms
The Jets agreed to contract terms with four veterans and three draft picks yesterday, and continued talking with the agent for Johnny Mitchell, the team's first-round pick, in hopes of reaching an agreement before players are to report to training camp at Hofstra University this evening.
The four veterans who signed were running back Johnny Hector, free safety Lonnie Young, defensive lineman Paul Frase and linebacker Troy Johnson.
That left only four veterans unsigned: starting quarterback Ken O'Brien, backup quarterback Troy Taylor, guard Dave Cadigan and tight end Mark Boyer.
Linebacker Glenn Cadrez, the sixth-round pick; guard Mario Johnson, a 10th-round selection, and receiver Eric Boles, an 11th-round pick, also agreed to terms yesterday.
The financial terms of the contracts were not disclosed.


Crew Fights Atlantic Storms
The 220-foot Italian powerboat Destriero left the Straits of Gibraltar Saturday afternoon for the start of a two-pronged attempt to break the westbound and eastbound trans-Atlantic speed records.
But fierce storms have placed the first part of its challenge in jeopardy.
With 1,300 miles to go at noon yesterday, the $50 million craft was being assaulted by 12-foot seas and winds of 35 to 50 miles an hour.
The 14-man crew expects to reach its destination at Ambrose Light off Sandy Hook, N.J., sometime today.


Prices of Treasury Securities Slip
Prices of Treasury securities dipped and long-term interest rates moved a bit higher yesterday, as traders reacted to rumors and assorted worries by selling notes and bonds.
The price slide began during overnight trading, largely on press reports published over the weekend that Germany's Bundesbank would raise interest rates at a meeting on Thursday.


U.S. PROPOSES DEREGULATING CALGENE'S BIOTECH TOMATO
Calgene Inc.'s genetically engineered tomato, the Flavr Savr, may soon be free of restrictions as a result of the United States Department of Agriculture's proposal yesterday to deregulate the product.
The tomato, which is designed to have an extended shelf life of two to three weeks, has been under Agriculture Department regulation for the last three years.


Iran-Contra Judge Warns Prosecutors Over Delay
The judge in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George, a former top official in the Central Intelligence Agency, angrily warned prosecutors today that he might dismiss the charges unless they moved more quickly to review classified materials needed for the case.
"I can put the Government out of its misery, you know," the Federal district judge, Royce C. Lamberth, told Michael D. Vhay, a prosecutor from the Iran-contra independent counsel.
Mr.
Vhay had just tried to explain why it was difficult to get the intelligence agencies to move as quickly as the judge would like in reviewing classified materials to be used in the trial.


Simpson Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Canandaigua Wine reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


As Fighting Widens, U.N. Orders Buildup Of Troops in Bosnia
As Bosnia and Herzegovina pleaded for more aggressive action by the United Nations to deliver food and medicine to cities under renewed attack, the Security Council decided today to expand the size of its peacekeeping force there.
By a 15-to-0 vote, the Security Council approved a resolution submitted by Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to add 500 military personnel to the United Nations forces in Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, bringing the total to 1,600.
Mr.
Boutros-Ghali called the earlier number "inadequate.


Dallas Semiconductor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Columbia First Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Convention Summary
THE DEMOCRATS' OPENING PITCH The convention opened with a parade of Democratic leaders trying to assure those watching at home that the party had moderated and could be trusted to govern.
Assertions of unity abounded, but there were signs -- seized upon by reporters hungry for some tension -- that it would not be a purely harmonic convention.
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. continued to withhold an endorsement of Gov.
Bill Clinton.
GHOST OF '88 HAUNTS OPTIMISTS In the last few weeks, many Democrats stopped planning for defeat and started believing Bill Clinton had a chance to be President.
The sense of euphoria was limited, however, by one unforgettable statistic: Michael S. Dukakis's 17-point lead in July 1988, which became an 8-point deficit in November.
WOMEN STAR AT CONVENTION, WARILY The views of the liberal groups that dominated the Democrats for so long are barely in evidence this week, and the reason for the change is no secret.
The Democrats have lost six of the last seven elections.
But one special interest is receiving special attention this year -- women.
The party's female wing greets its sudden popularity with triumph and wariness.
GORE PREACHES TO THE UNCONVERTED; DELEGATES DINE From one ballroom full of potential supporters to another, Al Gore carried a simple message: Forget the bad things you may have heard about Bill Clinton.
And the 4,928 Democratic delegates settled comfortably into their second day of wining and dining.


Mujaddid Ahmed Ijaz, Nuclear Scientist, 55
Mujaddid Ahmed Ijaz, a nuclear scientist and professor emeritus of physics at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University in Blacksburg, died Thursday at his home in Shawsville, Va.
He was 55 years old.
His family said he died from brain and lung cancer.


Butts Comes Under Fire For Endorsement of Perot
Three days after endorsing Ross Perot for President, the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d, pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem, has come under fire from some local black political leaders who have expressed dismay over the minister's choice of candidate, because of Mr.
Perot's reference to blacks as "you people" in a speech last week.
As head of one the city's largest black churches, which was once headed by Representative Adam Clayton Powell Jr., Mr.
Butts is one of New York's most influential religious and community leaders.
It remains to be seen what impact Mr.
Perot's comments may have on Mr.
Butts's standing in the black community.


Joyful Mood at Black Catholic Meeting
More than 1,000 representatives of the nation's two million black Roman Catholics asserted their African roots last weekend in a meeting devoted to the needs of black families and to problems confronting young black men.
From the African drum rhythms at the Mass that opened the congress on Thursday night to the applause and amens that interrupted the major speeches over the weekend, a joyful mood marked the seventh National Black Catholic Congress in New Orleans, overcoming the grim realities of broken families, unemployment, poverty, drug abuse and teen-age homicide that the delegates discussed in workshops and caucuses.


Blimps and BaseCams Cause Fans to Lose Sight of Game
Ric LaCivita is volatile.
He is intense.
He is talented.
But if you listen to CBS's coordinating producer for baseball, you may be convinced that he's the most misunderstood man in the country next to Dan Quayle.
LaCivita has been ticketed for criticism over CBS's baseball production.
In an interview -- he had been in the cone of silence under Ted Shaker, the longtime CBS Sports executive producer, who was replaced in June -- LaCivita said: "Whatever criticism we've taken hasn't been fairly delineated. I don't know if they know what we're doing. They don't know how difficult it is."


Ferruzzi's Ex-Chief Is Back, Defiant
Raul Gardini knows how to make waves.
Last year, he was ousted as head of Ferruzzi-Montedison, Italy's second- biggest conglomerate, after the three Ferruzzi siblings who control the agribusiness and chemical concern decided that Mr.
Gardini -- their brother-in-law -- was taking the company in the wrong direction.


Perot in Trouble Internal Strife, Missed Opportunities And Missteps on Issues Stall a Drive
It started out so hopefully; a bantam unafraid to speak his mind, blowing in like a cool, clean wind from the prairie to cleanse government and the political process.
But in the hot glare of the campaign, the insurgency of Ross Perot is dangerously close to unraveling.
In recent weeks, Hamilton Jordan, the co-chairman of the Perot for President Committee, has threatened to quit the campaign, frustrated because the independent-minded Texan has refused to heed his counsel.
Then Mr.
Perot severed his ties with Hal Riney &amp; Partners, a widely respected advertising company, when his advisers were pushing the Texas billionaire to begin a campaign to define himself to voters.


Women's Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Micropolis Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  A LIFELINE SEVERED IN SARAJEVO
Bosnians pleaded for intervention as power lines were blown up by Serbian forces, leaving Sarajevo dark and interrupting the supply of water.
"Without power, Sarajevo will die quickly," an official said.
A1  THE REVITALIZATION OF BAGHDAD
With cranes, bricks and and months of round-the-clock labor, Baghdad has rebuilt the rubble of war into a bustling city.
How it was achieved within the constraints of a trade embargo is a mystery.
A1


Oce-van der Grinten NV reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


GBC Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Healthsouth Rehabilitation reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
Clara McBride Hale, who is known as MOTHER HALE, has been slowed -- but not brought to a halt -- by a series of small strokes she suffered several years ago but that were only recently diagnosed.
"They happened about three years ago but I didn't even know about them, and it's just coming down on me now," Mother Hale, who is 87 years old, said yesterday, speaking on the telephone from Hale House, the group home she established for babies born addicted to drugs or alcohol and recently expanded to include those who are H.I.V. positive.


COMPANY NEWS: Touch-Screen Democracy; The Delegates Have Gone Digital
Democratic leaders, trumpeting their unity, are using a little high technology to help lend coziness to their gathering at the cavernous Madison Square Garden.
They have placed throughout the arena 60 touch-screen voting systems to electronically link each delegation to the podium and an electronic scoreboard.
The speed of the system's main computers, housed in the New York Knicks' locker room, lets organizers almost instantly record and tabulate their votes on platform and rules issues.


Inland Steel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Athletes, No Longer Homeless
New York City's decision to reduce the number of men sheltered in the vast Fort Washington Armory makes sense as homeless policy.
It also presents a rare opportunity for high school athletes.
As a shelter, the place is dangerous and demeaning.
Under pressure of a lawsuit, the city now declares it will shift most of the men to other, smaller shelters where space has lately become available.
But that's only half the story.


Improved Scanner Watches the Brain As It Thinks
A NEW and better way of making images of the brain as it works has been developed by several groups of scientists working independently of each other.
Known as fast magnetic resonance imaging, or fast M.R.I., the technique can produce pictures less than a second apart.
Other methods, like PET scanning, produce snapshots of the brain 5 to 10 minutes apart, hardly quick enough to catch a fleeting thought.


Federal Express reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Run, Rabbit, Run, but May the Great Horse Win
One of the unsung heroes of racing history is the "rabbit." He is the speedball who breaks out of the gate and runs like the wind with one mission in life: to set up the race for a stablemate who does his best running late in the race.
The rabbit does this by firing a burst of early pace that forces the other speed horses in the race to run faster and longer than they'd like, thereby setting the stage for his pal to execute his customary finishing kick with drama and effect and with dwindling opposition.


Take Me Out to the Cleaners
NORTHAMPTON, Mass.
The romantic view of major league baseball's relationship with cities -- like San Diego, where the All-Star Game will be played tonight -- is that it is a benevolent partner.
After all, a new old-fashioned stadium has revived Baltimore's fortunes.
But the realistic view is that baseball squeezes revenues out of already impoverished urban areas.
Baseball franchises are not publicly-held corporations.
There is no functional separation between ownership and management and, hence, there is no pressure to produce book profits to please individual or institutional stockholders.
Through accounting legerdemain, bloated front offices and extensive perquisites, even baseball's most lucrative and successful franchises can show losses.
Every year eight to 10 teams claim they lose money.


A Brooklyn Teen-Ager Shows a World of Potential
Jowanna McMullen first discovered her running talents on the streets of Bedford-Stuyvesant in Brooklyn, trying to keep up with her big brother, Steve.
Jowanna was 6 years old. Steve was 12 years older, training to be a boxer.


KU Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quotation of the Day
How much more of this must there be before the West realizes what is involved here and takes some action to help us? -- EJUP GANIC, a vice president in the Bosnian Government.  [ A1:2. ]


On My Mind; Classy Bill Clinton
In convention assembled, let us now join in hope that press and politicians will drop this baby boomer business about Gov.
Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore.
The label makes two sophisticated and experienced politicians sound as if there were something different, something coltish, about them that separates them from Americans who were born before World War II.


Towns Adopt Pay-as-You-Throw Garbage
Steve and Cally Frysinger and their four children have almost eliminated the need for the family garbage can.
Wizards at recycling and composting, they have cut the amount trash they put out for curbside pickup each month to one 30-pound container -- a minuscule amount for a household of six.


Corrections
A report in the Company News column of Business Day on Saturday about the Hartmarx Corporation's earnings misstated its closing stock price on Friday.
It was $5.75, down 12.5 cents.


Brown in Gotham City: The 'Penguin' Returns
Like the Penguin who bedeviled Batman, Jerry Brown is underground in Gotham City, making political mischief for Bill Clinton.
Mr.
Brown has never been seen eating raw herring or riding in a motorized duck, but there are similarities.
Deserted by his family, the Penguin ran an antic campaign for mayor with the help of the disenfranchised.
Despite pressure from his own annoyed family, Mr.
Brown continues his rag-tag campaign.
He has even left open the possibility of nominating himself for President rather than endorsing the Democratic ticket in exchange for a less-than-prime time speaking slot.
The irritated Clinton camp is barely able to find Mr.
Brown, much less negotiate the terms of his surrender.
On Saturday night Mr.
Brown phoned Mr.
Clinton but then immediately put him on hold while answering another call.
After five minutes on hold, even the eager-to-please Mr.
Clinton hung up, only to discover that neither his staff nor the party chief, Ron Brown, knew how to reach the elusive Mr.
Brown.
Although Mr.
Brown usually crashes at the luxury pad of the writers Joan Didion and John Gregory Dunne when he stops in New York, this time Mr.
Brown was out of pocket, spending the night at homeless shelters without phones.
He has not been seen at his own convention headquarters in the bowels of Madison Square Garden, a plywood hovel tucked behind the elaborate trailer court that serves as the Clinton base.
Visitors to the graffiti-covered Brown shack, reminiscent of the sort of place where kidnappers would hold a hostage, found scant signs of life: a couple of desultory young volunteers moving a battered desk around, the lingering aroma of stale tofu and an 800-number banner tacked above the door like a tattered flag from some forgotten holy war.
Even Mr.
Brown's own volunteers there did not seem to know where to reach him, nor did they have any idea when, or if, he would show up.
But, like the fiendish somersaulting clowns in "Batman Returns," his cult of devoted followers refused to succumb.
A hotbed of revolt was the California delegation, which offered political asylum to three Brown delegates from Iowa, including a self-described "former Valley girl" named Rebecca Reynolds, who said: "We're demanding respect for the people. I mean, the Iron Curtain came down. It could happen here."
Brown supporters heckled Hillary Clinton in the morning when she spoke to the California delegation, got into a shoving match with Clinton partisans when they tried to claim front-row seats at the Garden, and then hooted as Ron Brown spoke last night.
Chris Kysar, a Brown delegate who lives in the Los Angeles suburb of Encino and who was wearing a ponytail, Nike Airs and a tie with chili peppers and Tabasco sauce labels on it, saw it this way: "We could walk out. That's one option. We could all of a sudden vote for Clinton. That's another option. But I don't think that's in the realm of possibility."
Catching sight of a camera, Mr.
Kysar broke away to chant, "Let Jerry speak!" 'J.F.K.' Director Arrives To Praise 'Paranoids'
Another Brown delegate from California did not seem fazed by the paranoia rampant in the ranks.
Oliver Stone, the conspiracy buff who directed the film "J.F.K.," arrived in New York last night wearing his motto: "Paranoids have the facts."
Asked if he had yet determined Ross Perot's whereabouts in Texas on Nov. 22, 1963, Mr.
Stone replied: "Give me a break. We still haven't found out where George Bush was."
He added that the President had volunteered information on his whereabouts to Kevin Costner, the star of "J.F.K.," during a White House visit.
"You know, I was in Houston that day," Mr.
Bush assured Mr.
Costner.
Biden Offers His Seat To a Senate Candidate
Overheard at a New York Times cocktail party for the Democrats: Geraldine Ferraro, the New York Senate candidate, asked Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, "Have you polished up one of those seats for me on the Judiciary Committee?"
Mr.
Biden, whose seat as chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee grew very hot during the Clarence Thomas hearings last October, replied: "My dear, you can have mine. I can't wait to move to Foreign Affairs."  CNN Anchor 'Auditions' As the New Catwoman
If Jerry Brown is the Penguin and the Clinton-Gore ticket is the "Dynamic Duo," as Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia christened it last night, who is Catwoman?
Hillary Clinton, who was portrayed in a political cartoon as the rubber-clad, whip-wielding vixen, gave up the role this week, domesticating her image with ladylike teas and cookie recipes and motherly appearances with her 12-year-old daughter, Chelsea.
Many people here agree that Mrs.
Clinton's successor in the part is the Cable News Network anchor Catherine Crier, who once prowled the convention floor in a black catsuit with a large camera crew in tow.
Then she appeared in a black micro-miniskirt for an encore.
The Hillary-Tipper Team Makes a Decorous Debut
Republicans are hoping for the best: that Tipper Gore's relentlessly wholesome style will clash with Hillary Clinton's "yuppie wife from hell" image and cause a noisier battle than the one expected between Al Gore and Dan Quayle.
"We're looking forward to the debate in this campaign," said William Kristol, Vice President Dan Quayle's chief of staff.
"That is, the debate between Tipper and Hillary."
Democrats, of course, are hoping for the opposite: that Tipper Gore's more traditional stay-at-home approach to child-raising will complement Mrs.
Clinton's Supermom persona and represent the full range of options available to modern women.
Although campaign officials have not yet decided whether Mrs.
Gore will take on Mr.
Quayle on family values, and stress her crusade against X-rated rock lyrics, they were keeping their fingers crossed for good chemistry as the two women made their first joint appearances in New York yesterday.
In a scene out of Edith Wharton, if not the "Live With Regis and Kathy Lee Show," the two women made a decorous debut at tea at the Waldorf-Astoria, mixing politics with cookie recipes before an audience of more than 200 wives of senators and representatives.
Mrs.
Clinton and Mrs.
Gore were at the event to announce their new-found friendship, although it was evident by their two styles who was going to be at the top of the ticket.
A clearly nervous Mrs.
Gore was barely audible to the crowd of eager ladies who sipped their tea and nibbled petits fours, while Mrs.
Clinton's poise reflected her months on the campaign trail.
Mrs.
Clinton appeared in the role of a busy wife and mother, sharing advice with like women.
She said of Mrs.
Gore: "I feel as if I have a real partner here. She is someone who sees the world as I do, and she has children the same age as my daughter."


The Tired, the Poor, the Laundry
Mohammed Hassan, a busboy at the Righa Royale Hotel, is busy this week filling the water glasses and clearing the dirty plates of the Democratic Senate Convention Committee members and their guests.
But close as he is to the heart of the American political process, the 25-year-old immigrant from Bangladesh harbors no illusions about seeing democracy at work.
"They democracy, I work," said Mr.
Hassan, who has lived in Astoria, Queens, since he won a visa in an immigration lottery a year ago.


Three Jockeys Injured in Spill
Three jockeys were injured when their mounts collided and went down in a spectacular spill during the seventh race at Belmont Park yesterday.
The most seriously injured was Jose Santos, 31 years old, one of the leading riders in New York, who suffered a fractured right arm and possible broken ribs.
He was until recently the regular jockey on Fly So Free, the 1990 juvenile champion, and many other star horses and was scheduled to ride Silver Ending in Saturday's $500,000 Suburban Handicap.


Gore Tells the Wary: Clinton Isn't a Worry
Meet Ambassador Gore.
All over midtown Manhattan yesterday, from one hotel ballroom to another, before one or another of the groups that make up the core of the Democratic Party, the smiling Tennessean who will be the party's Vice-Presidential choice carried an unusual, crucial message: Forget all those bad things you heard about Gov.
Bill Clinton.
He's our kind of guy.
Trust me.


Staff Builders Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


The Computer Price War and Microprocessors
CHEAPER microprocessors are one factor in the latest computer price war.
The Intel Corporation, which has been the dominant supplier of PC microprocessors for the past decade, is being challenged by several rivals who claim to make microprocessors that work the same as or better than Intel's parts, but at lower cost.
In response, Intel has cut prices sharply and introduced a variety of new chips.
Lower prices and competition work to the benefit of computer buyers.
But many computer buyers, experienced as well as novice, are concerned about using computers built around microprocessors other than Intel's.
The current competitors are Advanced Micro Devices, Cyrix-Texas Instruments, Chips and Technologies, and the International Business Machines Corporation.


AmSouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Director Examines Hollywood's Reshaping
Walk down the street or go to a restaurant in Beverly Hills.
Nips, tucks, nose and chin jobs and just about every other facial and body overhaul are evident on numerous women and, yes, men too.
"It's more visible in L.A. but it's kind of universal -- this obsession now with perfection, with staying young forever," said Robert Zemeckis, who is 41 years old and looks it.
"The baby-boom generation has started to age and doesn't want to."


A Picture of Harmony, at Least on TV
Maynard Jackson, the Mayor of Atlanta, refused to budge from his message: the Democratic Party is one big, ideologically happy family.
"We're finally united," he said last night on CNN's "Crossfire," which was being broadcast live from Madison Square Garden.


For the Pleasure It Gave and Can Still Give, Save the Band Shell
To the Editor:
I am the conductor of the Naumburg Orchestra, which presents free summertime concerts in the parks of New York City.
It was for these concerts that in 1923 Elkan Naumberg built Central Park's Naumburg Bandshell, a focus of much intense controversy these days.
Certainly, the band shell should be saved, for several reasons:


Poland Undergoes A Transformation
To the Editor:
Your July 6 front page report on President Bush's stop in Warsaw speaks of his "glossing over Poland's economic and political problems, which have worsened considerably since he last visited, in 1989." This judgment is seriously in error.
In 1989, Poland had a Communist dictatorship; hyperinflation; intense shortages, threatening hunger and chaos; wages, measured at free-market exchange rate, of $15 a month, and a bankrupt state-owned sector, which controlled more than 75 percent of the economy.
State sector production was collapsing rapidly.


Review/Pop; Tour by Post-Dead Bands Arrives at Jones Beach
If Martians had come on Sunday night and swept the Jones Beach amphitheater and its audience away to some other planet, prep schools would be in deep trouble.
Horde (Horizon of Rock Developing Everywhere), a gathering of post-Grateful Dead bands, made its appearance, and anybody wondering where the children of the cultural elite go for musical entertainment didn't have to look any further.
The bands -- Col.
Bruce Hampton and the Aquarium Rescue Unit, Widespread Panic, Spin Doctors, Blues Traveler and Phish -- play bar-band music for the most part, rock with smatterings of blues and other types of music, and they make it adventurous.
For an audience weaned on the Grateful Dead, the style fills a need to hear musical exploration and the kind of authenticity in which performers actually play their instruments and punk and rap don't exist.


Tonight, They're In League of Their Own
Baseball will toast itself again Tuesday night, but its annual midseason pause for the All-Star Game has become more than just an exhibition made for television.
Players gather, renew friendships, recall their pasts and think about their futures.
They did it today, and New York, New York was one of the hottest topics.


G.O.P. Is Told Not to Alter Constitution
Blaming what he called "right-wing extremists" within the Republican Party, the Senate Democratic leader, John A. Lynch, accused the Republican legislative majority today of trying to undermine the State Constitution.
During a half-hour news conference, Mr.
Lynch made a frequently rambling, partisan attack on the Republicans, charging that if they succeeded in amending the Constitution it would create two separate New Jerseys divided along geographic and economic lines.


Weitek Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


U.S. Condemns Serbian Attacks; Plans No Force
The Bush Administration today condemned the stepped-up Serbian attacks on Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, but officials said the United States was not preparing to increase military or diplomatic efforts to end the fighting there.
When pressed by reporters about what steps were being taken to halt the devastation in the Balkans, the State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, said the most promising developments involved peace talks scheduled for Wednesday in London among Serbian, Bosnian and Croatian representatives.


CIT Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-6  BAKER FOLLOWING RABIN'S LEAD  The Secretary of State, responding quickly to a change of political direction in Israel, is heading to the Mideast, where he is expected to work on peace talks, loan guarantees and the Administration's image.
A3  HOW LONG A HONEYMOON?
News Analysis: Yitzhak Rabin's first pronouncements are being warmly welcomed, domestically and in Washington, after years of Likud Party rule, but can he live up to everyone's expectations?
A3  THE GULF WAR OF WILLS  Braving 140-degree heat -- in air-conditioned jeeps -- today's troops in the gulf are keeping vigil in a passive battle with Saddam Hussein over arms inspections.
A3  PRE-EMPTIVE STRIKE ON CONGRESS  In a move that will have more impact on Capitol Hill than on nuclear tests, the Administration is establishing new limits on the nation's testing program.
A5  SOME POWER SEEPS INTO SARAJEVO  Limited electricity and water were restored to hospitals and communications centers in parts of Sarajevo after Serbian forces blew up four transmission lines.
A6  Milan Panic, new Yugoslav Premier, says Bosnia is independent.
A6  More than 4,000 shells don't break the will of Dubrovnik.
A6  A doctor's report is expected on the Pope's condition.
A4  The Convention A7-13  DEMOCRATS PLEDGE 'A REVOLUTION'  With the last challenge to Governor Clinton's hegemony fading, the least contentious, most confident Democratic National Convention in years adopted a platform fashioned to match his prescription for victory in November.
A1  The platform: conservative words to a liberal tune.
A1  Excerpts from the platform.
A10  JACKSON AND A WATERSHED  In the end, Jesse Jackson faced up to political reality.
He appeared on the podium of the Democratic National Convention on Governor Clinton's terms, and he did so when the party chairman told him to.
A1  The party grudingly yielded Brown 20 minutes at the podium.
A13  CLINTON AND ABORTION  Governor Clinton's heavily scripted convention schedule was marred by an anti-abortion protester who thrust a fetus in a plastic container at him.
That gesture of protest came on a day when abortion opponents in Arkansas distributed a 1986 letter in which Mr.
Clinton wrote that "I am opposed to abortion and to government funding of abortion." A11  THE HOUR OF TRUTH  Since its creation, the Democratic Leadership Council has argued that it understands how to put a Democrat back into the White House.
Now it will be put to the test.
A7  BROADCAST NEWS  In the control rooms at the television networks, the struggle is to get some drama instead of settling for what the Democratic Party wants: pretty pictures and snappy sound bites.
Nowhere has that struggle been more acute than at CNN.
A8  AIDS PROTESTERS MARCH  Sending a loud plea to Democrats gathered in Madison Square Garden, more than 10,000 people marched from Columbus Circle to Times Square and demanded better health care for AIDS patients.
A9  THE RESCUE OF THE PRESIDENT  Political Memo: President Bush will spend the next two days at the Wyoming ranch of a longtime confidant, Secretary of State Baker.
And the fondest hope of many Republicans is that the two men will decide there that Mr.
Baker should take on the job of rescuing the President's re-election effort.
A13  National A14-19  RECORD WHISTLEBLOWER AWARD  A former employee of a military contractor was awarded $7.5 million by a Federal judge for bringing forward evidence that the company systematically defrauded the Pentagon in the 1980's.
A1  ABORTION-PILL ROLLER COASTER  A Federal judge in Brooklyn ruled that the Government acted illegally when it seized French abortion pills from a pregnant woman as she entered the United States two weeks ago.
But before the pills could be returned to her, an appeals court ordered a delay.
The issue will go to the Supreme Court today.
A1  SPLIT RULING ON ENVIRONMENT  A Federal appeals court ruled that the E.P.A. must review its 1990 decision, ordered by the Competitiveness Council, that allowed lead automobile batteries to be burned in municipal incinerators.
But the court also upheld the council's reversal of an E.P.A. regulation that would have required operators of incinerators to recycle wastes to be burned.
A14  MORE TROUBLE FOR MAGELLAN  The Magellan spacecraft, already threatened with a money-saving suspension of operations, has serious transmitter trouble and for more than a week has been unable to send usable data for the completion of its mapping survey of Venus.
A16  Education Page B7  Metro Digest B1  A judge has ordered New York State to pay a Utica nurse $5.4 million after she contracted the virus that causes AIDS from a prisoner during a frenzied scuffle at a hospital in 1988.
A1  Business Digest D1  The Living Section C1-12  Health Page C13  Arts/Entertainment C14-20  Film: Bokassa's legacy.
C15  Tokyo String Quartet.
C15  The Pop Life C15  Sports B8-13  Baseball: American League wins All-Star Game, 13-6.
B9  Basketball: No decision in Harvey Grant case.
B13  Obituaries D19  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials  Domesticated Democrats.
Looking abroad without a vision.
The well-fed dead in Bosnia.
Joyce Purnick: Hillary Clinton.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: Two faces of Eve.
Harper's: Politics by the numbers.
Richard Ben Cramer: Regarding Bill.


First Albany Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Azinger Returns to Scene of Crime
Exactly five years later, no one knows for sure how much damage was done, probably not even Paul Azinger.
He tells himself and others that he is fully recovered and his vital signs are good.
But something has been missing, and it is natural to wonder if it was lost at Muirfield.
The site of the 121st British Open, which begins Thursday, is where Azinger, in the final round of the 1987 championship, met what threatens to become the defining moment of his career.
While this year's heavy favorite, Nick Faldo, was making 18 ironclad pars to establish his reputation as the consummate major championship player, Azinger was losing a one-stroke lead with two closing bogeys that cost him the title he thinks is the biggest in golf. 'What Can You Do?'
"You come back here and you remember it all," Azinger said today, the second day of his first visit to Muirfield since that loss.
"You think about it. But what can you do? I'm not the kind of person who gives it the "What if?' "


American Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Putnam Trust Co. of Greenwich reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Honeywell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lucky 13: American All-Stars Go Supernova
There were so many hits, so many runs, so many runners circling the bases that the 63rd All-Star Game tonight almost seemed surreal.
They could have stopped counting after six innings.
By the end, the American League -- once the sorrowful doormat in these annual games -- had set a record for hits and tied a record for runs, crushing the National League, 13-6, in front of 59,372 at Jack Murphy Stadium.


Valero Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Shifts in 80's Failed to Ease Segregation
Despite the huge shifts in New York City's population in the 1980's, blacks and whites -- regardless of their incomes -- have remained as segregated as they were when the decade began, according to a block-by-block analysis of the 1990 census.
During a period in which white non-Hispanic New Yorkers became a minority and the gap between black and white median income in some boroughs narrowed greatly, integration of the city's private and public housing proceeded only glacially, if at all.


I'm in Therapy, You're in Therapy
If he wins in November, Bill Clinton will be the first post-therapy President ever to inhabit the White House.
The Arkansas Governor has acknowledged things that would have been used to blackmail a politician in earlier days, talking publicly about how he worked out his troubled marriage and went through family counseling for his brother's drug addiction and his stepfather's alcoholism.


Once Again, Are You Better Off Today?
To the Editor:
"Are you better off today than you were four years ago?" This simple query is one of the most consequential questions that can be asked in politics, especially during a Presidential campaign.
Ronald Reagan, the Great Communicator, asked this question repeatedly on his way to winning the White House in 1980 and again in 1984.
It's a question that's worth asking again during the 1992 Presidential election; but don't expect President Bush to ask it.


Houghton Mifflin Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; Leader in Food Lags in Attention
WHY is the most profitable company in an industry in which the United States is the recognized world leader largely ignored by Wall Street?
The streamlined American food distribution system is the most efficient on earth.
Yet Super Valu Inc., which will become the nation's largest food wholesaler after it completes its acquisition of Wetterau Inc., barely gets a glance from investors.


Nations Break Apart, The World Trembles
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb writes in his fine column "The Curse of Nations" that "It is past time for Americans and others to abandon the worship of national self-determination." Certainly it is time to re-examine it.
The idea begins as the right of the subjects of a state to choose their own government, as asserted in our Declaration of Independence.
Woodrow Wilson did indeed, as Mr.
Gelb writes, put the principle into practice in the Versailles Treaty of 1919.
But he did so despite the misgivings of his Secretary of State, Robert Lansing, who had been a Democratic county chairman in upstate New York and sensed how the idea was becoming infused with ethnic anger.


Eric's in Orange: Lindros Signs a $22 Million Pact With Flyers
Eric Lindros, the 19-year-old junior hockey sensation who has never played a game in the National Hockey League, has reached agreement on a contract with the Philadelphia Flyers that will reportedly make him the highest-paid player in the N.H.L. next season, eclipsing even Wayne Gretzky.
The Flyers, who have scheduled a news conference for this morning, declined to disclose terms of the pact yesterday.
But according to a Toronto lawyer who said he had negotiated the deal, the guaranteed contract will pay Lindros $22 million over five years, an average of $4.4 million a season.


Food Notes
Under the Sun
A two-hour demonstration of solar cooking will be given at noon on Friday and Saturday at the Union Square Greenmarket.
Using a solar cooker instead of gas, electricity, wood or coal, Mary Frank, a sculptor who regularly prepares food with a solar cooker, and Maury Rubin, the owner of City Bakery, will demonstrate the method with a recipe for chicken and one for berries.


Louisiana-Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Hot Pursuit of Iraqi Arms, U.N. Is Proud It's in Baghdad
Steve Flint, a young Briton with the United Nations, was sitting in a white Nissan jeep at 2 o'clock this afternoon with a bunch of local papers on his knee and not very much to do.
The recorded temperature in the capital was 114 degrees but in the direct sun of the parking lot it was considerably hotter.
Inside, air-conditioning made it tolerable.
"Actually these are quite comfortable vehicles for a six-hour stint," Mr.
Flint said.
"I scan the papers, read, play cassettes and translate any petitions the locals give us."


4 Indicted in Plot To Kill Informer
Two men identified as the top leaders of the DeCavalcante crime family in New Jersey were indicted with two others yesterday on Federal charges that they conspired with John Gotti to murder a suspected informer.
Mr.
Gotti, the convicted boss of the Gambino crime family, was named as an unindicted co-conspirator in the case.
He is serving a life sentence for his conviction on Federal murder and racketeering charges in Brooklyn.


Yields Continue to Plunge For Bank Funds and C.D.'s
With the drop in the Federal discount rate and the subsequent cut in the prime lending rate by most big banks nearly two weeks old, banks were still chopping yields on money market accounts and certificates of deposit in the week ended today.
In contrast to the pricing of bank yields in the latest week, discount rates at the Treasury's weekly auction of three- and six-month bills on Monday saw only a slight downtick.
The auction is considered a barometer of what many banks will eventually pay to their depositors.


For Griffey Jr., Three Is Quite the Charm
It had always been somewhat of an ignominious distinction, this nickname junior circuit, the moniker the American League has been stuck with throughout history.
But tonight, the Americans, riding the hot hand of a junior of their own -- Ken Griffey Jr. -- refused for a fifth straight year to take second place against the senior circuit.


Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Smith (A.O.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


United New Mexico Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dinkins Has Raised $893,000 for Re-election Bid
Mayor David N. Dinkins has raised about $893,000 for his re-election effort since January, far less than his main Democratic rival, Andrew J. Stein, has collected, officials from both campaigns said yesterday.
The likely Republican candidate, Rudolph W. Giuliani, has done slightly better than Mr.
Dinkins, raising about $1,025,000 over the same six-month period, said a spokesman for his campaign, Kenneth Frydman.


COMPANY NEWS
COMPUTERLAND CORP., Pleasanton, Calif., a computer reseller and network integrator, completed the acquisition of its largest franchisee, Infomax Inc., Concord, Calif.
HOOGOVENS N.V., a Dutch company, agreed to buy the 60 percent it does not already own of Norsk Blikkvalseverk A.S. from Norsk Jern Holding A.S., a Norwegian packaging steel concern, for an undisclosed sum.


Top Retirement At British Air
At British Airways P.L.C.'s annual meeting today, Lord King of Wartnaby, the airline's chairman since 1981, confirmed that he planned to retire.
Lord King, who oversaw the transformation of British Air from a loss-plagued state-owned company into one of the most profitable carriers, said he was immediately relinquishing his responsibilities.
They will be assumed by Sir Colin Marshall, 58 years old, the company's deputy chairman and chief executive.


NBD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Looking to Baker to Save Bush Anew
As Gov.
Bill Clinton and the Democrats dominate the political landscape this week in New York, a quieter but potentially pivotal Republican drama may play out along the white-water creeks that tumble down the Wind River Mountains onto the 1,700-acre Wyoming ranch of James Addison Baker 3d.
President Bush and Mr.
Baker, the Secretary of State, Presidential soul mate and political kingmaker, are to spend the next two days at the ranch after a cross-country 19-hour stint of American politicking and Mexican diplomacy, including stops at Sequoia National Forest and the baseball All-Star game here.
The White House says they will spend their long-planned retreat fishing for trout and engaging in some time-honored male bonding.


Deprenyl Research Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Metropolitan Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Musicland Stores reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Iranian Wrestler Pursues Dream for U.S.
Matt Ghaffari's first attempt to compete in the 1988 Olympics ended in failure, when he was fourth in the qualifying tournament to represent the United States in the heavyweight division in Greco-Roman wrestling.
No matter.
Like other athletes with family ties elsewhere, he found a second route.
But that alternative, through the country of his birth, Iran, left him saddened, angry and disillusioned.
But now he is elated to have made the United States team for 1992.


Cincinnati Milacron reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


Greek Official Escapes Death In a Rocket Attack in Athens
Greece's Minister of Finance, Ioannis Paleokrassas, narrowly escaped assassination today in a rocket attack on his armored limousine in broad daylight.
A Greek bystander was killed and four others wounded in the incident in the city center.
Responsibility for the attack was claimed by November 17, a militant leftist group.
In a seven-page proclamation sent to a Greek radio station, it said its action was designed to protest the Conservative Government's financial and social policies, and especially the inequalities in the taxation system.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.18
3.28
5.91
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.22
5.59
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.26
3.31
5.73
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.44
6.45
8.11
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.68
7.67
8.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.64
8.60
9.48
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.30
6.28
7.15
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


MBNA Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Champion Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


The $19.92 Lunch: More of a Good Thing
HOSPITALITY evolved into opportunity this week at New York City restaurants, many of which have announced plans to continue their $19.92 bargain lunches beyond this Democratic Convention week.
Among the restaurants that plan to do so are Bouley, the four-star French restaurant on Duane Street (through Aug. 31); the Hudson River Club in the World Financial Center (Sept. 1); le Perigord on East 52d Street (Sept. 7); Felidia on East 58th Street and Gotham Bar and Grill on East 12th Street (July 24, weekdays only), and the Water Club on the East River at 30th Street (July 24).


Where Commercial Arts Meet Computer Age
The scene, in some ways, was as traditional as Leonardo: a nude female model posing before a classroom of art students.
But instead of charcoal and sketch pads, the artists were rendering their drawings with electronic styluses and computerized tablets.
Another day, another workshop at the Center for Creative Imaging.
In a converted 130-year old machine shop where shipwrights once outfitted six-masted schooners, commercial artists, designers and photographers are equipping themselves and their craft for the computer age.


Mark Twain Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Israel's New Broom: How Much Time to Sweep?
On his first full day as Israel's new Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin today savored the high expectations that have accompanied his ascent to political dominance.
The problem, some Israeli political commentators warned, is that he may not enjoy a long honeymoon period to fulfill those expectations.


Apertus Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Excerpts From the Platform: A 'New Covenant' With Americans
Following are excerpts from the platform adopted by the Democratic National Convention last night.
PREAMBLE
The last 12 years have been a nightmare of Republican irresponsibility and neglect.
America's leadership is indifferent at home and uncertain in the world.
Republican mismanagement has disarmed government as an instrument to make our economy work and support the people's most basic values, needs and hopes.
The Republicans brought America a false and fragile prosperity based on borrowing, not income, and so will leave behind a mountain of public debt and a backbreaking annual burden in interest.
It is wrong to borrow to spend on ourselves, leaving our children to pay our debts.


10,000 Protesters Demand Help for People With AIDS
Aiming an angry message at Washington and a shrill plea to Democrats gathering just blocks away in Madison Square Garden, more than 10,000 people marched from Columbus Circle to Times Square yesterday in a rally that was part disco and part wake as marchers demanded better health care for Americans with AIDS.
The march ended in a sweltering 3 P.M. rally, which underscored the spread of the disease and its human cost.
The group presented five demands: increased support from the White House, a national health-care plan, expanded research and educational programs and an end to discrimination against people with AIDS.


Stryker Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Profit at First American
First American Bankshares Inc., the Washington-based bank holding company formerly owned by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, yesterday reported its first quarterly profit in two years.
First American also reported progress in reducing its total of nonperforming assets and shoring up its capital-to-asset ratio.


Miscellany
*
Bruce Lucker, former executive vice president of the entertainment group at Madison Square Garden, New York, has formed World Sports &amp; Entertainment Enterprises Inc., New York.


Time Warner's TV Venture
Time Warner Inc. announced yesterday the formation of a joint venture between two of its units, Time Publishing Ventures and Telepictures Productions, to produce television programming using information gathered by Time Inc.'s 25 publications.
Av Westin, a former vice president for news and documentaries for ABC and a former executive producer for CBS and ABC News, will head the day-to-day development operations for the new unit.


Elsie Driggs Dies at 93; A Precisionist Painter
Elsie Driggs, an early practitioner of Precisionist painting, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 93 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Miss Driggs, who had been hospitalized for a fractured pelvis, died in her sleep, said her daughter, Merriman Gatch of Manhattan.


Meet the Fast-Pitch Dream Team
For Jackie Cipolloni, a 27-year-old in her 11th year as a world-class softball competitor, a certain feeling takes over when she steps on the field with the Raybestos Brakettes fast-pitch team.
"I say to myself, 'Oh, my God, I'm out here playing with these people. I just can't believe it,' " Cipolloni, an outfielder and first baseman from Philadelphia, said recently before a Brakettes doubleheader.
"This is a dream come true."


King World Productions reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Vincent Gets Nod in Owners' Poll
Although no vote for the re-election of Fay Vincent as commissioner can be held for six months, some owners who are concerned about talk of a group's trying to induce Vincent to resign said yesterday that he would be re-elected if the vote were held today.
Vincent has said repeatedly he would not resign, even if 25 owners asked him to, explaining that it would be a bad precedent.
But he has not said if he would run for a second term.


Review/Dance; The Point Of Motion: Patterns
As a choreographer, Robin Becker is obviously interested in the flow of movement.
But she often seemed content to let works just drift along in the program she presented on Friday night as part of the Fiorello Festival, a four-week series of dance events at La Guardia Concert Hall in the High School of Performing Arts in Manhattan.
Ms.
Becker's choreographic patterns were especially attractive in her company's premiere of "Weaving," which she created last year at the Yard, an arts colony in Chilmark, Mass.
June Balish, Akiko Ko and Kalya Yannatos circled one another to recorded music by John Adams.
When they neared, their arms meshed in sculptural formations.
Ms.
Becker also devised striking poses in "Naming," a new duet to a vocal score by Tiye Giraud that was sung by some of the troupe's dancers.
The many intricate ways in which Ms.
Becker and Anthony Phillips clung to each other made the beginning of the piece a kinetic haze.
As clear shapes emerged from this blur, the choreography became increasingly repetitive.
Because "Naming" is only a fragment of a work in progress, it is impossible to say whether Ms.
Becker was emphasizing or merely belaboring her points.
Repetition was decidedly a problem in "Prayer," a new solo to music by Dvorak, in which Ms.
Becker's agitated movements were followed by attempts to achieve serenity.
These calms kept giving way to other storms.
Yet there was no sense of an continuing spiritual struggle.
One type of movement simply alternated with another.
The program also included two works from the company's repertory.
The bendings and swayings of elephants were the inspiration for "Kindred," to a score by Ms.
Giraud.
All too soon, the dance grew lumbering.
Although the work "Branching Waters" had pleasant swirling sequences, the choreography was ultimately swamped by the first movement of Rachmaninoff's imposing Piano Concerto No. 3, which served as its accompaniment.


Cushion of Cool


Star Banc Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Milking Drama at a Dry Convention
Mindful that conflict makes good television, the producers at Cable News Network were delighted when they thought they finally had found a gripping story at what has been a less than suspenseful Democratic National Convention.
Into the cramped production truck where CNN officials make the second-by-second calls on how millions see the convention came word Monday night that former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. was at that moment negotiating with advisers to Gov.
Bill Clinton over his role at the convention.


First Steps


First Security reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


DEMOCRATS, EMPHASIZING UNITY, EMBRACE A MODERATE PLATFORM
With the last challenge to Bill Clinton's hegemony fading, the least contentious, most confident Democratic National Convention in years adopted a platform last night fashioned to match the moderate prescription for victory that he has championed.
Seeking to capitalize on the national mood of discontent with Washington and distaste for politics, the 10,000-word document pledged "a revolution in government."  [ Excerpts from the platform, page A10. ]


Overheating, Venus Orbiter Can't Send Data
The Venus-orbiting Magellan spacecraft, already threatened with suspension of operations to save money, has developed serious transmitter trouble and for more than a week has been unable to send usable data and pictures for the completion of its mapping survey of the Venusian surface.
Engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., said yesterday that the spacecraft's only functioning radio transmitter began overheating last week.
It was a recurrence of similar trouble more than a year ago.
At that time, flight controllers switched to Magellan's second transmitter.
But it has since failed, leaving the mission dependent on the instrument that overheats.


Grenada Sunburst Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. and Mexico Push for the Completion of Free-Trade Pact
President Bush and President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico spurred efforts to reach a North American free-trade accord today, ordering their top trade officials to meet this month to discuss compromises on the remaining disputed issues.
The announcement came after a breakthrough in the negotiations on an agreement that will allow American and Canadian banks, insurance companies and securities firms to compete in Mexico.


60-Minute Gourmet
I HAVE received a number of requests for summer recipes for the grill that can be used in a broiler.
Essentially, any recipe for outdoor grilling can be adapted to indoor use; only the timing, and sometimes the basting technique, differ.
This recipe calls for mahi-mahi, a large, firm-fleshed, medium-moist, flaky fish that also goes by the name dorado and dolphin.
They commonly come from Pacific waters.


BROWN IS GRANTED 20-MINUTE SPEECH
The Democrats yesterday grudgingly yielded former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. 20 minutes on the Madison Square Garden podium tonight to deliver his excoriating denunciation of politics as usual, but made sure he would not speak when the three major networks were scheduled to carry the proceedings.
Still, Mr.
Brown, whose campaign theme has been an assault on the leadership of both parties, preferred to keep arguing yesterday.
His spokesman said that there was "no deal" on the speech and that Mr.
Brown still wanted a prime-time spot that was not based on the condition that he endorse the Clinton-Gore ticket.


Crown Cork &amp; Seal reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A report in the Music Notes column on July 6 about administrative changes at Spoleto Festival U.S.A. provided an outdated professional affiliation for the festival's new board chairman, Homer Burrous.
Mr.
Burrous heads his own firm, Burrous Enterprises Ltd.; he is no longer chairman of the Sunbelt Coca-Cola Bottling Company.


Retail Sales Up 0.5% in June; Consumer Prices Rose 0.3%
Consumers spent a little more money last month than in May, but consumer prices stayed relatively well behaved, the Government reported yesterday.
Both reports underscored the sluggish pace of the economic recovery in the quarter ended in June.


Temple of the Lord in a Tent in the Bronx
Toward evening, when the heat of the summer day had finally broken, they began to arrive by the hundreds under a tent set up on a vacant lot in the Bronx.
Young and old, in shorts and dungarees, in housedresses and sundresses, they came for a touch of that old-time religion usually associated with the American South and the islands of the Caribbean: the outdoor Christian revival meeting.


Corrections
An article yesterday about campaign appearances in New York by Senator Al Gore misidentified an organization he addressed.
It is the American Israel Public Affairs Committee.


Bridge
Experts tend to remember disasters rather than triumphs.
The recent death of Morrie Elis in Florida served to recall the diagramed deal to Oscar Brotman of Bayside, Queens, played when they were both young lions on the tournament circuit.
It occurred in the 1940 Masters Individual Championship in New York City, and Brotman sat West.
This was in the days before the weak two-bid became popular, and he chose two hearts, a strong two-bid.
Even in those days, a raise to game in this sort of situation was generally considered to be weak, so East's bid of four hearts, with a hand that offered prospects of a grand slam, was weird.
But this was, after all, an individual event in which partnership understanding was quite limited.
Lying in Wait With 11 Spades
Elis as South was rightly convinced that the bidding would continue.
He therefore decided to lie in wait with his freak hand, and emerge from the bushes at a later stage.
This proved to be at the six-level, and East-West misjudged by doubling him.
East should perhaps have tried seven diamonds, to guard against the possibility that South would be able to ruff a diamond lead in a seven-heart contract.


Party Politics of a Different Sort: Winners and Losers in the Canapes Race
MANY of the big winners at the Democratic National Convention aren't politicians at all.
They are the caterers, restaurateurs, club owners, hosts and party guests who know how to play the game: do deals, shmooze with old friends and clients, get a reporter's ear.
The stake for people in the party business is convention bookings; for party hosts, it's the highest-profile guests, and for party guests, invitations to the best parties.


City in Iowa Selling $86.6 Million Issue
The City of Muscatine, Iowa, yesterday negotiated the sale of $86.6 million in tax-exempt electric revenue refunding bonds through the First Boston Corporation.
The bonds are priced to offer a maximum yield of about 6.214 percent for an issue due in 2012, with shorter-maturity serial bonds yielding from 3.2 percent in 1993 to 5.5 percent in 2001.


Quayle's Council Is Set Back by Court Ruling
In a decision that could begin to limit the influence of the President's Council on Competitiveness, a Federal appellate court ruled today that the Environmental Protection Agency must review its 1990 decision that allowed automobile batteries, which contain lead, to be burned in municipal incinerators.
The environmental agency had issued the decision on orders from the council, a Cabinet-level group headed by Vice President Dan Quayle and charged by President Bush with reviewing Federal regulations for their costs.


Pinnacle Banc Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. TIGHTENS LIMIT ON NUCLEAR TESTS
In an attempt to forestall Congressional efforts to ban nuclear testing, the Bush Administration told lawmakers today that it was establishing new limits on the number and yield of its nuclear tests.
While offering a political commitment that nuclear testing will proceed at a low level, the new limits will have little or no practical effect on the United States' current nuclear testing program, which has shrunk considerably over the last few years.


Brenco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Motorola Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Pop Life; George Harrison Tour Produces Both CD's And New Attitudes
George Harrison's "Live in Japan" (Warner Brothers), a two-CD set, has just been released, and it's a bit of a surprise.
Mr.
Harrison, the shy former Beatle, is reclusive and rarely tours, instead concentrating on recording projects.
The last time he toured was in 1974.
It was a disaster; Mr.
Harrison, a heavy smoker, lost his voice soon after the tour began.
But this time, after Eric Clapton offered him his band, Mr.
Harrison decided to try touring as a way to quit smoking.
The CD's capture a tough, hard band, including Mr.
Clapton, backing Mr.
Harrison.
Now Mr.
Harrison says he is thinking about doing another tour sometime in the fall.


1992 Ticket Puts Council Of Moderates To Stiff Test
Since its creation, the Democratic Leadership Council has argued that it understands how to put a Democrat back in the White House.
Now, it will be put to the test.
"If we don't win with this ticket, everything we've been talking about is on the line," said Senator John B. Breaux of Louisiana, the chairman of the group.


Today's Television
Major Networks ABC (Channel 7 in New York) 10 P.M. to 11 P.M. 11:30 P.M. to midnight, "Nightline," live from Madison Square Garden.
CBS (Channel 2 in New York) 9 P.M. to 11 P.M.
NBC (Channel 4 in New York) 10 P.M. to 11 P.M.
PBS (Channel 13 in New York) 8 P.M. to 11 P.M.
Other Networks CNN (Channel varies by cable system) 4:30 P.M. to 12:30 A.M.
C-SPAN (Channel varies by cable system) Gavel to gavel, or about 5 P.M. to 11:30 P.M.
CNBC (Channel varies by cable system) Periodic updates from 6:30 A.M to 7 P.M.
CROSSWALKS (Available only in New York City; channel varies by borough) From 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. the city's municipal access channel will rebroadcast the previous night's events.


Amid Fears About a Fetal Test, Many Are Advising Against It
SOME leading experts on birth defects are beginning to fear that a widely used prenatal test to detect birth defects might actually be causing them in a small number of babies.
Others say the reports of problems with the test, chorionic villus sampling, or C.V.S., are based on an exaggerated interpretation of random statistical fluctuations.


Reviews/Rock; Singer Working The Territory Of Irish Soul
Has "The Commitments," with all its bogus grit, spawned a new school of Irish soul singing?
So it seems from the emergence of Suzanne Rhatigan, who performed last Wednesday night at Tilt, the successor to the club Heartbreak at 179 Varick Street in SoHo.
Ms.
Rhatigan, who is from Dublin, works the updated soul territory of Bonnie Raitt.
Unlike Ms.
Raitt, she writes or co-writes her own songs, which find some individual ways to probe romantic tension and attraction: "Go to hell, but don't you take my keys." At Tilt, as on her debut album, "To Hell With Love" (Imago), her fine-tuned band chugged along with the understated ease and smooth dynamics derived from serious study of Memphis soul music.


Peter, Paul and Mary Still Sing the Good Fight
THE scene is a two-story living room on the Upper West Side.
Immense Chinese paintings, elegant Persian carpets, a coffee table made of packing boxes.
Stacks of folding chairs await a voter registration benefit.
Peter, Paul and Mary are practicing.
"There is only one people," they sing.
"We are one and the same."


Personal Health
WHEN it comes to buying and wearing shoes, many people, women in particular, pay far too little attention to how a shoe fits and often end up with shoes that are too small in front, too loose in back, inadequately cushioned or otherwise inappropriate for the wearer or the use to which they will be put.
The unhappy results of wearing ill-fitting shoes -- from blisters and bunions to neuromas and backaches -- are helping to make thriving practices for podiatrists, orthopedists and chiropractors.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
A contributor's recent reminiscence of a faded billboard in Queens advertising "Tuxedos and Full Dress" brought to mind the time I moved from a sleepy New Hampshire town to the rough-and-tumble neighborhood of Hell's Kitchen in Manhattan.
I came, like so many before me, drawn to New York's cultural scene
Twenty-four hours after receiving my high school diploma I was walking on 42d Street.
It was while gawking at the tawdriness with a wonder that can overwhelm a small-town boy that I discovered, quite by accident, the glory of New York.


LSI Logic Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


The Walls and the Will of Dubrovnik
More than 4,000 shells are said to have fallen on the old town of Dubrovnik.
One hit and damaged the cupola of its famous clock tower.
The roof of the Franciscan church has been smashed in.
Several lesser buildings have been turned to rubble.
Many of the statues and marble facades are covered with wooden shields to protect them from shrapnel.
"We have been under attack since October," said Pavel Poljanic, the Mayor.
"This is the longest and most brutal attack in our very long history."


Once Again, Are You Better Off Today?; Too Lazy to Vote
To the Editor:
It is tiresome to read about eligible voters who say they won't vote because there is no real choice among candidates, because they are disgusted with politics and politicians or for other equally stupid reasons.
The real reasons are that they are too dimwitted to understand the issues or the candidates, and they are too lazy to take the trouble to study them.
By not voting they are giving up their power to change what they don't like, if they really know what they don't like.
The majority of those I see on television or quoted in the newspapers as not intending to vote seem out of the real world anyway, uninformed, uneducated, apathetic.
Perhaps it is better that they don't vote.
What good is a vote based on emotion, appearance or other superficialities?
That's what has given us more than 20 years of cartoon characters in the White House and comic-opera executive appointees.


No Headline
E.
Bright Wilson, former chairman of the chemistry department at Harvard University and a leader in the study of molecules through their microwave emissions, died on Sunday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 83 years old.
He died of pneumonia but had been suffering from Parkinson's disease since the late 1970's, the university said.


Storm Halts Bid for Record
A relentless storm at sea dashed the hopes of an Italian powerboat team yesterday by forcing the 14-man crew to abandon plans to break the westbound trans-Atlantic speed record.
The 220-foot Destriero, a $50 million custom-built powerboat, slowed to a relative crawl -- from an average speed of nearly 50 miles per hour to 20 -- as it bucked 12-foot seas and winds of 35 miles per hour.
While the boat was operating without incident, the team decided early yesterday that time had run out.


The Domesticated Democrats; They Look Abroad, Without a Vision
Unremarkable and circumspect to a fault.
That fairly describes the foreign policy ideas in the platform adopted yesterday by a Democratic Party eager not to make waves.
Though the chapter on national security promises "a compelling vision for global leadership at the dawn of a new era," what it delivers is a cursory grab-bag of generalities mixed with a few brighter passages -- in short, a squandered opportunity for leadership.
The best that can be said is that the platform does no harm: it does not bind Bill Clinton and Al Gore to premature or doctrinaire strategies.
Thus it calls for considering, without mandating, new sanctions against South Africa.
It speaks of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel without saying the United States Embassy should be moved there from Tel Aviv.


Santa Monica Journal; Where Only the Ocean Makes Waves
Jane Fonda has moved to Montana, but this seaside town still has movie stars and fitness factories, along with Tom Hayden and a social conscience.
It has art for the masses -- like the two lifeguard chairs that hum in the wind, badly, some residents complain -- storm drain sensors that are activated by pollutants to summon pump trucks, and a city attorney who runs his own feeding program for the homeless on Saturdays.
This year the People's Republic of Santa Monica, as it has been called, had something else it hadn't had in 20 years -- a deficit.
"The recession caught up with us," said a City Council member, Denny Zane, who is an environmental consultant.


American Business Information Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cheshire Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


People
*
John Balson was named to the new position of senior vice president of business development at Interpublic Group of Companies, New York.
The longtime advertising and media executive most recently was a consultant.
A spokesman for Interpublic confirmed a report on his hiring in this week's Adweek, but said, contrary to the report, that Mr.
Balson would not work solely on Interpublic's Coca-Cola Company account.


Today's Schedule
5:00 P.M.
Call to Order; "The Star-Spangled Banner" by the Harlem Boys Choir. 5:10 P.M.
Speech Mayor Maynard Jackson of Atlanta. 5:20 P.M.
Minority report discussion by representatives from the campaign of Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California.
Opposing views by Mayors Jerry Abramson of Louisville, Ky., and Jan Levity Jones of Las Vegas, Nev. 6:00 P.M.
Speakers on democratic values: Representative Barbara B. Kennelly of Connecticut, Representative Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, Ruth Messinger, Manhattan borough president; Keith Geiger, president of National Education Association; Gov.
Evan Bayh of Indiana, and Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska 7:15 P.M.
Introduction of film on Robert F. Kennedy by Representative Joseph P. Kennedy of Massachusetts. 7:30 P.M.
Robert F. Kennedy film.
Speech by Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts 7:45 P.M.
Nominating process: Former Governor Brown will speak and a floor demonstration is likely. 8:30 P.M.
Speech by Paul E. Tsongas. 9:00 P.M.
Nomination of Gov.
Bill Clinton by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York Nomination, seconded by Representative Maxine Waters of California and Representative Dave McGurdy of Oklahoma 10:00 P.M.
Roll call of states.
THURSDAY Nomination of Senator Al Gore for Vice President and acceptance.
Speech by Governor Clinton accepting the Presidential nomination.


Wolohan Lumber reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
They're rolling out the red carpet for two visitors at nine children's camps on the East and West Coasts, but it's not for Mom and Dad.
It's for two Tibetan Buddhist educators. (Don't worry, campers, parents will be along on visiting day.)
PHUNTSOK NAMGYAL and TENZIN SANGPO, the principals of two Tibetan village schools in India, will spend five weeks visiting a cross section of Jewish summer camps, ranging from Orthodox to Reform to Yiddish.
Their goal: to gain understanding into how Jews remain committed to their religion and its traditions despite the pull of assimilation.


Son of Ex-United Way Chief Resigns
Robert D. Aramony, son of the former president of United Way of America who was forced to resign five months ago, plans to quit as head of a United Way spinoff company.
For two years Robert Aramony has been president of Sales Service/America Inc., a catalogue company that sells items like coffee mugs, lapel pins and posters with the United Way logo to local United Way organizations.
He submitted his resignation late last month, but Sales Service/America's board asked him to stay on until a successor was chosen later this summer.


Harmonia Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Some Electricity Is Restored To Key Sarajevo Buildings
Electricity was restored to a few key buildings in Sarajevo today after the total blackout imposed by Serbian nationalist forces on Monday, but most of the city's 400,000 people continued to endure the Serbian siege without power or running water.
The state-owned electrical utility managed to restore a partial link to the power grid outside the city, and the limited electricity made available, amounting to about 3 percent of the city's normal use, was fed to buildings like hospitals, the army headquarters, the main telephone switching center and the Presidency, seat of the Government.


Books of The Times; Supreme Court: Personal and Institutional Drama
Turning Right  The Making of the Rehnquist Supreme Court  By David G. Savage  Illustrated. 473 pages.
John Wiley &amp; Sons. $22.95.
Capitol Games  Clarence Thomas, Anita Hill and the Story of a Supreme Court Nomination  By Timothy M. Phelps and Helen Winternitz  458 pages.
Hyperion. $24.95.
The national conventions nominate candidates; the winner in this election will almost surely nominate one or more Associate Justices of the Supreme Court in the next four years.


Puget Sound Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Keene Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


I.A.A.F. Takes Discus Away From Keshmiri
Not since Mac Wilkens in 1976 has the United States won the Olympic gold medal in the discus throw.
This year was to be the next.
Kami Keshmiri, a hulking 23-year-old thrower from Reno, has been the world leader since late May with an effort of 232 feet 5 inches.
But it now appears Keshmiri's gold-medal chances have been washed away by a drug test.
The International Amateur Athletic Federation, the world governing body for track and field, yesterday suspended Keshmiri for a drug test that produced evidence of the anabolic steroid, methanolone, a banned substance.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 10
July 3
July 12
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.2
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
221.7
222.7
214.2
Distillate stocks
107.4
103.7
117.1
Crude imports, daily
7.4
5.7
5.8
Product imports, daily
2.1
2.2
1.5
Crude stocks
330.1
327.2
349.7
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
92.4
92.9
86.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Outdoor Fashion Show for Democrats: 'This Is So New York'
FORGETTING politics for a moment, more than 1,000 Democratic Convention delegates and guests gathered yesterday on the Great Lawn of Central Park for some serious business -- a fashion show.
It was one of those rare moments in the annals of fashion when an audience of real women from every corner of the nation got to see the latest Seventh Avenue creations firsthand.


Enjoying the Flavor of Eggplant Without the Fat
EGGPLANT has always posed a problem for people who want to reduce the amount of fat they eat because it is usually sauteed to bring out its flavor.
Eggplant soaks up oil like a sponge, and thus requires vast quantities of it.
An alternative is broiling or grilling.
All the eggplant needs is a light spraying of oil to keep it from burning while it softens and sweetens.
Or, you can brush it lightly with olive oil.


Traffic Alert
Because of traffic congestion expected from the Democratic National Convention, New York City transportation officials have issued a gridlock alert through tomorrow and urge motorists to take public transportation.
The Department of Transportation said these will be the most congested areas: *
Madison Square Garden, between Seventh and Eighth Avenues and 31st and 34th streets. *
Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, 11th Avenue between 34th and 39th streets. *
Sheraton Hotel, 52d Street between Seventh and Eighth avenues. *
New York Hilton, Sixth Avenue between 53d and 54th streets. * 31st Street and 33d Street will be closed between Seventh and Eighth avenues from 2 P.M. to midnight each day of the convention.
There will also be these daily street closings: TODAY Broadway between 42d and 49th streets will be closed from 11:30 A.M. to 1 P.M. because of the Broadway on Broadway outdoor concert.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a Washington at Work article on Monday about Frank M. Lemay, a Foreign Service officer, misstated the position of Richard T. McCormack, a former Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, on new credit guarantees to Iraq in 1989.
Mr.
McCormack approved the program on the condition that the guarantees be provided in stages and that the program include safeguards.


No Headline
"The Governor's jogging motto is: Start slow and taper off. -- JAMES CARVILLE, explaining Bill Clinton's pace around the Central Park reservoir.  [ A7:2 ]


In Plans to Improve Schools, a Grab Bag of Ideas and Ideologies
Sprung for the summer, a team of educators gathered on the shores of Lake George last week to begin reinventing the American school.
The blueprints this group and 10 others around the country have started to sketch reveal the state of the American education reform movement: what some of today's most admired thinkers about education believe is wrong with schools, and what they say should be done to fix them.
Last year, President Bush called on the best minds in the nation to dream up plans for "New American Schools," which he said would transform education by serving as models and goads to regular schools.
Last week, a privately funded group set up at the President's behest picked 11 winners from 686 proposals, including the group at Lake George, known as the National Alliance for Restructuring Education.


Primerica Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


O'Sullivan Grabs for The Ball And a Job
Dan O'Sullivan would like nothing better than to pick up a job this summer doing what he likes to do, and doing it for the minimum wage.
At 6 feet 11 inches and 235 pounds, what O'Sullivan likes to do is play professional basketball, and the minimum wage he is seeking is a $125,000 contract to play for the Nets.
He has been working out with the team at Fairleigh Dickinson University, where the Nets held the last session of their two-practices-a-day summer camp today.
The Nets begin summer-league play tonight against the Boston Celtics at the Westchester County Center in White Plains.


Anthony Hass, Executive, 68
Anthony Hass, a retired vice president for external development at the General Foods Corporation, died Monday at his home in Washington.
He was 68 years old.
Mr.
Hass also had a home in Manhattan.
The cause of death was pancreatic cancer, his family said.


American City Business Journals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Standard Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Paine Webber Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reviews/Rock; Ex-Lemonhead Pairs Up
Current darlings of the college-rock set, both Evan Dando of the group Lemonheads and Juliana Hatfield, formerly of the Blake Babies, boast cuteness in spades.
Neither has a particularly great voice, but Ms.
Hatfield's little-girl peep and Mr.
Dando's scruffy husk can both express a kind of friendly, winsome melancholy.
Neither are they noticeably exceptional musicians: although both have been recording and performing since the mid-1980's, each plays with the unschooled crudity of adolescent garage punks.
As songwriters, too -- as evidenced on Ms.
Hatfield's recent solo album "Hey Babe" (Mammoth) and the Lemonheads' fifth and most recent effort, "It's a Shame About Ray" (Atlantic) -- both tend toward bubblegum-sweet melodies and quirky little romantic narratives using the half-mature language of a collegiate creative-writing class.
"Everybody loves me -- everybody but you," cries Ms.
Hatfield in one song.


Blasting the Loudspeakers for Science
NASA and Michael Jackson now have more in common than the moon walk.
The space agency has paid for a study on sonic booms that uses the same speakers that the pop singer used on his last tour.
The study, being conducted by the Georgia Institute of Technology, is designed to measure the impact of sonic booms on people and buildings.
The research is a small piece of the space agency's program to develop a supersonic commercial airplane larger and faster than the Concorde.
The shape of a plane has an impact on the loudness of sonic booms, explosive noises that are an unwelcome byproduct of traveling faster than the speed of sound.
By studying the sonic booms, and their effect on domestic bliss, Georgia Tech hopes to help designers determine the ideal shape for an airplane that would produce the least offensive booms.
Wall of Monster Speakers
At the heart of the study is a wall of speakers made by Intersonics Inc., in Northbrook, Ill.
The speakers are several hundred times more powerful than the speakers in most living rooms, said Thomas Danley, the general manager of Intersonics.
The rock group U2 is currently using 16 of the monster speakers to blast audiences on its current world tour.


Meridian Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mandela in New York to Address the United Nations


Arkansas Freightways reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Magna Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Lady Edna Is Gone But Not From Long Beach
For four years the prim and stately Lady Edna II, music wafting from her three wedding-cake decks, plied the waters off Long Island, enchanting her guests by moonlight while aggravating people who lived along the channels that took her out to sea.
After being ravaged by fire Monday, the 70-foot party boat went down off the beach here, and in a final statement to Long Beach, coughed up enough fuel today to send nine lifeguards to emergency rooms, and cause the closing of a mile and half of beach on one of the hottest days of the year.


INB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Queens Police Officer Arrested on Charge He Sold Cocaine
A New York City police officer was arrested yesterday on charges that he sold cocaine to an undercover detective last March at his home on Long Island.
The officer, Robert C. Daube of the 107th Precinct in Fresh Meadows, Queens, was the eighth New York City officer arrested on drug dealing charges by Suffolk County detectives in the last two months.
In May, six Brooklyn officers were arrested on charges of trafficking in cocaine, sometimes on their beats.
A seventh officer was arrested for selling steroids.


AMERICAN TAKES HELM IN BELGRADE
Promising to halt the bloodshed in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a Serbian-American millionaire from California was sworn in today as the new Yugoslavia's first Prime Minister.
"We respect the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina is an independent state," said Milan Panic, a Belgrade-born immigrant to the United States whose Cabinet was given a four-year mandate by a 99-33 vote of Parliament this afternoon.
"The most important thing for all Serbs is to stop shooting."


It's Father's Turn to Interrupt


LeaRonal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Rubbermaid Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


International Paper reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


All-Star Blowout


First Fidelity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


UJB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


With Skilled Jobs Unfilled, Vocational Training Changes Course
Once a backwater for students who were not college bound, vocational education is shedding its second-class image as more educators, business executives and policymakers view improved job training as an answer to many of the nation's economic and social woes.
But the rehabilitation will take many years and millions of dollars.
American public schools have emphasized academics over vocational education for so long, educators and policymakers say, that most job-training courses offered in high schools are outdated.


Colt 45 Account May Go Into Review
A spokesman for the G. Heileman Brewing Company said that the company was talking to other agencies on its Colt 45 Malt Liquor account, now at Della Femina, McNamee in New York.
Louise McNamee, the agency's president and chief executive, confirmed a report in this week's issue of Adweek magazine that the brewer had spoken to other agencies on the account, with billings estimated at $6 million to $8 million.
But she said this is not a formal review.


Jackson Faces New Reality He Talks the Old Talk But Lacks the Old Fire
The Rev. Jesse Jackson faced up to political reality last night.
He showed up on the podium of the Democratic National Convention on Bill Clinton's terms, and he did it when the party chairman, Ronald H. Brown, told him to.


Accounts
*
The Monsanto Chemical Co. fiber division, St.
Louis, to Marinelli Communications, New York, as creative agency of record for its Wear-Dated carpet products, and Advanswers, St.
Louis, as media agency of record.
The account has been handled on a project basis by various agencies for the last two years.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Burberrys Ltd., New York, to Griffin Bacal Inc., New York, to handle the apparel and accessory chain's advertising, previously handled by Bloom FCA, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


Home Federal Savings Bank (St. Louis) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Campaigns
*
To introduce American Dimensions, a collection aimed at younger families from Ethan Allen Inc., Grey Advertising, New York, created a multimedia campaign focusing on brightly colored furniture meant to be used, not admired or covered with plastic slip covers.
The campaign carries the theme "Ethan Allen home interiors. It's all about living," replacing the theme "For a very important part of the world called home." It is the first campaign for Ethan Allen produced by Grey since the agency was awarded the account following the closing of Ethan Allen's previous shop, Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver, New York, which was owned by Grey.


Contractors Reap Gains Promised by Convention
In the scramble for the millions of dollars of business generated by New York City's third Democratic convention in 16 years, some well-connected (or just connected) local companies snared big contracts, while others fought over the relative scraps and still others lost out as irrevocably as Edmund G. Brown Jr.
The largest city contract, for a nearly $6 million renovation of Madison Square Garden, went to AJ Contracting Company of Manhattan, which counts a former city official as an executive vice president.
It then subcontracted $355,000 in carpentry work to a company named in a mob-related bid-rigging case, Nastasi White Inc. of Flushing, Queens.
A less lucrative but highly prestigious contract went to Howard J. Rubenstein Associates.
Mr.
Rubenstein, crowned as the public relations bonanza's official public relations man, says he is losing money on his $25,000 consultant's contract.


Review/Television; Once More Unto the Pool, Dear Hunks
Recipe for a hit show: pretty faces, sculptured bodies, tidy crises and, if possible, a swimming pool.
Fox Broadcasting is especially adept at whipping up this kind of entertainment confection.
First, there was "Beverly Hills 90210" and its bevy of gorgeously earnest high-school teens.
Now, Wednesdays at 9 P.M., there's "Melrose Place" and a representative collection of adorably struggling twentysomethings.
Shameless, but not bad.
You were expecting Proust?
Melrose is supposed to be the hip section of Los Angeles, the area where the young people hang out.
The producers compare it to trendy Carnaby Street in 1960's London, but actually it comes off looking more like seedy suburbia in the party's-over late 1980's.
The local club of choice seems to be Shooters Bar and Grill, a somewhat dark emporium with pool tables.
And over on decidedly downscale Melrose Place, No. 4616, most of the series' major characters live in apartments grouped around the communal pool.


Polaroid Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Lance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


'Death and Maiden' Closing
"Death and the Maiden," a drama by Ariel Dorfman, is to end its limited run after the matinee on Aug. 2 at the Brooks Atkinson Theater, 256 West 47th Street.
That matinee of the play, directed by Mike Nichols and starring Glenn Close, Richard Dreyfuss and Gene Hackman, will be its 159th regular performance; it had 33 previews.


Review/Music; Romance Colors The Tokyo Vision
The chamber music component of the Mostly Mozart Festival offers listeners the chance to compare competing ensembles playing similar repertory in close succession.
Last week, the Cleveland Quartet presented one view of the string quartet ideal, a pristine, tightly focused and finely polished sound.
On Monday evening, the Tokyo String Quartet offered an alternative approach.
The Tokyo players -- Peter Oundjian and Kikuei Ikeda, violinists, Kazuhide Isomura, violist, and Sadao Harada, cellist -- aim no lower than their Cleveland colleagues, nor is their playing less precise.
But their concept of sound is rooted in breadth and lushness that they apply equally to Mozart and Mendelssohn.


Public &amp; Private; The Two Faces Of Eve
It is no longer the fashion to lie about the everyday lives of women.
Gone are the days when we pretended that caring for children and cooking meals were always rewarding.
Gone are the days when we insisted that a real woman found it more satisfying to provide comfort for those who did great things in the world than to do great things in the world herself.
Now we only insist on lying about the lives of women whose husbands are running for President.


Review/Film; Cannibalism, Caprice and Pomp: Indirect Portrait of an Emperor
The man on television denies the charges against him with great indignation, even though he has been accused of cannibalism and there are strong indications the stories are true.
A great many citizens will swear that Jean-Bedel Bokassa, the deposed Emperor Bokassa I of the Central African Republic, did indeed eat his countrymen and that he maimed and murdered others in comparably horrifying ways.
The oversize refrigerator and oven in his quarters have long since been abandoned, but they are reminders of the Bokassa regime and its bloodthirsty ways.
The people of the Central African Republic no longer see much of Bokassa since he is incommunicado (with a death sentence commuted to life imprisonment) in a tiny cell.
Nor was he at the disposal of Werner Herzog.
So Mr.
Herzog's haunting documentary "Echoes From a Somber Empire," which opens today at the Film Forum, must work obliquely to summon images of this eccentric, benighted ruler and the damage he left behind.


Oneok Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Top Italian Politician Called in Graft Inquiry
Former Foreign Minister Gianni de Michelis has been told he is under investigation in connection with a corruption scandal in Venice, his hometown and political power base, the Italian news agency Ansa and television stations said tonight.
There was no immediate official confirmation, and the former official called the accusations groundless.


Excerpts From Remarks Delivered by Jackson and Carter at the Convention
Following are excerpts from remarks delivered at the Democratic National Convention by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and former President Jimmy Carter, as transcribed by The New York Times.
Rev.
Jesse Jackson
President Bill Clinton, you have survived -- you have survived a tough spring.
It will make you stronger for the fall.
With your stripes you must heal and make us better.
The hopes of many depend upon your quest.
Be comforted that you do not stand alone.


Job Changes At Magazines
In a restructuring of its top management, K-III Magazines yesterday named Janice Grossman, publisher of Seventeen, and Terrence W. Russell, publisher of Automobile, to new positions as group publishers.
The group headed by Ms.
Grossman will include Soap Opera Digest, Soap Opera Weekly and Seventeen.
Mr.
Russell's group will include Premiere and Automobile.
K-III's other two magazines, New York and New Woman, will not be affected.


Baker to Visit Mideast in Aura of Hope
Acting swiftly to get the Middle East peace process moving now that Yitzhak Rabin is Israel's Prime Minister, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d will visit five nations in the region over the next week, the State Department said today.
The trip is an opportunity for the Bush Administration to advance the peace talks while also improving the President's flagging political position at home, especially among Jewish voters who regard Mr.
Bush as too tough on Israel.
The trip was prompted by an invitation from Mr.
Rabin.


Boy, 8, Critically Wounded By Stray Bullet, Police Say
An 8-year-old boy who was playing in a friend's apartment in Harlem was shot in the head and critically wounded yesterday afternoon.
Early this morning, the police were still trying to determine the circumstances of the child's shooting.
The police did not know who fired the single shot that struck the boy, nor had they determined whether the bullet came from inside the fifth-floor apartment, at 171 West 133d Street, or passed through an open window from the street, said Sgt.
Sesar Alicea of the 32d Precinct Detective Squad.


Jets and O'Brien Miles And $500,000 Apart
Jets quarterback Ken O'Brien was a no-show today for the beginning of the team's training camp here at Hofstra University.
His absence came as no surprise to anyone who has followed the details of O'Brien's negotiations with the team during the last five months.
Backup quarterback Troy Taylor and guard Dave Cadigan joined O'Brien as the only Jets who remain unsigned, and they, too, did not report.
Players who aren't under contract can't participate in training camp.


Oxford Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Financial Scene for Tour de France Teams: Lots of Valleys
By the time last year's Tour de France approached the mountains after the usual first 10 days on the plains, the Buckler bicycle team had registered a victory or two and had been close in other daily stages.
No more.
Plagued by economic uncertainty, which has affected nearly one-third of the 22 teams in the Tour de France, Buckler has not come close to a victory this year.


Coca-Cola Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ON THE RIVER WITH: Pam Houston; Adventure, a Cure for Bad-Love Blues
IT'S a blue-sky day, and the Yampa River is pumping like a wet pulse when Pam Houston tells you to push off.
"Just push the raft and jump in fast," she says.
"I mean it. The river's going to take the boat, and I won't be able to stop for almost a mile."
The mud squishes sickeningly around your ankles.
The water, melted snow, lashes cold, red welts up to your knees as you wade and heave.
The spank of the river makes you yelp like a newborn as you dive toward the 15 1/2-foot, custom-fitted red rubber raft.


METRO DIGEST
NURSE INFECTED WITH AIDS WINS SUIT
A judge has ordered New York State to pay a Utica nurse $5.4 million after she contracted the AIDS virus from a prisoner during a frenzied scuffle at a hospital in 1988.
The judge determined that two corrections officers assigned to the prisoner had done nothing to restrain him as he punched and kicked at a medical team and the nurse was jabbed with a hypodermic needle containing his infected blood.
A1.
AN ASSAULT ON ASSAULT WEAPONS
Governor Florio of New Jersey, joined by Police Commissioner Brown of New York City, Curtis Sliwa, the founder of the Guardian Angels, and a phalanx of members of Congress from New York and New Jersey called for a nationwide ban on assault weapons similar to laws on the books in New York City and New Jersey.
B5.
NEW YORK CITY


KeyCorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cavalier Homes Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to June 26


School Chief Is Dismissed In Bias Dispute
A veteran school superintendent in the northeast Bronx has been ousted from his job amid charges that he was indifferent to the needs of black students, and the dismissal has prompted countercharges that his chief accuser is biased against Jews.
The removal of Dr.
Frank C. Arricale, superintendent of District 11, which embraces Co-op City and Williamsbridge, came last week when the district board, which had appeared ready to renew Dr.
Arricale's contract, voted 5 to 4 not to do so.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Traded Jose Mesa, pitcher, to the Cleveland Indians for Kyle Washington, outfielder.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Signed Jamie Howard, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.


Protester Thrusts Fetus At a Surprised Clinton
Gov.
Bill Clinton's heavily scripted convention schedule was marred yesterday by an anti-abortion protester who thrust a fetus in a plastic container at the Democratic Presidential candidate as he was leaving his hotel for a morning jog.
The incident provided a striking counterpoint to the efforts of the Clinton campaign and the Democratic National Committee to highlight the importance of women and abortion rights in the party's 1992 Presidential campaign.


Convention Summary
WITH PLATFORM, DEMOCRATS AIM FOR THE MIDDLE
Seeking a middle ground between unfettered capitalism and welfare-state economics, the Democrats' platform stresses conservative values and liberal programs.
The platform is salted with phrases like "personal responsibility" and "market forces," but it also endorses universal medical insurance and higher taxes on the wealthy.
GOV.
BROWN STILL TALKING ABOUT TALKING AT CONVENTION
The Democrats grudgingly yielded former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. 20 minutes at the podium on Wednesday -- when the three major networks were not scheduled to carry the proceedings.
But unlike the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, who chose to cooperate with the party, Mr.
Brown preferred to keep arguing.
His spokesman said there was "no deal," and that he wanted a prime-time slot unconditioned on an endorsement.
DEMOCRATS AND DEMONSTRATORS VIE FOR FACE TIME
The convention may be a ratings bust, but New York's Democrats and demonstrators are treating it like the opportunity of a politicial lifetime.
For politicians, tactics for garnering exposure vary from elbowing for position in a staged photo to cruising through 20 events daily.
For demonstators, group performance is what counts: 10,000 people held a rally that was part disco and part wake to demand better care for Americans with AIDS.
WHO'S THAT RADICAL IN THE BROOKS BROTHERS SHIRT?
Conventioners figured out to spot New Yorkers, but they were still having trouble separating the moderates from the progressives at their parties.
Style cues proved treacherous.


Corrections
A brief article in some editions yesterday about a rally in conjunction with the Democratic National Convention characterized its purpose incorrectly.
The rally opposed violence against women; it did not advocate abortion rights.


Diebold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


National City Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Peacekeepers Occupy Former Soviet Region
A Russian-Georgian peacekeeping force wearing United Nations blue began operations today to stop the fighting in the South Ossetia region of Georgia.
It was the first such peacekeeping effort in the former Soviet Union, which has been ripped by conflict between long-suppressed nationalities.


U.S. Trust Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Engraph Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Electronics Maker Posts Lower Profit
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said yesterday that high interest costs and the weak economic recovery combined to push second-quarter net earnings down 3.9 percent, to $122 million, from $127 million a year earlier.
The decline translated into a 14.6 percent drop in earnings per share, to 35 cents for the quarter from 41 cents a year earlier, because the company sold an additional 54 million shares of stock as part of its efforts to shore up the finances of the troubled Westinghouse Credit Corporation.
That financial bailout also led the company to borrow money, raising interest costs outside Westinghouse Credit by 17.5 percent, to $67 million, from $57 million from a year earlier.


Nederlander Resignation
Arthur Rubin, the executive vice president and general manager of the Nederlander Organization, resigned on Monday, the theater chain announced.
Through a spokesman, Howard J. Rubenstein, Mr.
Rubin said that he had resigned "in order to pursue other personal business interests," and that he would continue to serve as a consultant to the organization.
His interim replacement is Leo K. Cohen, the operations manager for the Nederlanders.


Chairman of Hartmarx Hands Over Reins
Harvey A. Weinberg, chairman and chief executive of the Hartmarx Corporation, unexpectedly handed over the reins of the embattled apparel manufacturing and retail company yesterday to Elbert O. Hand, its president.
Mr.
Weinberg's departure signals that the company, which has struggled to meet its debt repayment schedules as its stores have bled sales, will focus its efforts on sustaining its manufacturing business.
It makes Hart Schaffner &amp; Marx and Austin Reed suits among other labels, as well as several men's and women's sportswear lines, and operates Wallachs, Raleighs and Field Bros. stores.


A TV Season of Fact, More or Less
What's real on television?
That question should be even harder to answer in the next television season.
The stew of news-magazine programs, so-called reality programs that mix actual events with "recreations," movies and mini-series billed as based on a true story and thinly fictionalized versions of headline-making crimes will be stirred even more aggressively by network programmers who have concluded that the television audience finds fact -- or at least the suggestion of it -- more enticing than fiction.


Cache reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


10,000 AIDS Protesters Demand a Better System


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Croatia, Georgia, Albania Denied Berths  Croatia, Georgia and Albania were denied berths yesterday in next season's European club soccer tournaments after being rated dangerous regions.
U.E.F.A., European soccer's governing body, did admit nine new countries to today's first-round draw for the three European Cup competitions.
Russia, Ukraine, the three Baltic states, Slovenia, Israel, Liechtenstein and the Faroe Islands met the U.E.F.A. emergency committee's requirements on safety and match organization.
Yugoslavia will not be in the draw because of the United Nations sanctions.
The European Cup begins Sept. 16 with first-round, first-leg games. (AP) TENNIS


Pioneer Standard Electronics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Marriott Corp.  reports earnings for 12wks to June 19


New York Politicians Jockeying for Slice of Fame at Convention
Which of these is not like the other: Bob Kerrey, Lee H. Hamilton, Barbara B. Kennelly, Ruth W. Messinger?
Hint: Only one needs a visitor's pass to get into Congress.
But tonight Ms.
Messinger, the Manhattan Borough President, is to join that trio of Capitol Hill regulars on the podium at Madison Square Garden, each assigned to make a brief speech on "Democratic Values." It may be the coup of the week among New York's hometown Democrats, all of whom are using the convention week to jockey for their 15 minutes of fame (actually, 6 minutes in Ms. Messinger's case).


United Carolina Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ALC Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Even in the U.S., Ideology Infects Language; Long Before Marx
To the Editor:
Doris Lessing's contention in "Language and the Lunatic Fringe" (Op Ed, June 26) that political correctness is the intellectual progeny of Communism is full of amusing, though apparently unintended, irony.
Surely she must realize that political correctness is a pejorative coined by those who disagree with the prevailing values of academia in order to discredit them.
That political correctness in one form or another has always existed in every human institution is self-evident: the phrase is only the latest weapon of choice in the battle of ideologues.
Attributing "pedantries and verbosities" and "language that seemed designed to fill up as much space as possible without actually saying anything" solely to Communism and its philosophical antecedents is either intellectual myopia or disingenuous posturing by Ms.
Lessing.
Euphemism, obfuscation and evasion: have they not been the hallmark of American politics since long before the advent of Communism?


Attendance In Majors Taking A Dip
After a season that drew a record number of fans -- almost 57 million -- major league baseball attendance has lost 555,000 paying fans so far this year.
At the All-Star break, attendance of 19 of the 26 clubs was down from the corresponding period last season, and total attendance has slipped by 1.8 percent.
No one reason is readily apparent for the decrease, from 30,598,159 to 30,043,250, but it has not yet created panic in the upper echelon of the sport.


Party's Quest for a Middle Road: A Liberal Stance in Business Suits
The platform that the Democratic Party endorsed last night puts new conservative words to an old liberal tune in an attempt to find a middle road between the unfettered capitalism espoused by Republicans and the welfare-state economics of the Democrats' past.
The Democrats and their Presidential candidate, Gov.
Bill Clinton, are eager to shed the party's image as favoring a tax-and-spend irresponsibility, and the platform stresses virtues like personal responsibility, strengthening the family and market forces.
Restrictions on welfare are advocated, and the need for military might is stressed.
Some Expected Stands
But at the same time, the document endorses Government-paid abortions for poor women, expanded child care, higher taxes on the wealthy, civil rights protection for homosexuals, universal medical insurance, unpaid leave for workers during family emergencies, increases in the minimum wage at the same rate as inflation and vastly increased spending on public works and environmental protection.


Walbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pentair Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Shifts At G.M.'s Top Levels
Dropping another shoe in the restructuring of its North American operations, the General Motors Corporation yesterday announced an overhaul of its marketing and communications staff that for the first time has resulted in the departure of a vice president and group executive.
Marina v.N.
Whitman, who led the public affairs and marketing group and was the auto maker's most senior female executive, will retire Sept. 1 to teach at the University of Michigan.
G.M. eliminated a second layer of management in its marketing staff with the departure of James B. Fitzpatrick, vice president of marketing and communications, who will retire in September.


CPB Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Faith as Lasting as the Soil He Tills: An Iowa Democrat Hopes Anew, at 88
At age 88, John D. Stegemann has to cup his ear to hear the Democrats' convention speeches arrive from New York City on the television in his farmhouse in the midwest night.
The pictures from the garrulous scene flicker across his own expressions of pure pleasure as he listens to his Democrats, his battered, beloved Democrats, make one more try at resurrection by sending forth their speeches.
Farmer Stegemann is incorrigible.
He is listening raptly to the oratory, aching to believe the way his forebear -- Grandfather Claus Heinrich Winter, a sod-house pioneer who pushed beyond his immigrant speech by reading Jefferson -- once raced off to listen to William Jennings Bryan boom forth down at the prairie crossroads.


The Domesticated Democrats; They Come Home to Re-Union and Reunion
The cliche of the week seems to be, "Oh, how boring conventions have become." But for the normally raucous Democrats, boring is obviously better.
Think back to 1988.
Jesse Jackson rolled into Atlanta having collected seven million primary votes and more than a quarter of the delegates.
He staged a spectacular rally on the eve of the convention; Michael Dukakis had his hands full getting Mr.
Jackson back into the fold.
Fast forward to 1992.
Though Mr.
Jackson did not run this year, he did seek influence and took well-publicized positions.
Mr.
Clinton played a shrewd chess game, distancing himself and counting on Mr.
Jackson eventually to support the ticket without a fight.


Into the Volley Strides The 36-Year-Old Borg
It's blindingly hot on the city hardcourt where the 36-year-old man with the limp blond tresses trapped beneath an equally damp headband is whacking away at a tennis ball.
But Bjorn Borg, sweating his way into form for his first American tour event since 1981, when he finished as runner-up for the fourth time at the United States Open, is blind to everything but the voice in his head that keeps urging him to make this crazy little thing called a comeback.


Debora D. Kramer, Welfare Administrator, 54
Debora Dammann Kramer, an administrator of mental health and social-welfare programs, died on Saturday at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Kramer was 54 years old and lived in Washington and in Manhattan.
She died of cancer, a member of the family said.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Florida Power and Light Co., Miami, a unit of FPL Group Inc., is offering $150 million in 8.5 percent 30-year first-mortgage bonds at 99.55 to yield 8.54 percent through Salomon Brothers. *
North Carolina Medical Care Commission is offering $40.8 million in hospital revenue bonds for Memorial Mission Hospital through underwriters led by Paine Webber.
The bonds were tentatively priced to yield from 4.25 percent in 1995 to 5.7 percent in 2003.
Longer maturities yield about 6.130 percent for a bond due in 2012 and about 6.202 for a bond due in 2022.
Because the bonds are insured by Federal Security Assurance, they are rated triple-A by Moody's, S.&amp; P., and Fitch Investors Service.
The financing includes zero-coupon bonds that pay no interest but if held to maturity yield 6.1 percent in 2004, 6.2 percent in 2005 and 6.25 percent in 2006.


Ah, Those Rare Moments When the Blood Tingles
There are moments in a convention that make a television director's heart pound with excitement and a political manager's palms sweat with anticipation.
Last night, the Democratic National Convention had a few.
There was Aretha Franklin belting out the National Anthem in a way that made it sound not only melodic, but positively soulful.
"If that didn't make you patriotic, then nothing will," said Representative Patricia Schroeder, taking the podium after Ms.
Franklin.


Algae, an Ancient Food
To The Living Section:
Thank you for your informative article on innovative foods and blue-green algae  [ "Pass the Spelt. A Little Ketchup With Your Algae?" June 24 ] .
I wanted to clarify three points.
Blue-green algae is an ancient food that has been around for millions of years, consumed by the Aztecs of Mexico, the Incas of Peru and the Kanembu natives of Chad.
Scientifically known as Aphonizomenon flos aquae, this blue-green algae was rediscovered by Daryl Kollman in 1976.
After six years of research, Mr.
Kollman founded Cell Tech Inc. and named this algae Super Blue-Green Algae.
For more than 10 years, Cell Tech has been the major harvester of this algae from Upper Klamath Lake in Oregon.
Cell Tech's harvesting and processing site is at the source of the lake, eliminating the need for unpredictable transportation and preserving the algae's delicate intrinsic value.
More importantly, Cell Tech's harvest site does not interfere with the ecosystem of the lake.


J. Allen Murphy, 60, Decorator And Antiques Dealer, Is Dead
J.
Allen Murphy, a dealer in antiques and a decorator who worked on estates in Palm Beach and Southampton and apartments in New York and Caracas, Venezuela, died yesterday at New York Hospital.
He was 60 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He fell ill the night before and appeared to have suffered a heart attack, said Anne Hayes, his assistant.


Parametric Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


3 Big Brokerage Firms Post Gains
Three national brokerage firms reported strong second-quarter financial results yesterday, citing gains in all their major lines of business.
While the favorable results were good enough to prompt minor gains in the publicly traded shares of the companies, analysts warned that business in the second half of the year was not likely to be so robust as in the first half.


Caroline Miller Dead; A Pulitzer Winner, 88
Caroline Miller Ray, whose first novel won the 1934 Pulitzer Prize for literature, died on Sunday at her home in Waynesville, N.C.
She was 88 years old.
A son, George A. Miller, said the exact cause of death was not known.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A former employee was awarded $7.5 million by a Federal judge for evidence that a Binghamton, N.Y., military contractor had systematically defrauded the Pentagon in the 1980's.
The company, now known as CAE-Link Corporation, was owned during the period at issue by the Singer Corporation.
The award went to Christopher M. Urda, a 35-year-old auditor.  [ A1. ]
General Motors, overhauling its marketing and communications staff, promoted Philip Guarascio to general manager of marketing and advertising for North American operations.
Marina v.N.
Whitman, heads of public affairs and marketing, and James B. Fitzpatrick, vice president of marketing, will retire.  [ D1. ]
American Airlines plans to raise fares 4.4 percent starting on Saturday, and to impose various additional increases in some markets.
Northwest and United plan similar actions.  [ D4. ]
Three brokerage firms reported strong second-quarter results.
Merrill Lynch was up 23.5 percent; Paine Webber, 35.5 percent, and Primerica, parent of Smith Barney, 28.3 percent.  [ D2. ]
Westinghouse earnings were down 3.9 percent, to $122 million, from $127 million a year earlier.  [ D4. ]
Harvey A. Weinberg, chairman of Hartmarx, unexpectedly handed over the reins of the embattled apparel manufacturing and retail company to Elbert O. Hand, its president.  [ D4. ]
Ernst &amp; Young agreed to a $1.6 million settlement of accusations that it helped Charles H. Keating Jr. deceive the Government about the health of his failed Lincoln Savings and Loan.  [ D4. ] The Economy
Consumers spent a little more money last month than in May as retail sales rose 0.5 percent, but the Consumer Price Index rose just three-tenths of 1 percent, the Government reported.  [ D1. ]
Sales of U.S.-made cars and trucks fell 6.7 percent in early July against the corresponding period a year earlier.  [ D2. ]
Top trade negotiators of the U.S. and Mexico are to meet to expedite a free-trade pact, Presidents Bush and Gortari agreed.  [ D18. ] Business Technology
The visual-arts field known as digital imaging has drawn more than 2,000 professional artists and photographers to Kodak's Center for Creative Imaging in Maine.  [ D5. ]
NASA has commissioned a study on sonic booms as part of a program to develop a big supersonic commercial airplane.  [ D5. ]  Markets
Z.
Lou Guttman, New York Merc chairman, has been told by the C.F.T.C. enforcement staff that it plans to recommend that civil charges of commodity violations be brought against him.  [ D2. ]
The Dow Jones industrial average tacked on 21.08 points to close at 3,358.39, buoyed by late buying in energy stocks.  [ D6. ]
Prices of most Treasury securities moved higher, but long-term bond yields remained high.  [ D13. ]  New York banks reduced the average money market yield 6 points to 3.14 percent.  [ D16. ]
Cocoa futures plunged $45 a ton on talk that Ivory Coast and Ghana were selling.  [ D14. ]  The dollar generally fell.  [ D14. ] Today's Columns
American Express and Visa are jousting over TV sponsorship of the Olympic Games.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D1. ]
Super Valu, the most profitable company in an industry in which the United States is the recognized world leader, is largely ignored by Wall Street.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]


Mosinee Paper reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TV Viewers Tune Out Convention
It's official: The Democratic convention is a ratings bust.
Yesterday, Nielsen Media Services released the ratings for Monday night, the first night of the convention.
CBS's convention coverage, which lasted 108 minutes, got an average rating of 5.7 points.
ABC, with 160 minutes of coverage, had an average rating of 5.3.
And NBC, with 81 minutes, had a 5.1 rating.
One rating point equals roughly one million households.


Sherwin-Williams reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Do Clothes Make the Democrat? Well, Yes and No
On the third day, they tried to recognize each other.
The conventioneers discovered an instinct for spotting New Yorkers.
"I just stay real close behind those gals in tennis shoes and I get across the street every time," said an aide to the Louisiana delegation.
Before adopting this navigational technique, he narrowly missed a crosswalk collision with a yellow cab.
"Men with briefcases are O.K., but they aren't as reliable," he said.
"Some of them are from out of town."


Wine Talk
THIS fortified hilltop village, outwardly unchanged since the Middle Ages, seems to float on a sea of verdant vines.
In every direction they roll away into the distance -- Carignan, grenache, syrah and the dozen other kinds of grapes, most of them meant for the pink wines that are part of summer on the Cote d'Azur.
This is rose country.
Rose is a very democratic wine.
In the chic restaurants along the Croisette in Cannes, in Le Lavandou and Mougins and just up the road from here in St.-Tropez, rose is the wine of choice in the warm months.
In the rustic beach restaurants where German campers slake their thirst and in the high-walled compounds of the film stars in St.-Paul-de-Vence, everyone is drinking rose.


Torchmark Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CREDIT MARKETS;
Delaware County, Pa., yesterday tentatively priced $85.3 million in general obligation bonds for sale to the public through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
The maximum yield at pricing was 6.2 percent for a bond due in 2022, with another long-term bond due in 2014 priced to yield 6.15 percent.
For short maturities, there are serial bonds priced to yield from 3 percent in 1993 to 4.7 percent in 1997 and 5.4 percent in 2001.


United Investors Management reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Electing to Dine
WITH approximately 15,000 restaurants, New York City offers about three for each of the 4,933 delegates to the Democratic National Convention.
Yet, most of these visitors could not come up with the name of even one restaurant they wanted to visit while in town, let alone three.
In a New York Times telephone poll from June 18 to July 2, 1,091 delegates were asked what restaurant they wanted to be sure to visit while they were in New York.
Only a quarter of the delegates polled expressed a preference for a particular restaurant or type of cuisine.
Given the mind-boggling profusion of choices, an array that even dyed-in-the-wool New Yorkers sometimes find daunting, it's not surprising that there was no consensus on a single restaurant.


A WHISTLE-BLOWER TO GET $7.5 MILLION IN BIG FRAUD CASE
A former employee of a military contractor in upstate New York was awarded $7.5 million yesterday by a Federal judge for bringing forward evidence that the company had systematically defrauded the Pentagon in the 1980's.
The award, made to Christopher M. Urda, a 35-year-old auditor from Binghamton, is the largest to date under a Federal law that was revised in 1986 to encourage whistle-blowers to come forward with allegations of wrongdoing by Government contractors.


SunTrust Banks reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Colorado National Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Judge Overturns Federal Seizure Of Abortion Pill
A Federal judge in Brooklyn ruled yesterday that the Government acted illegally when it seized abortion pills from a pregnant woman as she entered the United States two weeks ago.
But before the pills could be returned to her a Federal appeals court ordered a delay.
The Federal district judge, Charles P. Sifton, refused to order the Government to lift its overall ban on importing the drug, the French pill RU486.
But his ruling said that other women, acting individually, could ask Customs agents to allow them to import it for personal use.


Eating Well
"MY 21-year-old daughter, Winnie, saw one too many batches of mashed potatoes being made with sticks of butter and batches of cream," said Barry Wine, who with his wife, Susan, owns the acclaimed Quilted Giraffe.
Which is how Mr.
Wine, acknowledged as one of the most innovative chefs in America, came to be making creamless and butterless sauces worthy of a meal that costs $75.
"To give up butter and cream and make things taste exciting, that's a challenge," he said recently as he and his chef de cuisine, Morgen Jacobson, discussed the infinite variety of riotously colored, stunningly intense sauces they are creating with slow-cooked vegetable stocks and purees.
The results are equally as complex as sauces based on long-simmering beef stock, but they are more pleasing to the eye and more convenient to use.
They are also more healthful.


Wachovia Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bethlehem Steel Posts Loss
The Bethlehem Steel Corporation, the nation's second-largest steel producer, said yesterday that it would report a net loss of $64 million for the second quarter.
The company said the loss was the result of a litigation charge and continued depressed prices for steel.
In a statement, the company said it expected "moderate improvement in steel demand.


Lattice Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Kevlin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Campus Journal; Bard Seeks An Old Inn, But the Sale Hits a Snag
It seems a perfect place for lollygagging, a drowsy, dusty hamlet of old buildings abutting a perfect soak-your-feet creek.
Seems that way, but of late Annandale has been the site of contentious, though always properly upper-crusty, haggling between Bard College, whose boundaries end where the tiny hamlet begins, and Historic Hudson Valley, a group that preserves grand estates around here.


Freymiller Trucking reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Even in the U.S., Ideology Infects Language
To the Editor:
Doris Lessing ends "Language and the Lunatic Fringe" (Op-Ed, June 26) with a warning that those in former Communist countries now search, "perhaps not even knowing it," for another dogma.
They need look no further than the United States.
While lavishing praise upon ourselves for having prevailed over Communism, we too have become enslaved by catch phrases and empty slogans -- and, not surprisingly, few of us realize it.
I offer a few examples of some of the dead language of orthodox capitalism:


Rent Regulation Helps Keep the Middle Class in New York City
To the Editor:
"The Enduring Cost of Rent Control," your June 27 editorial attack on rent control in New York City, is ill considered and should be condemned.
Your newspaper, as much as any other source of power in the city, ought to be concerned with retaining the middle-class taxpayer.
This class has been and is continually leaving New York, as the quality of life sinks under the burden of great pockets of drug dealing, crime, poor schools, dirty streets and other problems, which make our community less desirable as a place for people to live decent lives and bring up their children in a wholesome environment.


Oscar Lewis, 99, an Early Writer On History of the American West
Oscar Lewis, one of the first historians to write seriously about the literary, cultural and social history of the American West, died at his home in San Francisco on Saturday.
He was 99 years old.
He died after two years of declining health, said his stepson, Addison Mooney of San Francisco.


Florio Joins Effort to Ban Assault Guns
Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey, joined by Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown of New York City, Curtis Sliwa, the founder of the Guardian Angels, and a phalanx of members of Congress from New York and New Jersey, called yesterday for a nationwide ban on assualt weapons similar to laws on the books in New York City and New Jersey.
"We're concerned about New York and New Jersey, but we are concerned about America as well," said Mr.
Florio, whose tough assault-weapons ban is likely be repealed by the Legislature.
The Republicans received strong financial and organizational support from the National Rifle Association in winning two-thirds majorities in both houses of the New Jersey Legislature last November.


Coke's 2d-Period Net Grew, But Shipments Were Weak
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that second-quarter net income advanced 20 percent despite weak shipments in important markets, including the United States, Japan, Brazil and Mexico.
Despite the sharp jump in profits, Coke's shares dropped 62.5 cents yesterday, closing at $41.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.
While earnings matched analysts' expectations, Coke's shipments of concentrate to bottlers were lower than expected.


Cooker Restaurant Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Tangy Barbecued Chicken: Crispy Skin, Split Legs and All
EVEN though I enjoy grilled food year round, barbecuing is primarily a summer activity for us.
I grill many types of food on the barbecue grill behind my house, but one of the tastiest and least expensive is chicken.
I use chicken legs for the main dish here, although a whole cut-up chicken, if priced more attractively, can be prepared this way.
But use legs, if possible, taking advantage of sales offering large packages of legs at low prices.
Chicken legs can withstand higher heat and longer cooking than breasts, without drying out.
I partly split the legs at the joint that connects the drumstick and thigh; this is the thickest part of the leg, and cutting halfway through it makes cooking easier.


Brand Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Editorial Notebook; Let Hillary Be Hillary
Musings on multiple newspaper stories about Hillary Clinton:
She will now favor soft pastels over crisp business suits.
She doesn't bake cookies.
She does bake cookies.
She'll advise her husband.
She won't advise her husband.
She should advise her husband.
She shouldn't.
She's too aggressive, she loves children, she cares about family.
She should, shouldn't, can, can't, won't . . .


A Formidable Wrestling Personality
Mikhail Mamiashvili is no slouch, a three-time world champion at Greco-Roman wrestling and Olympic gold medalist at Seoul.
For two years, he has been the chief wrestling coach for the Unified Team, that awkward euphemism for the throughly disunited Soviet Union, and as he munches the Crimea's wine-dark cherries, he looks as if he hasn't lost a step to his advanced age, which is all of 27.
Mamiashvili quit after he took a second place in the world championships in Italy two years ago.
"I realized I was as strong as I was going to get, and that I couldn't add anything more," he said cheerfully at the Spartacus Olympic training camp here, by the Black Sea.
"To stay on top in a sport like this, you have to be on the rise every year -- like Karelin."


Illinois Central Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
Concern on Fetal Test
Some experts expressed fear that a widely used prenatal test might cause birth defects in a small number of babies.
But others say the data are inconclusive.
Health, page C13.
An American in Belgrade
Milan Panic, a Serbian-American, took over as Prime Minister of a smaller Yugoslavia.
He raised hackles, declaring Bosnia is free.
Page A6.
Bush Limits Nuclear Tests
Limits are being set on nuclear testing in a decision that might reverberate in Congress but is not expected to have much real impact.
Page A5.


Long-Term Bond Yields Defy Data
Prices of most Treasury securities moved higher yesterday, but long-term bond yields remained stubbornly high despite the release of weak economic data and a report showing that inflationary pressures remain in check.
Analysts cited June's minuscule one-tenth of a percent rise in nonauto retail sales, the worst monthly number of the year, as evidence that the economy was losing momentum.
That report was followed by car sales for the first 10 days of July that at an annualized 6.5 million units were slightly weaker than expected.


Now Is the Time to Come to the Aid of Your Favorite Cookies
HILLARY CLINTON says she has been baking chocolate-chip cookies since she and her brothers competed to see who could produce the largest on Christmas.
"My mother wanted to keep us out of my father's hair while he put up the Christmas tree," she recalled.
"We usually got sick eating them and couldn't eat Christmas dinner."


Rent Regulation Helps Keep the Middle Class in New York City; Never for the Poor
To the Editor:
"The Enduring Cost of Rent Control" (editorial, June 28) cites many problems with New York City's rent regulations but manages to perpetuate one myth: "It purports to help the poor afford housing."
None of the rent control or rent stabilization laws enacted or continued since World War II even mentions housing poor people.
Protecting the poor is a banner supporters of rent control march under because it's less embarrassing than saying, "I've got mine, protect me."


New York Merc Chairman May Be Facing Civil Charges
The enforcement staff of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission has told Z. Lou Guttman, the chairman of the New York Mercantile Exchange, that it plans to recommend that civil charges of commodity violations be brought against him, several people involved in the case said yesterday.
They spoke on condition of anonymity.
The action, which is subject to approval by the commissioners of the C.F.T.C., would be a staggering blow to an industry that has fought, with some success, over the last three years to recover from Federal investigations of illegal trades in the futures pits in both Chicago and New York.


Jousting by Mass Marketers Is the Newest Olympic Sport
Pow!
Bam!
Oof!
That was the sound of American Express, trying again to ambush its archrival, Visa International, on the way to the Olympic Games.
Tonight, American Express plans to renew a longstanding battle against Visa over Olympic sponsorship by running two provocative television commercials created by Chiat/Day/Mojo Inc. in New York.


Politics by the Numbers
On the occasion of the Democratic National Convention, the editors of Harper's Magazine compiled this special Index to take the measure of the political moment.
Number of extra dancers Stringfellow's, a New York City topless bar, has hired to work during the Democratic National Convention: 30


Herbert C. Kenny, 78, Sang With Ink Spots
Herbert Cornelius Kenny, a bass-baritone who sang in the original Ink Spots quartet, died on Saturday at his home in Columbia, Md.
He was 78 years old.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Minnie McNeal Kenny.


Genicom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Infected Nurse Wins $5.4 Million From New York State in AIDS Suit
A judge has ordered New York State to pay a Utica nurse $5.4 million after she contracted the virus that causes AIDS from a prisoner during a frenzied scuffle at a hospital in 1988.
The judge determined that two corrections officers assigned to the prisoner had done nothing to restrain him as he punched and kicked at a medical team and the nurse was jabbed with a hypodermic needle containing his infected blood.
The decision, by a Court of Claims judge in Binghamton, includes the largest pain-and-suffering award the state has ever been required to pay a victim.
Legal experts said today that they believed it was one of the largest civil awards in the country to result from a person's being infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Graphic Description
The ruling was unusual in its graphic description of the events leading to the infection, including testimony from a fellow nurse who described the look of horror that crossed the plaintiff's face as the infected needle plunged into the palm of her hand.


MORE ON THE CONVENTION
Moderates' Hour of Truth
Since its founding, the Democratic Leadership Council has argued that it knows best how to put a Democrat back into the White House.
Now it will be put to the test.
Page A7.
Protester Confronts Clinton
Bill Clinton's heavily scripted convention schedule was marred by an anti-abortion protester who thrust a fetus in a plastic container at him as he was leaving his hotel.
Page A11.
Six Minutes in the Limelight
Four members of Congress will speak tonight on "Democratic values." And so will the Manhattan Borough President.
Page A9.
Other Winners, and Losers
What determines who wins and who loses among party hosts, actual and would-be, this week?
Politics, naturally.
The Living Section, page C1.
And Back at the Ranch . . .
President Bush is the guest of his Secretary of State, who, many Republicans hope, will take over the Bush campaign.
Political Memo, page A13.


American Airlines Raising Fares an Average 4.4%
American Airlines will try again to raise its fares, increasing them an average of 4.4 percent starting on Saturday, to help pay for higher fuel prices.
It will also impose additional increases in about 15 percent of its markets to make up for earlier price cuts.
Whether the increases stick will depend on whether other leading carriers plan to go along.
With many strong carriers like United, Delta Air Lines and Northwest suffering big losses because of the broad overhaul of the fare structure that began in April, the latest American move to bring fares back up has a good chance of succeeding.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday with a review of "Mo' Moves" at the Serious Fun festival misidentified the dancers shown.
They were Jamale Graves and Dancers, with D'Juan Dinzey in the foreground.


'A New Paine Webber' Refocuses on Its Roots
Throughout much of the 1980's, Paine Webber Inc., the nation's fifth-largest brokerage firm, was no stranger to change.
It was just success that remained alien.
The decade began with a botched merger that almost pushed the company into insolvency, and in the mid-80's came a highly publicized -- and largely mishandled -- swing into the sharp-elbowed world of mergers and acquisitions.


Book Notes
Booksellers' Rebates
It appears to be discount season in the publishing industry.
At least three major publishing houses are offering rebates to booksellers if they lower prices on particular books that are not selling as well as the publishers had expected.
For the past month, Random House has been offering money back to stores that cut the price on Robert Ludlum's novel "The Road to Omaha," which had a first printing of 600,000 copies when it came out in February and which booksellers say has not been selling as briskly as they had hoped, even though it has been on The New York Times best-seller list.
Random House suggested that to move the book, it might be wise to lower the suggested list price of $23.95 (which itself is often discounted by 20 or 30 percent) to $12 or so, and offered to give any retailer who did so about a $6 rebate.


Marshall &amp; Ilsley reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fashions for Democrats: C12.


Sports of The Times; A Career Blossoms In San Diego
GARY SHEFFIELD, the baby-faced player who has put the shine on what had been an increasingly tarnished career, may have finally got it right.
That is not always easy for a 23-year-old, let alone one living the pampered existence of a major leaguer.
But, in Sheffield's case, even he realized he was running out of choices and chances when it came to finding a proper foothold in baseball.
Last night, baseball was served notice that Sheffield, the all-star third baseman from San Diego, has indeed found footing on the proper rung and is climbing, as once predicted, to the upper ranks of superstars.
For the name "Gary Sheffield" was on the roll call of players announced as the National League's best for the 63d All-Star Game.


Xilinx Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


First of America Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lotto's Magic Wand: A Man's Ticket to a New Life; Bankrupt on April 20, 52-Year-Old Doles Out Gifts and Contemplates Remarriage
David N. Demarest can't get a credit card but his debts are history.
The two mortgages on his apartment and the credit card bills that forced him into bankruptcy last year are paid now.
Recently, he bought his dream car, a Jeep Cherokee, with cash.
Such is the difference three months can make.


Health Care Property Investors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Well-Fed Dead in Bosnia
No sooner did United Nations convoys relieve Sarajevo with food and medicine than Serbian commandos cut the city's power and water supplies.
Not content with trying to shell and starve Sarajevo into submission, Slobodan Milosevic has also stepped up his brutal bombardments across Bosnia.
And he continues his "ethnic cleansing" in Sarajevo's suburbs, killing some of the Muslims who are the Slav majority and deporting others.
The people of Bosnia remain unprotected.
What good will it do for them to have food in their stomachs when their throats are slit?


Jefferson Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Convention Coverage: Big Show, Little News
The network come-ons for the Democratic convention were ambiguous.
Even as viewers were promised a grand New York show, they were cautioned to expect no revelations.
Was it the networks' way of rationalizing why less time is being given to the convention this year, or just truth in advertising?
Gavel-to-gavel duties were relegated to C-Span, purveyor of civic programming to the insatiable.
Cable News Network and the Public Broadcasting Service, with the help of its new NBC News ally, occupied the hours from 8 P.M. and 11 P.M.
CBS, ABC and the NBC stations held off until 9:30 P.M. or 10 P.M., so on Monday night fans could fortify themselves with a shot of "Murphy Brown," "Pacific Station" or "F.B.I.: Untold Stories" before facing the keynote addresses.
Less Attention on Protests
Protesters were sought out, and this being New York, easily found.
Some of these activists, experienced in the art of camera attraction, have devoted lifetimes to plaguing Democratic candidates.
Only this year, less attention is being paid, except to the abortion-rights cadre and to AIDS activists.


Gort Journal; Daughters of the Irish Renaissance
The two graceful old women, almost perfectly composed, smiled and laughed a bit as they recalled what it was like growing up in a mansion watching the foibles of visitors like George Bernard Shaw, William Butler Yeats and Sean O'Casey.
Shaw was something of a cheater; Yeats was bad-mannered and aloof; O'Casey came to dinner improperly dressed, in the recollection of the women, Anne Gregory De Winton, 81 years old, and Catherine Gregory Kennedy, 79, the granddaughters of Lady Gregory, one of the major figures in Irish literature who helped found the national theater.


CHRONICLE
Another public figure has come forward to say that she has breast cancer.
OLIVIA NEWTON-JOHN announced yesterday that she has the disease, saying that she wanted to make the diagnosis public to forestall scandalous headlines in the tabloids.
"I am making this information public myself to save 'enquiring minds' 95 cents," the 43-year-old Australian singer and actress said in a statement issued through a spokesman, GAVIN DE BECKER, in Los Angeles.
The cancer was detected in an early stage, and her physicians expect a full recovery, Mr.
De Becker said, according to the Associated Press.
He would not divulge whether surgery had been performed or what treatment was being prescribed.


Hawkeye Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Leslie Fay Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Knicks and Bullets Await Decision on Grant
A hearing was held but no decision was announced yesterday regarding the tampering charges filed by the Washington Bullets against the Knicks.
Special Master Ted Clark, a New York attorney, met for eight and a half hours with lawyers and front-office officials representing each team.
Clark is expected to rule either today or tomorrow on whether the Knicks violated league rules by negotiating with the restricted free-agent forward Harvey Grant before they were eligible to do so.


Pennsylvania's $150 Million Issue
A $150 million student loan revenue bond issue by the Pennsylvania Higher Education Assistance Agency was priced yesterday through a group of underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
The tax-exempt bond due in 2022, which for some investors may be subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax, has a 6.4 percent coupon and is priced at par.


Altera Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Valero Natural Gas Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, the continuation of an article in Science Times yesterday about plans to use sea lions in research on other marine mammals included scrambled passages in some editions.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Ryan's Family Steak House Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


S.&amp;P. Stuns Bond Market By Cut in California Rating
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation stunned the municipal bond market yesterday by announcing that it had lowered its ratings on debt securities issued by the State of California by two notches, to A+ from AA.
S.&amp; P. said the downgrade, which affects about $13 billion of debt outstanding, reflected the state's continued weak financial position, "with little likelihood of improvement in the near future."


GERMANY TO SEND FORCE TO BALKANS
Germany announced plans today to send a destroyer and three reconnaissance planes to join in enforcing United Nations sanctions against Yugoslavia.
The German Defense and Foreign Ministers, who announced the decision, said it did not violate constitutional restrictions on the use of military force abroad.
Leaders of the opposition Social Democratic Party at first threatened to challenge the Government in a constitutional court case, but later withdrew their objections.


Harrison A. Storms Is Dead at 76; Leader in Aerospace Development
Harrison A. Storms Jr., an aeronautics pioneer, died on Saturday at his home in Rancho Palos Verdes, Calif.
He was 76 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said Earl Blount, a family friend and associate.


Lance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


COMPANY NEWS;
American Airlines' parent company said yesterday that it had lost $166 million in the second quarter, largely as a result of special charges for a suspended reservations project and settling a lawsuit.
The loss also underscores the effects of the low-priced tickets that are being used by travelers as a result of a huge restructuring of fares initiated by American; full coach fares have fallen more than 40 percent and discount fares were cut 50 percent.


Cuomo-Style Support: Sure, He's for Clinton
The Brady Bunch it's not.
Bill Clinton has managed to get his recalcitrant liberal brothers to the stage to pose for a family portrait.
But, like other recent Democratic nominees, Mr.
Clinton will need to watch his back in the fall when it comes to fragile party unity.


Fingerhut Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Corrections
The Pulse chart in the Metro Section yesterday about the change in consumer prices carried an erroneous label in some editions for the most recent monthly figures available.
They were for June, not May.


Hayes-Dana reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Treasury Issues Continue to Rise
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher again yesterday and interest rates, including long-term bond yields, moved lower.
Traders said that after several days of selling failed to push prices appreciably lower, investors were returning to the Treasury market.


Mets May Be Down, but They're Hardly Out
The enemy for the Mets in 1992 has been themselves.
Howard Johnson hasn't been nearly productive enough.
Bobby Bonilla hasn't been nearly consistent enough.
Manager Jeff Torborg hasn't been nearly inspirational enough.
And the marginal players haven't made nearly enough meaningful contributions.


American Home Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Judge Lets Yonkers Try Its Housing Approach
Urging the city of Yonkers to move "full-speed ahead," a Federal judge yesterday gave city officials four months to prove that their plan to end housing segregation will work.
The judge, Leonard B. Sand of Federal District Court in Manhattan, gave his approval to critical elements of the city's plan, which relies heavily on existing housing rather than new construction to meet desegregation goals.


Arts Czar Of Berlin: Power and Problems
Cultural bureaucrats lead shadowy lives, lost behind the brilliance of better-known artists and directors.
Which is as it should be.
Yet some such bureaucrats wield enormous power and use that power to shape a city's or a country's cultural life in ways that are ultimately as lasting as those of any single artist.
Take Ulrich Roloff-Momin, for instance.
As the Berlin Senator for Cultural Affairs, Mr.
Roloff-Momin probably has more power than any other cultural official in the world aside from Jack Lang.
Mr.
Lang's long tenure as Minister of Culture in the highly centralized French system makes him easily the world's foremost cultural politician.


Whitman Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Valley National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mother Made a Good Life of Her Hard Times
She grew up poor in rural Arkansas, buried three husbands, one of whom was an abusive alcoholic, watched her younger son go to prison for drug trafficking and underwent a mastectomy.
But Virginia Kelley, Bill Clinton's mother, said yesterday: "I've had a good life. The good has far outweighed the bad."
Especially last night, when she cast her state's votes for Mr.
Clinton's nomination for President.


BB&amp;T Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Potlatch Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thomas Expedites Suit on Abortion Pill
Justice Clarence Thomas of the Supreme Court asked the Justice Department today to explain quickly why the Government should not return an abortion drug that a pregnant woman had tried to bring into the United States from Europe.
Justice Thomas asked the department to submit its arguments early Thursday.
Government agents seized the drug, RU486, from the woman when she arrived July 1 at Kennedy International Airport from London, where the drug is legally prescribed to induce abortion.


TECO Energy reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Growing
SO how did your garden start, I asked Robert Dash, the painter, who can use both a brush and a trowel. (The same movement, he says, from the heart down the arm to the wrist.)
He reminded me that gardening is an ancient art, that for thousands of years we have been making the same gestures: slicing, hacking, digging.
But like painting, gardening has no rules.
If you had the misfortune to go to art school, someone was always talking about the center of the canvas.


Trenton Questions Shift of Town Land to Private Owners
State officials are looking into the practice of several southern New Jersey municipalities of selling or giving away waterfront land at street ends, allowing adjacent property owners to fence off what were traditional fishing and crabbing areas.
David Sciarra, director of Public Interest Advocacy, a state watchdog agency, has begun collecting evidence of the street closings, and the state attorney general's office is examining records to see if the land transfers have violated the state's claim to tidelands.


Democratic Image Makers Churn Out the 'News'
It was a press secretary's dream: There was Senator Howell Heflin of Alabama facing the cameras on the convention floor yesterday, answering questions that were lighter than softballs.
They were puffballs.
"Gore's being on the space subcommittee -- how do you think that might help Huntsville if Clinton and Gore get in the White House this fall?" asked a neatly coiffed young man thrusting forward the inevitable microphone.


No Headline
Step aside, Mr.
Bush.
You've had your parade!
It's time for change -- someone smart enough to know, strong enough to do, sure enough to lead.
The Comeback Kid.
A new voice for a new America. -- GOV.
MARIO M. CUOMO.  [ A15:2. ]


Superior Industries Intl.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Slow Growers
Q.
Can you suggest several slow-growing plants requiring little care that I can use in a semishaded area around a cemetery plot? -- N.V.
Harris, New York.


Tentative Settlement Is Reached With Workers at Rainbow Room
Waiters, bartenders and hat checkers at the Rainbow Room, the Art Deco restaurant high above Rockefeller Center, reached a tentative contract agreement yesterday that could end a two-month strike, union and management officials said last night.
"I am aware of a tentative settlement," said Richard Mann, a partner in the law firm representing the B. E. Rock Corporation, the owner of the restaurant.


Santos to Miss 6 Months After Operation
JOSE SANTOS, who was thrown and badly injured in a three-horse collision at Belmont Park on Monday, underwent surgery at Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park yesterday to repair two fractured bones in his left forearm.
His agent, DREW MOLLICA, reported that the 31-year-old jockey would need at least six months to heal before resuming his career.


Recycling Paper With Interior Motives
HOW many old Home sections does it take to construct a designer showroom?
The architect Michael McDonough isn't saying.
But at the new Sam &amp; Libby showroom in Manhattan, he has taken the idea of recycling old newspapers seriously.
Much of the 6,500-square-foot space has been fabricated from Homosote, a material made largely of recycled newspaper.
"You can say it's politically challenged," the 40-year-old SoHo architect said of the space.
In this case, good politics has bred good design.
Domestic in feeling, the walls and the classically inspired armoires, rolling display racks and other pieces of furniture have crisp lines and give the illusion of permanence.
They are soft and tactile.
Architecturally speaking, Mr.
McDonough was inspired by Shaker furniture, Expressionism and American folk art.


Accounts
*
Synoptics Communications Inc., Santa Clara, Calif., to Dahlin Smith White, Salt Lake City, as agency of record on its account, previously at TFB/BBDO, Palo Alto, Calif.
Dahlin Smith defeated the Foote, Cone &amp; Belding/Technology Group, San Francisco, in a review on the account, with billings estimated at $5 million. *
Pella/Rolscreen Co., Pella, Iowa, consolidated its marketing communications account at Creswell, Munsell, Fultz &amp; Zirbel, Des Moines.
Scali McCabe, Sloves Inc., New York, previously handled the window and door manufacturer's national consumer and trade accounts.
Billings were not disclosed.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Telephone companies will be able to transmit television programming to homes over their telephone lines, under a rule the F.C.C. will adopt today.
The move that could lead to formidable competition for cable television companies.  [ Page A1. ]
Companies would have to value more of their investments at market value under a compromise proposal from the Financial Accounting Standards Board.
The intent is to avoid problems like those in the savings and loan crisis.  [ D1. ]


RB&amp;W Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Foreign Affairs; Wonks vs. Liberals
Democrats can tear your heart out.
Quixotic, ill disciplined, at times unrealistic, they also love to cry over injustice, battle evil and save the world.
You cannot watch that montage of immigrant faces in Madison Square Garden this week without wondering whether as a national party Democrats would rather fight for liberal causes than win the White House.
Which is why this "harmonious" convention -- apparently dedicated to victory in November at the expense of liberal philosophy -- seems so out of joint.


A Few Workers Keep Clinton's Campaign on Track
While the television producer Linda Bloodworth-Thomason was working this week on a biographical film about her friend Bill Clinton to precede his acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention tonight, she amused herself by cutting a short subject on the side.
"It's not for public airing, just for Hillary and Bill," she said in a telephone interview from California.
"I fit together a bunch of clips from pundits talking since January, all of them saying: 'Clinton is dead. He'll be out of the race tomorrow. He's hemorrhaging. He's swimming around with three harpoons in him.' They don't know this guy. You can't kill Bill. He'll be dead when he's embalmed, and even then I'd suggest an airtight casket, to be on the safe side."


Carolina Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Glatfelter (P.H.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Judge Tells New York to Save Its Band Shell in Central Park
Ruling that the Naumburg Bandshell in Central Park was a gift to New York City and therefore must, by law, be preserved, a judge in Manhattan yesterday prohibited the city Department of Parks and Recreation from demolishing the band shell.
In issuing his ruling, State Supreme Court Justice Eugene Nardelli contended that the Parks Department had acted "arbitrarily and capriciously" in deciding to remove the band shell.
He said the city's argument that the law did not apply to gifts that had fallen into disrepair could, "in taking it to its logical extreme," be used as grounds for tearing down Grand Central Terminal.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about broadcast technicians working in a sky box at Madison Square Garden during the Democratic convention misidentified their network.
It was CBS, not CNN.


2 More Large Banks Post Big Gains
The Bank of New York Company and the Fleet Financial Group posted strong increases in second-quarter earnings yesterday, as both companies benefited from wide net interest margins and internal efforts to reduce nonperforming assets.
The Bank of New York's net income rose 45 percent, to $87 million, in the second quarter compared with a year earlier, and Fleet's more than doubled, to $71 million.
Analysts said the results exceeded expectations of many on Wall Street, and continue what many expect to be a pattern of positive earnings in the banking industry.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PROSECUTING 'QUALITY OF LIFE' CRIMINALS
To help clear midtown streets of prostitutes, chain-snatchers and other so-called quality-of-life criminals, New York State court officials will open an arraignment court later this year in an old courthouse on West 54th Street.
B3.
OFFICER IN SHOOTING TESTIFIES
Michael O'Keefe, the police officer whose fatal shooting of a Dominican man ignited angry protests in Washington Heights last week, has told the Manhattan District Attorney's office that he fired in self-defense after the man pulled a gun on him, a law-enforcement official and a lawyer connected to the case said.
B3.
TRIAL OPENS IN KILLING OF 10-YEAR-OLD
Alejandro Henriquez blew a kiss toward the back of a Bronx courtroom, then sat stone-still as a prosecutor told a jury that he was the only man who could have strangled three girls, including 10-year-old Jessica Guzman.
In a brief opening statement, the prosecutor outlined the evidence against Mr.
Henriquez, a 31-year-old livery car driver charged in three of the six similar slayings that outraged and brought together a Bronx community.
B3.
JUDGE GIVES BAND SHELL NEW LIFE
Ruling that the Naumburg Bandshell in Central Park was a gift to New York City and therefore must, by law, be preserved, a state judge in Manhattan prohibited the city Department of Parks and Recreation from demolishing the band shell.
B3.
STATUES OF AMERICAN WOMEN FOR PARKS
Women in New York's public monuments are legends or fantasies or allegories, not prominent Americans.
But that is about to change, with the arrival of Gertrude Stein in Bryant Park and plans for an Eleanor Roosevelt memorial in Riverside Park.
B3.
NEW YORK DEMOCRATS APPEAL FOR UNITY
With New York's favorite son orphaned by self-doubt, the state's typically fractious Democrats were papering over their differences and their own doubts in unusual appeals for unanimity that could be crucial to Bill Clinton's campaign for the Presidency.
A13.
New York a big hospitality suite to convention delegates from Montana.
A13.
Democratic message tested in Northeastern Queens.
A13.
REGION
JUDGE APPROVES ELEMENTS OF YONKERS PLAN
Urging the city of Yonkers to move "full-speed ahead," a Federal judge gave city officials four months to prove that their plan to end housing segregation would work.
The judge approved critical elements of the city's plan, which relies heavily on existing housing rather than new construction.
B6.
FISCAL PROBLEMS EASE IN SUFFOLK
An increase in sales-tax revenues has eased Suffolk County's financial crisis and enabled officials to reconsider plans to borrow money, cut wages and lay off county employees.
B8.
EXAMINING WATERFRONT STREET CLOSINGS
State officials are looking into the practice of several southern New Jersey municipalities of selling or giving away waterfront land at street ends, allowing adjacent property owners to fence off what were traditional fishing and crabbing areas.
B6.
Piscataway Journal B6  Chronicle B10


Fly So Free Out of Suburban
Strike the Gold's new "rabbit" claimed its first victim yesterday when Fly So Free withdrew from Saturday's running of the $500,000 Suburban Handicap at Belmont Park.
Fly So Free, the juvenile champion of 1990 and the winner of $2.1 million, was withdrawn for several reasons involving the length (a mile and a quarter) of the race and the fast early pace that is expected to be set by Loach, a speed horse recently purchased by the owners of Strike the Gold.
As the rabbit, Loach will set a fast pace aimed at killing off the other speed horses and opening the way for the customary finishing kick by his stablemate, Strike the Gold.


Today's Schedule
5:00 P.M. Call to order.
5:15 P.M.
Tribute to former Representative Morris Udall of Arizona by Representative Butler Derrick of South Carolina, followed by various speakers, including Mayor Kurt Schmoke of Baltimore; Representative Jose Serrano of New York; Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey; Senator Harris Wofford of Pennsylvania; Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia; Representative Dick Gephardt of Missouri, the House majority leader; Senator George Mitchell, the Senate majority leaders.
8:10 P.M.
Nomination of vice presidential candidate by Senator Barbara Mikulski of Maryland; seconds by Representative John Lewis of Georgia and Senator Tim Wirth of Colorado.
8:45 P.M. Roll call of states.
9:30 P.M. Acceptance speech by the vice presidential nominee, Senator Al Gore.
10:05 P.M.
Film introducing Gov.
Bill Clinton.  10:15 P.M.
Acceptance of presidential nomination by Mr.
Clinton.


Dual Journey From Glory to Despair
In the summer of 1985 Paul Gonzales was the Little Pug Who Could, a fighter who appeared skilled enough and charismatic enough to do what no flyweight before him ever had: make America care about diminutive boxers.
CBS-TV gave him $40,000 for his first professional fight, the precise sum that another prince of the ring, Ray Charles Leonard, had made for his debut.
Forty grand for a fighter who weighed a mere 112 pounds.
It wasn't exactly a miracle, but in its way, the greening of Gonzales, a kid from the barrio of East Los Angeles, was a pretty radical departure for the sport.


Tigers Fall To Poachers
Indian poachers working for an international smuggling gang have trapped and killed at least five tigers and perhaps as many as 20 in India's best-known tiger sanctuary.
A member of Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao's Cabinet, speaking on condition of anonymity, said today that several poachers had been captured and had confessed to the police near the sanctuary, Ranthambhor National Park, that they had killed five tigers.


Little League Coach Held on Sex Charges
A 26-year-old Little League coach has been arrested and charged with sexually abusing a 9-year-old boy on his team in Manhattan, and investigators were trying to determine whether any other players in the league had been abused, the authorities said yesterday.
The suspect, Alberto Alvarez of 607 West 136th Street, has been coaching Little League teams since his arrival in this country from the Dominican Republic four years ago, said Albert O'Leary, a spokesman for the transit police.
Mr.
Alvarez, who was arrested Tuesday, was charged yesterday with two counts of first-degree sex abuse and one count of endangering a child, said Wayne Brison, a spokesman for Manhattan District Attorney's office.


Reynolds Metals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Today's Television
Major Networks ABC 9 P.M. to 11 P.M. 11:30 P.M. to midnight, "Nightline," live from Madison Square Garden.
CBS  9 P.M. to 11 P.M.
NBC  9:30 P.M. to 11 P.M.
PBS  8 P.M. to 11 P.M.
Other Networks
CABLE NEWS NETWORK (Channel varies by cable system) Gavel to gavel, or about 5 P.M. to 11:30 P.M.
C-SPAN (Channel varies by cable system) Gavel to gavel, or about 5 P.M. to 11:30 P.M.


13 Million Watched on Tuesday
Roughly 13 million Americans watched the Democratic convention on NBC and ABC Tuesday night, according to Nielsen Media Services.
PBS, which is covering the convention in partnership with NBC, drew a 3.7 rating for its three-and-a-half hours of coverage and had roughly 5 million viewers.


Provident Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lindros Gets No. 88 Jersey To Go With All Those Zeros
Hockey's newest and youngest multimillionaire pulled on a Philadelphia Flyer jersey for the first time yesterday, and if Eric Lindros plays as well as the Flyers pay, No. 88 will be a numerical fixture of televised hockey highlights at least for the next six seasons.
Lindros, the junior hockey sensation who led Canada to the silver medal at the 1992 Winter Olympics, modeled his new uniform at a news conference in Philadelphia after signing a six-year, $21.8 million contract that makes the 19-year-old rookie the highest-paid player in the National Hockey League, displacing Wayne Gretzky of the Los Angeles Kings.


Amsco International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Pro Bono Campaigns
*
Office of Family Planning of the California Health Services Department is introducing a multimedia campaign, called "Education Now and Babies Later," aimed at persuading youths aged 12 to 14 to postpone sexual activity.
Rather than dramatizing the possible consequences of that activity, the ads, created by Gardner Communications Inc., San Francisco, focus on building self-esteem.
They carry the theme "If you're not ready, you're not alone."


Home Video
Tomorrow Disney is releasing "The Great Mouse Detective," a 1986 animated title starring a frisky sleuth named Basil of Baker Street.
Distributors expect the tape, which is priced at $24.95, to sell about five million copies.
Just as important, perhaps, the film is the first of a string of $25 movies that will be released this year by Disney and other studios.
People still rent many more tapes than they buy, but industry figures reflect a growing buying trend.
A study by Veronis, Suhler &amp; Associates, a New York investment bank, reports that from 1986 to 1991 rentals rose by 13 percent while sales went up by almost 31 percent.


Vans Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Record-Low Rating for Stars
The All-Star Game on Tuesday registered the lowest prime-time TV rating ever for the midseason classic, thanks in large part to the American League blowing open the game in the first inning on its way to a 13-6 rout of the National League.
The 14.9 Nielsen rating for CBS was the lowest since the 12.9 for the 1965 telecast, which was broadcast by NBC during the afternoon.
Last year, CBS posted a 17.4 rating for the game, recovering from a 16.2 the rain-delayed game the year before.
The highest prime-time rating was a 28.5 in 1970.


4 Indicted in F.B.I. Investigation Into Corruption in Film Industry
A Federal investigation into corruption in the movie industry has led to the indictments of the son of New England's reputed mob boss, as well as two of his associates and a member of the Teamsters here.
The son, Francis P. Salemme Jr., along with Thomas L. Hillary and Dennis D. Lepore, identified as associates of the Patriarca crime family, and William M. Winn, a Teamsters supervisor, were indicted by a Federal grand jury last month, the Federal Bureau of Investigation announced on Tuesday.


IP Timberlands reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Clergyman Lashes Out at Critics Who Attack Perot Endorsement
Responding to criticism over his endorsement of Ross Perot for President, the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d, pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem, made a rare attack on a fellow black political leader yesterday as he lashed out at his critics.
Mr.
Butts strongly denounced Congressman Charles B. Rangel of Harlem, saying he found appalling Mr.
Rangel's use of the term "white cracker" in describing Mr.
Perot.
In a further reproach, Mr.
Butts suggested that social and economic conditions in Harlem had declined substantially during Mr.
Rangel's tenure in Congress, compared with that of the late Adam Clayton Powell, who served as pastor of Abyssinian and who Mr.
Rangel defeated to win the Congressional seat.
Critical of Democratic Party
Explaining his support of Mr.
Perot, Mr.
Butts said that he had abandoned the Democratic Party because it continues to ignore the needs of blacks and that Mr.
Perot represents a viable alternative for black voters because he would be a staunch defender and enforcer of civil rights.


Watkins-Johnson Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Dover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Intergraph Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mandela Asks U.N. to Help End Township Violence
Nelson Mandela, addressing a special session of the Security Council, called today for diplomatic intervention by the United Nations to stop the rising violence in South Africa's black townships and to re-open negotiations over the country's tense political future.
Accusing the Government of abandoning its moves toward democratic rule, Mr.
Mandela appealed to the United Nations to send a special representative to South Africa to report on the situation.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Mingus Dynasty  Fat Tuesday's 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street Gramercy Park Through Sunday
The latest lineup of Mingus Dynasty likes a challenge.
On Tuesday night, opening a six-night stand, the group's first set included compositions that represented Charles Mingus at his most demanding.
They shifted tempos, jumped from idiom to idiom and used asymmetrical forms that made it impossible for the musicians to coast.


Rowan Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Books of The Times; Putting the Heat on the Taste Buds
Peppers  A Story of Hot Pursuits  By Amal Naj  Illustrated. 245 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
When Amal Naj was a 6-year-old boy living in a remote farming village in Bengal, India, he was wandering near his family's pond one rainy afternoon as he approached "the esteemed pepper patch." He heard a hiss, saw a black snake fan its head above its coiled body under a bush, and ran crying back to his house screaming: "A cobra! A cobra!" His aunt went out to inspect and told him to stay away from the pepper bushes henceforth.
"Cobras take shelter under pepper plants," she told him, "and that's how pepper gets its bite." Though her warning, as he later learned, was intended to keep him away from the pond and, indeed, away from the cobras, which had nested nearby, the main result of the incident was to turn him off peppers.
He "developed a palate that eschewed the blustery spice."


Computer Task Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.37
3.25
5.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.16
3.20
5.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.26
5.76
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.34
6.44
8.16
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.61
7.68
8.49
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.60
8.64
9.52
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.27
6.30
7.15
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Dutch Firm Indicted For Selling Iraq Gear For Fighting at Night
A Federal grand jury indicted a Dutch company and four former employees of subsidiary enterprises today for conspiring to sell sophisticated night vision gear to Iraq in violation of United States arms export control laws.
Terence J. Lynam, a lawyer representing the company, Delft Instruments N.V., said it would "enter a guilty plea to the charges in the indictment, probably by Friday."


Trade and Credibility; State Department Sees Progress On Talks That Negotiators Don't
Why was there such apparent division in the Bush Administration about the extent of progress on world trade talks at last week's economic summit meeting?
So wide was the gap between the upbeat assessment delivered by some State Department officials at Munich and the no-progress verdict handed down by senior American trade negotiators back in Washington that it was almost as though they weren't talking about the same subject.


No Time to Abandon The Supercollider
To the Editor:
It is an exaggeration to suggest in "Physicists Struggle to Save Supercollider from Budgetary Ax" (Science Times, July 7) that the American Physical Society "was nearly split apart" in 1988 over whether or not the superconducting supercollider should be built.
When many worthy research projects in all fields of science are being canceled or deferred for lack of funds, any major initiative is certain to be viewed with apprehension by scientists, who must compete for limited funds.
The society's elected council, however, unanimously adopted this statement:


Qume Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


K. L. Rawson, 81, Longtime Executive In Book Publishing
Kennett L. Rawson, a book publisher, died on Friday at Mather Memorial Hospital in Port Jefferson, L.I.
He was 81 years old and lived in New York City and Setauket, L.I.
Mr. Rawson died of heart failure, said his wife, Eleanor S. Rawson.


Abrams Funds Lead Among Challengers
Two months before the New York Senate primaries, the State Attorney General, Robert Abrams, holds a slight edge in the Democrats' race for money, taking in $914,609 in the last three months, compared with the $806,773 raised by former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro, who has led in several polls.
But filings released yesterday show that Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Republican incumbent, raised at least $1.4 million in the quarter that ended on June 30 and has at least $4.2 million in cash on hand, compared with Mr.
Abrams's $1.3 million and Ms.
Ferraro's $664,311.
Alone among the candidates, Ms.
Ferraro lists debts, a total of $267,050, mostly in loans from herself.


Bursts of Fire at an Orderly Convention
Last night, for a few sweet, fleeting moments, they finally let the Democrats be Democrats.
The managers at Madison Square Garden let former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, the Peck's Bad Boy of this year's politics, spell out his plans to overturn the nefarious American "system." They asked Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts to evoke the glow of Camelot once more.


Gannett Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


New Jersey State Park Workers Protest Proposed Closings


Telephone Companies to Get Right to Transmit Television
The Federal Communications Commission will adopt a rule on Thursday to allow telephone companies to transmit television programming to homes over their telephone lines, a move that could lead to formidable competition for cable television companies.
Supporters of the change argue that it could help lower cable television prices, which have increased sharply in recent years, and speed construction of a nationwide network of fiber-optic cables needed to transmit television images.


DIGITAL INTRODUCES A REVAMPED VAX COMPUTER LINE
The Digital Equipment Corporation introduced a complete overhaul of its flagship VAX computer line, from work stations to the newest mainframe.
The new VAX computers, which were expected and which Digital calls Alpha Ready, are supposed to allow customers to easily switch from VAX systems to Digital systems based on the new Alpha microprocessor when the machines become available late this year.
To simplify that migration, the company also announced Open VMS, a new version of Digital's popular VMS operating system, which will allow users to shift their current software tasks onto not only Alpha systems but onto computers using the standard Unix operating system.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
INSTALLING new casing, the interior wall trim around a window, is exacting work, but fairly simple in principle.
You will need new casing if you are remodeling to add wallboard or paneling that increases the thickness of a wall, or if you decide to change the style of molding in a room.
Two casing styles are popular: picture-frame (also called contemporary) and traditional.
As the name suggests, picture-frame casing surrounds a window the way a frame surrounds a painting.
The casing consists of four identical pieces of molding, usually mitered at the corners.
Picture-frame casings are simple and quick to install, provided the corners of the window frame meet at perfect right angles, the wall is flat and you are able to cut miters accurately. (An electric miter saw, or chop saw, is an indispensable tool for mitering, unless you are highly accomplished with hand tools. It can be rented.)


Suspect in Bronx Slayings Portrayed as Clever Killer
Alejandro Henriquez blew a kiss toward the rear of a Bronx courtroom yesterday, then sat stone still as a prosecutor told a jury that Mr.
Henriquez was the only man who could have strangled a woman and two girls, including 10-year-old Jessica Guzman.
In a brief and low-key opening statement, the assistant district attorney, Edward J. Talty, outlined the evidence against Mr.
Henriquez, a 31-year-old livery car driver charged in three of six similar slayings that outraged and united a Bronx community.
The police have said he is a suspect in the others, though he has not been charged.


Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Events: Seminars in Recycling
New Recycling Laws  New York City Sanitation Department.
Seminars are being offered for residential building managers and owners about recycling laws that take effect on Sept. 14.
There will be five sessions in Manhattan, on Wednesday and on July 27 and 28.
Registration and free handbooks for superintendents are available by calling (212) 837-8195.


In Step Toward Freer Trade, Mexico to Pay Oil Bonuses
In another step toward a North American free-trade agreement, Mexico has tentatively agreed to pay bonuses to United States and Canadian oil drillers for good performance, Mexican and American officials said today.
Mexico currently pays foreign oil companies only fixed fees for their work.
The main basis for bonuses will be the speed with which work is completed, although whether a company strikes oil will also be included in the bonus formula, an official involved in the negotiations said.


COMPANY NEWS
L.M.
ERICSSON, Stockholm, received a $112 million contract from Kansai Digital Phone Co., Japan, for a digital cellular telephone system.
UNISYS CORP., Blue Bell, Pa., received a $10 million order from U S West Communications, for a mainframe computer system.


WHERE TO FIND IT


Orbiting Craft Discover 'Afterglow' in Solar Flares
Two observatories orbiting the Earth have discovered surprising new details about the flares that leap millions of miles from the surface of the sun and other stars, astronomers said today.
The Compton Gamma Ray Observatory has discovered that solar flares leave behind a previously unknown "afterglow" of gamma rays that may be emitted by nuclear particles when they are energized by powerful magnetic fields associated with the flares, they said.


One Dog Owner Who Loves Too Much
WHEN I was a child, my father told me that when he died he expected to be judged by a panel of Labrador retrievers.
I pictured the scene: a semicircle of dogs with stainless-steel choke collars and crimson rabies tags.
Souls would come forward.
The dogs would count sins.
The court would be silent, although there might be the jangle of a collar now and then if His Highness, or Her Highness, had a flea.
In repose, a Labrador's face can seem unforgiving, and I used to think my father courageous in his choice of judges.
Now I'm not so sure.
My guess is that if Goebbels had had a Labrador named Bismarck, and if Bismarck had been given any say in the matter, Joe would have gone straight to heaven.


Oil Production Declines 3.3%
Crude oil production in the first half of this year was the lowest of any corresponding period since 1961, the American Petroleum Institute reported yesterday.
Domestic crude production was 7.236 million barrels a day, down 3.3 percent from the 7.485 million barrels a day last year.


Nixon-Eisenhower Ticket Casts Its Baseball Votes
His presidency might have ended in despair and resignation, but Richard Nixon's happiest moments in Washington surely included the relationship he had with major league baseball.
For an afternoon, he brought back the fond memories.
Nixon, always a fan, and his son-in-law David Eisenhower today saluted their all-time great baseball teams from three eras, announcing the teams at a $200-a-plate luncheon at the Nixon Presidential Museum.


Wheelabrator Technologies Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hubbell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Falling Costs Seen as Draw To Employers
Amid ample evidence that the New York metropolitan area remains mired in recession, a report yesterday by the Federal Home Loan Bank of New York said that declining commercial rents and a slowdown in wage increases were making the region more attractive to business.
Office rents across the region have plummeted by as much as 40 percent since the late 1980's, the study said.
And while wages in the New York area remain far higher than elsewhere in the nation, the study found that the wage differences in some segments of the economy, including the retail-trade and the service industries, had begun to narrow.


Broadway Puts On a Free Show for the Democrats
Broadway threw a mammoth, confetti-rich theater party in Times Square yesterday for the Democratic National Convention.
At a time when the nation's eyes were on New York City, the event sought to dazzle the delegates with the city's generosity -- and to exploit convention hoopla as a means of drawing attention to the Broadway theater which, even after a stellar season, is struggling to fill empty seats.
"Just in case the delegates' schedules are too tight, we've brought Broadway to you," said Mayor David N. Dinkins, kicking off the free theatrical extravaganza, "Broadway on Broadway." Trumpeted as the largest collaborative performance in Broadway history, the 90-minute show featured excerpts from 13 current Broadway productions accompanied by a 28-piece orchestra.


The S.E.C. Goes Electronic As Edgar Starts Running
With the flick of a switch, the Securites and Exchange Commission yesterday began to automatically accept electronic document filings on the computer system that will someday be used as a central depository for the filings of publicly traded companies.
The first day of tests for the system, known as Edgar, for Electronic Data Gathering Analysis, represented a giant step for the long-delayed $75 million project.
It proceeded with just one glitch, Government officials and corporate officers said, and by last evening more than 110 filings had been made by almost 50 publicly traded companies.


Market Place; A Leaner I.B.M. Still Must Worry
THE International Business Machines Corporation has made impressive progress in its drive to slim down and cut costs.
Selling and administration costs may be reduced as much as $1.5 billion in 1992, estimates Dan Mandresh of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
Fewer midlevel managers and more decision-making in the field or on the factory floor are key elements of the I.B.M. slim-fast formula, which was disclosed at the end of last year.
Analysts say that this year 20,000 to 40,000 people could be sliced from I.B.M.'s payroll, which totaled 344,000 at the end of 1991.
The number will depend on how many workers accept the company's buyout program.
Even confirmed I.B.M. skeptics concede that the company has made big strides.
"I.B.M. is doing much better on cost-cutting than people expected," said Stephen Cohen, managing director of the Soundview Financial Group Inc., who has a "hold" recommendation on I.B.M. and a reputation for being bearish on the company.


First Commonwealth reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Leaving Shelters for More Uncertainty; Many Families Set Out on Their Own, and Many of Them Return
When Marisol LaFontaine left the city's homeless-shelter system after two months in 1990, it was not because she had found a place of her own.
Not even close.
She left on the spur of the moment when she saw the latest hotel she and her three children had been sent to, a decrepit building in Harlem where people smoked crack openly at the front door.
Even the manager encouraged her to move.
"This is no place for you," he said.


Corrections
An article yesterday about beach closings on Long Island misidentified the city manager of Long Beach.
He is Edwin L. Eaton.


Topics of The Times; George McGovern, Still Smiling
In 1972 Richard Nixon preached a simple, devastating negative message: George McGovern and his people were elitist, permissive, sanctimonious left-wingers.
Aided by a few McGovern blunders -- not least Mr.
McGovern's call for a downsizing of overseas commitments that was too radical even for war-weary Americans -- Mr.
Nixon won 49 states.
Mr. McGovern has since been blamed for driving his party into the political wilderness.


Executive Changes
ADDINGTON ENVIRONMENTAL INC., Ashland, Ky., a waste-management unit of Addington Resources Inc., appointed William R. Nelson president and chief executive.
ADMEDIA CORPORATE ADVISORS INC., New York, an investment banking and consulting concern, named Robert H. Huntington managing director.


Seal of Approval


EA Engineering Science/Tech reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


RESULTS PLUS
OLYMPICS  U.S.
Women Win Clarissa Davis scored 21 points, including 5 in the final two minutes, to spark the United States Olympic women's team to a 110-105 overtime victory over the Central Jersey A.A.U. boys team at Rutgers in Piscataway, N.J., last night.
After Carolyn Jones's foul shot gave the Olympic team a 102-101 lead with 2 minutes 18 seconds left in overtime, Davis made two foul shots to make it 104-101.
Roshown McLeod, who had 30 points, scored for A.A.U. before Davis hit a 3-pointer to make it 107-103 with 1:33 remaining.
McLeod scored another bucket to make it 107-105 before Suzie McConnell hit two free throws with 38 seconds left and Tammy Jackson made a foul shot with seven seconds left to clinch the victory. (AP) TENNIS Garrison Injures Ankle  Fourth-seeded Zina Garrison limped off the court yesterday after suffering a painful twisted left ankle in her opening appearance in the Pathmark Tennis Classic in Mahwah, N.J., but her fears about missing the Olympics subsided after examination by an orthopedist.
"Zina has an ankle sprain and a slightly torn ligament," said Dr.
Joseph Pizzurro of Ridgewood.
"She should be able to hit in four or five days and should be ready to compete at the Olympics. There's no break or real swelling. Her treatment will be ice and ultra sound. I'm unable to prescribe any medication because they are all banned at the Olympics." Garrison, the 15th-ranked player in the world, was forced to retire after playing only five games and one point in 39 minutes of the exhibition.
The second-round loss (recorded as 3-2, retired) came against the lowest-ranked player in the exhibition competition, No. 394 Christine O'Reilly, was hardly on her mind.
The 29-year-old Garrison was one of the three American players selected to compete in the women's singles at the Olympics.


Pop and Jazz in Review
K.
T.
Sullivan  Oak Room Algonquin Hotel 59 West 44th Street Mid-Manhattan Through Aug. 1
A singer who looks like a redheaded Judy Garland and has a voice that in its upper register recalls Barbara Cook, K. T. Sullivan has been working her way up New York's cabaret ladder for several years.
With her current engagement, she has reached the top rung.


Maytag Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Coltec Industries Inc.(X) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Economic Scene; Leaner Times, Meaner Times
HARD times could put Bill Clinton in the White House.
But they could bury his Administration, much as they threaten George Bush's.
Does the Arkansas Democrat have the right stuff to fix the economy?
Mr.
Clinton, it is safe to say, has been too busy raising money and acting Presidential to figure out how he would get from here to there.
But in contrast to Ross Perot and George Bush, candidate Clinton has delivered a remarkable amount of protein along with the empty rhetorical calories.
And it appears that many of the strategic choices that would drive his economic policies have already been made:


U.S. WARNS IRAQIS ON HINDERED TEAM
The Bush Administration warned Iraq today that it was violating the Persian Gulf war cease-fire agreement by barring a United Nations inspection team from searching for documents stored in a Baghdad ministry.
Iraq's refusal since July 5 to let the inspectors enter the Agriculture Ministry, where they believe information on missiles may be stored, is "putting at risk the cease-fire that concluded Operation Desert Storm," a State Department spokesman said, using implicitly strong language against the Government of President Saddam Hussein.


Walbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dun &amp; Bradstreet reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Milhaud Tribute to Open Merkin Season
A full-day tribute to the composer Darius Milhaud on the 100th anniversary of his birth is to open Merkin Concert Hall's 1992-93 season, which will include new series devoted to song, early opera and harpsichord music.
The Milhaud tribute, on Oct. 4, is to include chamber works, choral works on Jewish themes, and a panel discussion, "Mirror on Milhaud," with the pianist William Bolcom, the Milhaud scholar Charles Jones and the composer's widow, Madeleine, taking part.
The new Opera on Original Instruments series begins on Oct. 5 with the American premiere of Handel's "Muzio," in a concert version starring Julianne Baird, Erie Mills, D'Anna Fortunato and John Ostendorf.
The series will include a fully staged version of "Semele" by the English composer John Eccles, with a libretto by William Congreve.


Fleet Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
Suicide  The Limelight Chelsea
In the mid-1970's, Suicide was a defiant, minimalist, arty, convoluted half-joke: a singer, Alan Vega, who crooned and chanted doomy poetry and a keyboardist, Martin Rev, who played repetitive riffs and cheesy electronic drum sounds.
But the joke was prophetic.
In the 1990's, it's clear that Suicide presaged both the electro-pop of the early 1980's and current industrial rock.


Valero Natural Gas Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Sent Bob Milacki, pitcher, to Rochester of the International League.
Called up Richie Lewis, pitcher, from Rochester.
CELVELAND INDIANS -- Optioned Reggie Jefferson, first baseman, to Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.


New Talks Set in Pittsburgh Newspaper Strike
Six unions whose members were laid off after a strike against a company that publishes two Pittsburgh newspapers decided today to meet to discuss the company's plan to resume operations.
The newspapers have not published since May.
The company, The Pittsburgh Press Company, said on Tuesday that it intended to resume publication of one or both papers, possibly within 10 days, with or without an agreement with the striking union, Local 211 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.


Kelvin Coe, 45, Dies; An Australian Dancer
Kelvin Coe, a former principal dancer with the Australian Ballet, died on Thursday at his home in Melbourne, Australia.
He was 45 years old.
He died of AIDS, said a spokesman for the company.


BIC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


For New York's Parks, First Statues of Famous American Women
Joan of Arc has brandished her sword above Riverside Drive for more than 75 years, while Mother Goose has flown through the wind in Central Park, and Liberty has enlightened the world -- or, at least, a good part of the harbor.
Women, as portrayed in New York's public monuments, are legends or fantasies or allegories.
They are not prominent Americans.


Honors
*
Harry Paster, executive vice president of the American Association of Advertising Agencies, was named "Man of the Year" by the Advertising Club of New York.


Coslet Thinking Big for 'Good, Not Great' Jets
Hinting that the Jets would take to the air more and that they would emphasize a commitment to the big play, Coach Bruce Coslet kicked off training camp this afternoon with the eye gleam of a kid on Christmas morning.
"We go into this season with higher expectations," said Coslet, who is beginning his third year as the Jets' coach.
"We're a good football team right now -- not great, but competitive. We can be in every football game and have a chance to win every game."


Plan to Revive Old Courthouse Aims to Combat Midtown Crime
To help clear midtown streets of prostitutes, chain-snatchers and other so-called quality-of-life criminals, state court officials will open an arraignment court early next year in an old courthouse on West 54th Street.
The aim is to prevent crime by making justice local.
Most petty criminals caught on the west side from Chelsea to Times Square will be processed through the new court, which would connect them with in-house education services and addiction-treatment programs to keep them from returning to crime.


Morrison Knudsen reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ON THE PROWL WITH: Victor Malafronte; Stalking the Wild Celebrity
ONLY Victor Malafronte, the mad dog of New York's wolf pack paparazzi, knows the indignity of sprinting after John F. Kennedy Jr. on Roller Blades.
Or being held in a headlock by Michael J. Fox's security guard.
Or charming Sigourney Weaver into posing for a quick photograph -- and then running out of film.
Considering these humiliations, today's shoot with the teen idol Luke Perry must seem like a wedding gig.
Mr.
Malafronte has secured not only an invitation to the official celebrity photo opportunity at the St.
Regis, but also a seat in the dining room for a free lunch.


Bosnia, Where Titans Fear to Tread
At two separate summit meetings last week, President Bush and other world leaders sounded tough about what they would do if the Serbs did not call off their offensive in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But it is increasingly clear that none of them seem ready to authorize the kind of military action that might save the beleaguered Bosnians.
The reasons seem clear.
In a complex conflict in a mountain country where the front lines are hazy and hatreds are deeply rooted in history, any peacemaking effort by outsiders would probably be difficult, dangerous and extremely drawn out -- a "quagmire," Mr.
Bush called it, like Vietnam, Afghanistan or Lebanon.


Michigan National reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Revco D.S.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Steel Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Norwest Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Flagler Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ask the Woman Who Drives One. No, TWO!


Accusation of Bias Against Children Leads to Big Award in Housing Suit
In what is believed to be the largest verdict in a housing bias case, a Federal jury here has returned a $2.4 million judgment against a company found to have discriminated against families with children by excluding them from its apartments.
Lawyers for the plaintiffs predict that the size of the verdict, one of the first under a Federal housing law enacted four years ago, will prompt lawsuits nationwide against property owners and managers believed to be discriminating against families with children.


Righetti Goes From Rags To Riches Back to Rags
Dave Righetti was talking about the uncertain future of his team, the San Francisco Giants.
"Who knows what's going to happen to us?" he said.
Even closer to home, what's going to happen to Dave Righetti?


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ALTHOUGH Stan Corn's relationships with his 35-year-old sister and 41-year-old brother have been tumultuous for quite a few years, things recently took a turn for the worse.
Last year, he took down their pictures from the walls of his home.
He hasn't spoken to his sister in four months.
His parents are so upset by the family discord that they've stopped coming to his house and didn't attend his daughter's high school graduation.
"Instead of maintaining a relationship with each of the children, my parents chose sides," said Mr.
Corn, who is 45 years old and lives in Richmond.
"Now we're not on speaking terms. I feel lousy about this. It's like I've lost my parents ahead of their death."


Snap-On Tools reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Republic New York Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


MORE ON THE CONVENTION
The Team Behind the Man
At times during the primaries early this year, Governor Clinton overcame pressures that might have destroyed other candidacies.
But he did not do it alone.
Page A11.
A Boon for the War Chest
The excitement generated by the convention could not have come at a better time for the Clinton campaign's finances, which before this week were perilously low.
Page A17.
New York on the Bandwagon
This is not the ticket that many New York delegates would have envisioned endorsing.
But the state's Democrats have joined the appeals for a unified party.
Page A13.


Benjamin Richardson, Liberal Clergyman, 78
The Rev.
Benjamin A. Richardson, an assistant pastor at Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem in the 1940's who was a clergyman and social worker in Chicago from the 1950's through the 1970's, died on July 8 at his home in Watertown, Mass.
He was 78 years old.
Mr.
Richardson died of complications following a stroke, said a daughter, Marilyn Richardson Bering, with whom he lived.


Jinotega Journal; O.A.S. Goes in Peace (That's What It Came For)
One day last September, as a group of veterans of the contra struggle against the Sandinistas stood on a rain-drenched hilltop near here and threatened to go to war again, a white four-wheel-drive vehicle with the letters "C.I.A.V.-O.E.A." on the side made its way up the muddy slope.
A smiling young man in jeans jumped out and began to work the crowd, shaking hands and engaging in small talk as if the grizzled men he met were holding cocktail glasses instead of M-16 rifles.


Dexter Corp.(X) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Food Gets Through, a Brave but Small Step
At 12:50 P.M. on Sunday, Fabrizio Hochschild was a worried man.
Mr.
Hochschild, a 29-year-old Chilean who directs United Nations relief efforts here, had 10 minutes to go before the expiration of a truce that had been negotiated to allow 12 truckloads of food to be delivered to a besieged suburb of Sarajevo.


McEnroe and Agassi Stumble in First Round
Ten blurred days ago, Andre Agassi broke a grand-slam hex when he defied all predictions, conquered the trauma of his losses in three previous grand slam finales and captured Wimbledon.
That championship helped him break back into the top 10, but it did nothing to help him break Kevin Curren's hefty serve tonight.
As the mildly chagrined Agassi later explained, this downfall was almost to be expected: Because of an overdose of post-Wimbledon partying and an insufficient ration of hardcourt preparation, the sun-scorched and rain-drenched NationsBank Classic lost its two-time defending champion.


Rollins Environmental Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fire Sweeps Through Block in Tennessee Resort Town


CHRONICLE
WHITNEY HOUSTON and BOBBY BROWN, the Grammy Award-winning singers, plan to marry on Saturday in a ceremony at Ms.
Houston's home in Mendham, N.J.
Regina Brown, Ms.
Houston's publicity agent, said that the Rev.
MARVIN WINANS, a Baptist minister and member of the Winans, the family singing group, will perform the ceremony before 75 to 100 guests.
A reception for 600 will follow.
There are to be seven bridesmaids, including the singers CE CE WINANS and PEBBLES, and seven groomsmen.


Consolidated Rail reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fifth Third Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hunt (J.B) Transport Services (O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief article in Business Day on Tuesday about A.&amp; P.'s earnings misstated some results.
The company reported first-quarter sales of $3.316 billion.
In last year's first quarter, it said it earned 95 cents a share.


Democratic Strays Look Homeward Again
From Madison Square Garden, it's a 30-minute drive along rutted highways and the roads John V. Lindsay forgot to plow to reach the Seymour Perlmutter Community Center, where Bernard and Gert Feingold were waving their arms and bouncing in the pool in midafternoon water aerobics.
City Council races have been won and lost among the chaise longues and card tables of this Little Neck pool club, some say.
Every summer a succession of candidates makes pilgrimages to this corner of Queens, where Democrats outnumber Republicans by as much as 3 to 1 and voter turnout is so high it borders on the compulsive.


People
*
Kathy Anton, a vice president; Leon Hanson, a senior vice president and management supervisor, and Jeanne Massaro, a vice president and associate media director, at Smith/Greenland Inc., New York, were named partners. *
Mark Richardson was named executive vice president and director of client services at Houston Effler &amp; Partners, Boston.
He was previously senior vice president and account services at Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson, Boston.
Mr.
Richardson is the third executive to leave Ingalls, Quinn for Houston Effler since Houston Effler won the Converse account from Ingalls, Quinn.


DIALOGUE: Adrenaline for the Economy -- Whose Road to Prosperity? Bush's Plan Means Jobs
President Bush has advanced a comprehensive economic program to create jobs and increase the standard of living for all Americans.
His growth agenda is based on three convictions about America and the 1990's.
First, we must invest in our future.
A wise nation does not consume its seed corn through excessive current consumption.
It makes sound investments in plant, equipment, research, development, infrastructure and the education and training of its people.


Benign Tumor Is Cut From Pope's Colon In 4-Hour Operation
Doctors excised a large but benign tumor from Pope John Paul II's colon and removed his gallbladder early today in an operation lasting almost four hours and marked by secrecy.
The Pope was said to have "tolerated the operation well" but is expected to remain in the hospital for about 10 days to recover.


Universal Foods reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Theater; Not a Pair to Go Shopping Together or Out to Tea
The one constant image in "The Flash and Crash Days," the Brazilian playwright and director Gerald Thomas's surreal evocation of a stormy mother-daughter relationship, is a miniature volcano at the center of the stage.
During the 80-minute drama, which had performances on Tuesday and Wednesday evenings at Alice Tully Hall as part of Lincoln Center's Serious Fun festival, the volcano cone intermittently spews smoke and becomes a receptacle for one woman's severed head and the other's ripped-out heart.
The volcano is a typically blunt symbol of inexhaustible fury in a play that uses few words and offers many flashy and violent images of mother-daughter strife done in highly expressive pantomime.
It is all underscored by a prerecorded soundtrack of thunderclaps, feverish string quartet music, Billie Holiday singing "Solitude" and, in the final scene, orchestral music from Wagner's "Ring" cycle.


Traffic Alert
Because of traffic congestion expected from the Democratic National Convention, New York City transportation officials have issued a gridlock alert today and urge motorists to take public transportation.
The Department of Transportation said these will be the most congested areas:
* Madison Square Garden, between Seventh and Eighth avenues and 31st and 34th streets.
* Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, 11th Avenue between 34th and 39th streets.
* Sheraton Hotel, 52d Street between Seventh and Eighth avenues.
* New York Hilton, Sixth Avenue between 53d and 54th streets.
* 31st Street and 33d Street will be closed between Seventh and Eighth avenues from 2 P.M. to midnight.


A Victory Seems to Be in Lopez's Grasp
After second-place finishes in two of her last three tournaments, Nancy Lopez appears to be a solid choice this week for her first victory of the season and 45th of her illustrious career.
What is discouraging for Lopez is that the $500,000 JAL Big Apple Classic at Wykagyl Country Club this week has a very strong field, with seven of the top-10 money winners playing in the tournament because it is being staged the week before the United States Open.


Equitable Prices Initial Offering at $9
The Equitable Life Assurance Society has priced its initial stock offering at $9 a share, well below its hoped-for range of $11 to $14.
But it is high enough to complete the largest conversion ever of an insurer owned by policyholders into one owned by stockholders.
At $9 a share, the offering will raise more than $390 million, surpassing the minimum of $300 million that Equitable needed to convert from debt to equity a $1 billion investment made last year by Groupe Axa S.A., the French insurance company.


ABC and C-Span Attended Different Parties Together
Months of meticulous planning went into this week's Democratic National Convention so that nothing -- not the speakers, the singers or the words that appeared on the "video wall" -- would be left to chance.
In the end, though, the impression that will be left with the folks back home is likely to depend on one simple factor beyond the Democrats' control: which television station they happened to be watching.
At least that is the conclusion that anyone would be forced to draw after watching Tuesday evening's proceedings on two televisions, the first tuned to C-Span for an uninterrupted live broadcast, the second tuned to ABC for a sampling of the networks' abbreviated coverage.
Live Versus Processed


Mead Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Ogilvy Gets Jaguar Account In Chief's First Big Victory
FOR the fourth time in less than a year, a large automotive marketer has dismissed its longtime agency after a competitive, closely watched review.
In March, Jaguar Cars Inc. announced that its estimated $15 million account, at Geer, DuBois Inc. in New York since 1986, would be reassessed.
And yesterday, Jaguar Cars, the Mahwah, N.J., American subsidiary of the troubled British luxury-car maker, said it would move the account, effectively immediately, to Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York.


Far Back of the Pack, The Broom Is Ready
At 11:47 this morning, Roberto Sierra decided that the pain in his left thigh was too intense, the road ahead too steep and long, and the rest of the field in the Tour de France too far ahead to be overtaken by him.
Sierra, a 25-year-old Spaniard who rides for the Clas team, pulled over to the right and got off his bicycle, which a mechanic began attaching to the roof of a team car.


Sprint Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
A Message From Balkans, But Will Anyone Heed It?
Overwhelmed with Bosnian refugees, Croatia says it will send new arrivals to Europe's borders.
As the war continues, world leaders do not seem ready to authorize military action to save the Bosnians.
Articles, page A8.
Record Housing-Bias Verdict
A $2.4 million judgment was returned against a company found to have discriminated in housing against families with children.
Page A18.
From Shelters to Uncertainty
Thousands of families pass through New York City's shelters for the homeless only to become urban nomads, two studies show.
Page B1.


Address Delivered by Cuomo Nominating Clinton for Presidency
Following is the speech delivered last night by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo at the Democratic National Convention, as transcribed by The New York Times.
I don't want to go overtime.
They warned me I might wind up playing the accordion on the Arsenio Hall Show, so let's ---- Tonight, tonight I will have the great privilege and honor of placing before you the name of the next President of the United States of America, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.


From Country of Big Sky to the Town of the Big Skyscrapers
Hi, I'm a delegate from Montana, and I'm legally blind."
That is what June Hermanson said to Tyrone Walker, the security guard she met at Bloomingdale's on Monday.
"I told him, 'I want to shop for an hour, and then I need somebody to help me get out of this place,' " Ms.
Hermanson said, recounting her latest adventure in Manhattan.


Noland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dauphin Deposit reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Liberty National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chester Straub, Businessman, 82
Chester Straub, a retired businessman and former New York City official, died on Tuesday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 82 years old and lived in Bronxville, N.Y.
The cause of death was not specified.


Reebok International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


We Can't Turn Animals Into Parts Shops
To the Editor:
The transplantation of a baboon liver into a human being (front page, June 29) has serious and disturbing implications.
The advent of animal-to-human organ transplants, along with genetic engineering techniques that manipulate the bodies of animals to produce biological products, has made real the possibility that the animal kingdom will become nothing more than spare parts supply houses and drug-producing factories for humankind.
This will entail enormous suffering for animals.
It is science without ethics.


The Ups and Downs of Going Over the Top
Vote for Bill Clinton. But not too early, please. And not too often.
Of all the scripted events at a party convention in which the nomination is clinched, the most carefully managed is the formal nomination vote.


Finning Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bank of New Hampshire reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Old Jockeys Don't Retire; They Fade Into Training
Angel Cordero Jr. sits in the little office in Barn 40 at Belmont Park surrounded by framed pictures and newspaper articles depicting his illustrious career in horse racing: 31 years as a jockey, 7,076 victories in 38,684 races, including the Kentucky Derby three times, and $164 million in purses.
There are no clippings after Jan. 12 this year, when he crashed in a four-horse collision at Aqueduct and suffered multiple injuries to his arm, ribs, liver and spleen.
And there are no clippings to mark his new career.
In one month as a trainer, 14 horses stabled, 6 horses saddled, 1 victory, 3 second-place finishes.
And one horse, Puchinito, accounted for most of the numbers.


Police Also Fight Against Stereotypes
To the Editor:
Allegations of police corruption in New York City lead me to write.
I am a member of the generation that came of age during Vietnam and Watergate, and had strong suspicions of anyone in uniform or authority.
I was a guitar-playing, long-haired hippie, almost tear-gassed at a protest march on the Pentagon.


The Show House of Mirth
LIKE bug zappers zapping, designer show houses are a sure sign of summer.
One of the season's zappiest houses is the Edith Wharton Designer Showhouse in Stockbridge, Mass., which benefits Edith Wharton Restoration Inc., a preservation group dedicated to restoring the writer's summer residence in Lenox.
The site of the second annual show house, which opens Sunday, is the Taggart House, a 22-room Victorian mansion built in the early 1870's along the Housatonic River.
This year's theme is "Design in the 1990's and the Spirit of Edith Wharton."


Democrats Saw Through Saddam Hussein
To the Editor:
Leslie Gelb hits the nail on the head in "Cuddling Saddam" (column, July 9), when he suggests that Republicans would be up in arms if a Dukakis administration had cosied up to Saddam Hussein as Ronald Reagan and George Bush did during the 1980's:


A Diverse Delegation Finds Unity in Opposition to Bush
No way was this the ticket that many New York delegates said they would have envisioned themselves endorsing.
Nor was nominating Bill Clinton the bittersweet supporting role that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo expected to play at the national convention.
But with New York's favorite son orphaned by self-doubt, the state's typically fractious Democrats were papering over their differences and their own doubts in unusual appeals for unanimity that could be crucial to Mr.
Clinton's campaign.
Since 1948, when Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey was the Republican nominee, no Democrat has won the Presidency without New York.
None has carried the state by more than a slender majority since 1964.


Convention Summary
BILL CLINTON'S PERSISTENCE PAYS OFF As he finished his long-winded nomination speech at the 1988 convention, Bill Clinton knew he had bombed.
But persistence is a theme of his life, and it may be why, only four years later, he was nominated for the Presidency after facing pressures that might have destroyed other candidates.
Helping him along were a few hired political guns and friends going back decades.
IN SWITCH, DEMOCRATS ACT LIKE DEMOCRATS . . .
For a few sweet moments, the managers of the convention let the Democrats be Democrats.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo set the place afire with his endorsement of Bill Clinton, while former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas laid out their idiosyncratic prescriptions for the party.
And, once more, Senator Edward M. Kennedy evoked the glow of Camelot.
EXPECT NO EXPOSES ON DNC-TV Don't look for a lot of hard-hitting reports from the Convention Satellite News Service.
It's the Democrats' own news service, generously provided free to local television stations.
The message-meisters also try to manage the news by policing every speech.
Still, viewers' impressions are likely to be determined by which station they happened to watch.


General Dynamics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tenacity and Change in a Son of the South
By the time he finished his long-winded nomination speech for Michael S. Dukakis at the 1988 Democratic National Convention, Bill Clinton knew he had bombed.
After all, the audience was chanting, "Get off, get off."
"Had I been Bill at that point," said Samuel Berger, an adviser who was backstage, "I would have gone out and dug the deepest hole I could and buried myself."


Suburban Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


F. A. McAnaney, 85, A Real-Estate Lawyer
Francis A. McAnaney, a real-estate lawyer in New York City, died on Tuesday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 85 years old and lived in Rye, N.Y.
He died of heart failure, said a son, Edward G. McAnaney 2d of Manhattan.


Driveway as Yellow Brick Road
SEARCHING for the nation's spirit?
Look beyond politics.
Look to the place where rolled newspapers dwell, snow blowers roar, free throws soar heavenward and teen-agers tryst.
To the sticky fingerprint of the American soul, to that national asphalt welcome mat, the driveway.
Will the circle be unbroken?
Don't bet on it.
The circle driveway, symbol of bygone gentility, is now being wedged into smaller and smaller plots of land, shimmying into position like hips into a girdle.
Like the push-button door chime, it is ubiquitous.
Obsessed with making an entrance, Americans are increasingly worshiping at the high altar of concrete.


An Accounting of Taste
"SIGNS of the Times: A Portrait of the Nation's Tastes" explores how the English decorate and perceive their homes.
Martin Parr's photographs, with comments from homeowners, and Nicholas Barker's films are on exhibit until July 31 at Janet Borden Inc., a gallery at 560 Broadway in Manhattan.
There's a photograph of a lustrous- orange, ruffle-edged balloon shade.
Under it are words from its owner: "I get such pleasure from them every day when I sit in the bath."


Signet Banking Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Actors to Read Writers
Eli Wallach and Anne Jackson are to read works by some of their favorite writers at 1 P.M. today at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, Fifth Avenue at 55th Street, mid-Manhattan.
The presentation, for Stanley Eugene Tannen's Free Theater Project, is to include pieces by Dorothy Parker, Tennessee Williams and George Bernard Shaw.
Representative Ted Weiss, Democrat of New York, who is the chairman for the Congressional Arts Caucus, is to introduce the program.
The reading is free.


Woodhead Industries reports earnings for 13wks to June 27


94 Electronic Guides for Adolescents
WHAT teen-agers don't understand, what teachers rarely teach and what parents don't know or won't say is now available here by telephone: 94 recorded messages on subjects ranging from drug abuse to suicide to sexuality.
The program is called the Community Awareness Phone System, and since a computer began keeping count on July 2, more than 300 calls have come in.


West Newton Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sealright Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 Fundamentalists in Algeria Get Relatively Light Sentences
A military court in Algeria today condemned the two top leaders of the country's Islamic fundamentalist party to 12 years in jail.
This was widely viewed as a lenient sentence and perhaps a signal from the military-dominated government that it seeks some kind of reconciliation with the Islamic opposition.
The two leaders, Abassi Madani, 61 years old, and Ali Belhadj, 35, have been under arrest for months and their party, the Islamic Salvation Front, which has millions of adherents in Algeria, was banned.


The Offer Is Good: Knicks Didn't Tamper, Lawyer Rules
The Knicks were cleared today of all tampering charges filed by the Washington Bullets, meaning that their offer sheet to restricted free-agent forward Harvey Grant remains valid.
But the Bullets are expected to match New York's six-year, $17.6 million offer sheet to Grant by the 6 P.M. deadline on Friday.
After more than nine hours of testimony, the New York lawyer Ted Clark, the special master in this grievance, ruled that the Knicks had not negotiated with Grant before the July 1 deadline.
Under National Basketball Association rules, no team can negotiate with free agents from another team before July 1.


Norman Farquhar, Bank President, 71
Norman Farquhar, a Washington investment banker and former president of the Chevy Chase Savings Bank, died on Tuesday at Georgetown University Hospital.
He was 71 years old and lived in Washington.
He died of complications from prostate cancer, his family said.


Nashua Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Lotus Development reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


First City Bancorp-Tenn. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CREDIT MARKETS;
A two-part, $817 million debt offering by the Long Island llighting Company was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
The sale included $397 million of noncallable debentures due in 1999, which were given a 7.3 percent coupon and priced at 99.943 to yield 7.31 percent, or about 85 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Character vs. Caricature; Can Bill Clinton Be Trusted?
In 1988, he nominated Michael Dukakis with a speech voicing anguish over America's lack of concern for children.
But no one remembers that; the 19-page address brought groans from a Democratic Convention that had barely five pages of patience.
It was, someone gibed, either the longest nominating speech or the shortest Presidential candidacy in history.
This time around, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas has shrewdly and tirelessly persevered to win the nomination.
Tonight, following Gov.
Mario Cuomo's stirring nomination last night, he goes before the 1992 Democratic Convention to make another speech, to rally the public to his own candidacy.
But if he is to succeed he'll need more than wit and energy.
He'll have to confront a bigger, simpler subject: trust.


Kroger Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


Topics of The Times; 85 Minutes on Broadway
A determined theatergoer would spend the better part of two weeks and several hundred dollars to see all the show-stoppers on the bill at lunchtime yesterday in Times Square.
All 13 of Broadway's current musicals pooled their talent and hits for a special outdoor staging in the heart of the theater district.
The show was put together for the Democratic National Convention, but it was open to one and all.
Judd Hirsch, one of the emcees, told the thousands who came that they'd fill Broadway's theaters five times over, and urged them to do so.


Hubco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chemical Waste Management Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Unusual Tumor With a Potential for Trouble
Although the tumor removed from Pope John Paul II's colon yesterday was benign, this kind of growth can cause a variety of symptoms and is commonly removed because of its enormous potential for becoming cancerous.
The tumor is called a villous adenoma and is a form of polyp.
It takes its name from the villi, the millions of tiny finger-like projections that occur in the bowel.
Villi increase the surface area of the bowel to aid in absorbing fluids, chemicals and other nutriments.
An adenoma is a benign tumor arising in glandular tissue.


Green Tree Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Damage Is Reported After Severe Storms
Severe thunderstorms accompanied by driving rains, unusually large hail and 50-mile-per-hour winds struck the metropolitan New York region yesterday, knocking down trees, capsizing boats and cutting off power to thousands of residents.
There were no immediate reports of injuries.
The National Weather Service said it had received unconfirmed reports that eight tornadoes had touched down last night in the region -- two in Queens, one in Nassau County, L.I., and five across New Jersey.
But Mike Caropolo, a meteorologist for the Weather Service, said those reports could not be verified until investigators inspected the storm damage in daylight today.


Money Funds' Yields Down, Hurt by the Fed's Rate Cut
Money market fund yields dropped in the latest week, according to IBC/ Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
Analysts said the Federal Reserve's cut in short-term interest rates two weeks ago continued to put pressure on fund yields.
Tax-exempt money funds suffered another sharp drop in yields.
A number of investors who suddenly redeemed their municipal-bond holdings because of lower interest rates rushed to park that fresh cash in money-market funds.
This forced yields down as the supply of short-term tax-exempt paper tightened.


Jerusalem Post's Policy
To the Editor:
Let me reassure Anthony Lewis (column, June 28) that The Jerusalem Post will continue, as it has for the last two and a half years, to present its readers with information, analyses and think pieces enabling them to form their own opinions.


Neworld Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gallagher (Arthur J.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


General Electric reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stop Legal Harassment of Our Trade Partners
To the Editor:
"Trade Gap Too High? Export a Few Lawyers" (Business Day, July 2), an otherwise insightful look at trade complaints by American steel companies, fails to expose the real problems of the growth of dumping suits against foreign companies.
The unmanageable Comprehensive Trade Act of 1987, which many dubbed the "full employment of Washington lawyers and lobbyists act," has abetted legal and political harassment of foreign products and companies.


Bridge
The Greater New York Bridge Association, which successfully introduced a major event with cash prizes two months ago, continues to break new ground.
Its Summer Regional Championship, beginning tomorrow at the Vista International Hotel, 3 World Trade Center, Manhattan, will feature a two-day Swiss Pairs, scored by match points, the first time such a competition has been played in North America.
The full schedule is: tomorrow, Imp Pairs and Stratified Open Pairs, 1:30 and 7:30 P.M.; Bracketed Knockout (first session), 7:30 P.M.; Knockout Teams (one session), midnight; Saturday, Matchpoint Swiss Pairs, noon and 8 P.M.; Flighted Open Pairs, noon and 6 P.M.; Sunday, Matchpoint Swiss Pairs (final), Open Swiss Teams and Stratified Swiss Teams, 12:30 and 7:30 P.M.
Single-session Stratified Novice Pairs throughout.


CHRONICLE
Two groups of people who don't ordinarily dine together, at least not all at once, are to break bread tonight.
The board of Carnegie Hall has invited the board of the New York Philharmonic to dinner in the Carnegie East Room to celebrate a return visit of the orchestra to its former home.
The Philharmonic, which left Carnegie Hall in 1962 to take up residence at Lincoln Center, concludes a series of four Tchaikovsky Celebration concerts tonight at the hall.
"Any time we can, we like to welcome them back to their old home grounds," said ISAAC STERN, who is president of the Carnegie Hall board and who has performed with the orchestra 103 times.
"Kurt Masur loves the hall. So did Lenny Bernstein, and the members of the orchestra feel coddled and warmed here."


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Jones Intercable Inc., Englewood, Colo., a broadcast, radio and television company, is offering $160 million, up from $150 million, of 11 1/2 percent senior subordinated debentures due in 2004 at a price of 100 through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities.
The debentures are rated B-2 by Moody's and B by S.&amp; P.
*
Louisiana Power and Light Co., New Orleans, a unit of the Entergy Corp., is offering $90 million in 8 1/2 percent first mortgage bonds due in 2022 at a price of 98.91 to yield 8.601 percent through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The bonds, nonrefundable for five years, are rated Baa-2 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Stephen Scott  Bradley's 70 University Place Greenwich Village Through Saturday  Ahmad Jamal  Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street Greenwich Village Through Sunday


Air Transport President Forced Out
An apparent casualty of the troubled airline industry, Robert J. Aaronson, the president of the Air Transport Association, has been forced to resign.
The association, the airline industry's chief lobbying group in Washington, said on Tuesday that Mr.
Aaronson's resignation would be effective Aug. 7.


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Multibank Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Best 'Pretty Cleaned Up' T-Shirts
TO the Minneapolis graphics designer Charles S. Anderson, America's T-shirts reflect "an artistic melting pot." An exhibition of more than 90 T-shirts by American designers is on view through Aug. 7 at the American Institute of Graphic Arts Gallery at 1059 Third Avenue, between East 62d and 63d streets.
The shirts are the winners of a national design competition.
"T-shirts are a mixture of art and commerce," Mr.
Anderson said.


First Alabama Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Officer Tells Of Shooting That Ignited Disturbances
Michael O'Keefe, the police officer whose fatal shooting of a Dominican man ignited angry protests in Washington Heights last week, told the Manhattan District Attorney's office yesterday that he fired in self-defense after the man pulled a gun on him, a law-enforcement official and a lawyer connected to the case said.
Officer O'Keefe told investigators that he had followed the man, Jose Garcia, after suspecting that Mr.
Garcia was concealing a gun, and that after questioning him, Mr.
Garcia first tried to flee, then punched the officer several times and drew a gun on him, the officials said.


Sports of The Times; Jets' Nagle Needs More Than an Arm
FOR the Jets and Browning Nagle, the future together begins today.
For better or for worse.
As training camp opens, both Ken O'Brien and Troy Taylor are absent because of contract disputes.
But even if both were here, the Jets think it's time for a change at quarterback.
Now 31 years old, O'Brien took the Jets as far as he could, but never far enough.
Taylor has the look of a career backup.
Even though Nagle threw only two passes and completed one, for 10 yards, as a rookie last season, it's as if it now is his job to lose.


Essay; The Me-Too Democrats
If Russia can abandon Communism, the Democratic Party -- in a New York minute -- can say goodbye to income redistribution, the essence of liberalism.
"Growth" -- the economics of the bigger pie -- is the unabashed message of Clintonomics.
"Why not change from a party with a reputation of tax-and-spend," intoned the keynote lecturer Barbara Jordan, "to one with a reputation of investment and growth?"


TRW Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Income-Based School Busing Stirs Anger in Wisconsin
Four of nine members of the LaCrosse, Wis., School Board were defeated in a recall election Tuesday and two more were forced into runoff elections, as residents expressed anger over a plan to bus students based on family income.
The plan, believed to be the first of its kind in the nation, was designed to ease overcrowding in the district's 11 elementary schools and to break up large blocks of poor children who had been concentrated in two of the schools.
Poor children are defined by the district as those receiving free lunches under the Federal school-lunch program.


Croatia Warns It Will Take Bosnian Refugees to European Borders
In an effort to goad Western countries into doing more to help it cope with the greatest surge of refugees in Europe since World War II, Croatia has warned its neighbors that it will transport newly arrived refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina and leave them on other European nationss' borders.
"At this moment there is absolutely no possibility of accommodating a single new refugee from Bosnia and Herzegovina," a Government statement issued in Zagreb said Monday.
It declared that the Government could barely contend with caring for the estimated 300,000 who have already fled from fighting in the neighboring republic while housing an equal number of Croatians who have been dispossessed from Serbian-held areas of this country.


Ameritech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about Vanity Fair's profitability misidentified the magazine's publisher in some editions.
He is Ronald A. Galotti.


Poor Performance on Arms Curbs
What a stunt!
President Bush has just promulgated new policies designed to reduce the threat of nuclear weapons.
They include a unilateral halt to U.S. production of nuclear material and limits on nuclear testing.
But these policies only codify what the U.S. is doing already.
If Mr.
Bush really means business, he needs to go beyond promulgating stand-pat policies and take a number of urgently needed new steps to control the spread of nuclear weapons in the former Soviet Union, South Asia and other trouble spots.


Wickes Case Ruled Closed
A Delaware court has refused to reopen a 1989 lawsuit filed by a category of investors who contended that their rights had been impaired by the buyout of Wickes Companies by WCI Holdings, a joint venture of Blackstone Capital Partners and Wasserstein, Perella Partners.
Earlier this year, the investors, who were holders of Wickes common stock warrants, had asked Judge William Allen of Delaware Chancery Court to reconsider his earlier dismissal of their claim.
The warrant holders had challenged a last-minute reclassification of Wickes common stock into a new issue of Wickes preferred shares in the WCI buyout.


DEMOCRATS GIVE CLINTON THEIR BLESSING; CUOMO HAILS 'NEW VOICE FOR NEW AMERICA'
The Democratic National Convention nominated Gov.
Bill Clinton for the Presidency last night after Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York made an impassioned case for the man from Hope, Ark., and declared that the nation could not afford another Democratic defeat.
Mr.
Clinton capped the emotional night with a joyous march from a restaurant in Macy's to the convention floor in Madison Square Garden a block away.
Illuminated by floodlights and cascades of red, white and blue glitter confetti falling from the ceiling, Mr.
Clinton strode into the convention hall, which was packed by roaring, triumphant Democrats.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  POPE'S SUCCESSFUL OPERATION  Doctors excised a large but benign tumor from Pope John Paul II's intestine and removed his gallbladder in an operation lasting almost four hours.
The Pope was said to have "tolerated the operation well," but is expected to remain in the hospital for about 10 days.
A1  Tumors in the colon are removed because of the danger of cancer.
A6  FOOD AND MORALE IN BOSNIA  Delivering food to a long-besieged Sarajevo suburb was a breakthrough for the United Nations refugee commission and a morale boost for the troops protecting deliveries.
But the U.N. is short of money.
A8  Germany to send destroyer and planes to Balkans.
A9  WEST SEEMS SHY ABOUT BOSNIA  News Analysis: It seems increasingly clear that neither the United States nor the rest of the West appears ready to authorize the kind of military action that might save the beleaguered Bosnians.
A8  CROATIA'S PLEA, AND THREAT  In an effort to goad Western countries into doing more to help it cope with the greatest surge of refugees in Europe since World War II, Croatia has warned its neighbors that it will transport refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina and leave them on Europe's borders.
A8  MANDELA CALLS FOR U.N.
HELP  Nelson Mandela, addressing the Security Council, called for United Nations intervention to stop the violence in South Africa's black townships and to reopen negotiations over the country's political future.
A3  BUSH SENDS WARNING TO IRAQ  The Bush Administration warned Iraq that it was violating the Persian Gulf war cease-fire agreement by barring a United Nations inspection team from searching for documents stored in a Baghdad ministry.
A7  Jinotega Journal: Peacekeepers came, saw and now must leave.
A4  The Convention A11-17  THE CORONATION OF CLINTON  With the blessings of the party's liberal wing, the Democratic National Convention sent Governor Clinton into an unpredictable battle for the Presidency.
A1  A PARADE OF NOT-QUITE-NOMINEES  News analysis: For a few fleeting moments, the convention's managers let Democrats be Democrats.
Here came to the rostrum people named Brown, Kennedy, Tsongas and Cuomo.
These were the losers, the men not nominated, the paths not taken, and there were contradictions aplenty.
A1  The text of Cuomo's nominating speech.
A14  Finding the right state to nominate the candidate.
A12 'IN IT FOR THE LONG HAUL'  Man in the News: Persistence is a theme of Governor Clinton's life, and it may be the reason why, only four years after one of the worst speeches in recent convention history, he won his party's nomination.
A1  Every step of the way, a persistent staff as well.
A11  For Clinton's mother, trials and now triumph.
A11  NEW YORK JOINS THE BANDWAGON  This is not the ticket that many New York delegates would have envisioned themselves endorsing.
But with Governor Cuomo orphaned by self-doubt, the state's Democrats are papering over their differences and their own doubts in unusual appeals for unanimity that could be crucial to the Clinton campaign.
A13  THIS IS NEW YORK?
The 24 delegates from Montana have been roaming fearlesslessly around town since Saturday, from their hotel on East 50th Street to the Blue Note in Greenwich Village to Madison Square Garden.
And everywhere they go, proclaming "Hi, we're from Montana," New Yorkers are, yes, nice to them.
A13  AND WHICH CONVENTION IS THIS?
In the end, the impression of the convention that will be left with the folks back home is likely to depend on one factor beyond the party's control: which television station they happen to be watching.
A12  Garden Diary: Clinton and the liberal brethren.
A11  National A18-23, B10  ROLLINS QUITS PEROT TEAM  Less than two months after signing on as co-manager of Ross Perot's Presidential campaign, Edward J. Rollins resigned in frustration, saying his advice to Mr.
Perot had been unheeded.
Mr.
Rollins's duties will be assumed by the other co-manager, Hamilton Jordan.
A1  F.C.C.
BACKS PHONE-COMPANY TV  The F.C.C. today will adopt a rule allowing telephone companies to transmit television programming over phone lines.
The move could lead to formidable competition for cable television companies and ultimately revolutionize video use in the home and elsewhere.
A1  RECORD HOUSING-BIAS VERDICT  In what is believed to be the largest verdict in a housing case, a Federal court jury returned a $2.4 million judgment against a company found to have discriminated against families with children.
A18  JUSTICE GETS ABORTION-PILL CASE  Justice Thomas asked the Government to submit arguments today explaining why it should keep French abortion pills seized from a woman entering the country two weeks ago.
To be assured that the pills will end her pregancy, the woman should take them by Saturday, her doctor said.
A18  BACKLASH TO NOVEL BUSING PLAN  Four of a Wisconsin school board's nine members were defeated and two others forced into runoffs as voters participating in a recall election expressed anger over a plan to integrate poor students with affluent ones by busing both.
B10  Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  The Home Section C1-12  Driveway as yellow brick road.
C1  On the prowl with Victor Malafronte: Stalking celebrities.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C15-26  Berlin's cultural czar.
C15  A Broadway free show.
C15  Time Warner hears protest over its  "Cop Killer" album.
C17  Sports B13-19  Baseball: Mets have seen the enemy . . . it's themselves.
B14  Yankees start 2d half with an 11-game road trip.
B14  Basketball: Arbitrator rules in Knicks favor.
B13  Cycling: No major changes in Tour de France standing.
B16  Obituaries B12  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Can Bill Clinton be trusted?
Poor performance on arms curbs.
Topics: 85 minutes on Broadway.
Letters  William Safire: Me-too Democrats.
Leslie H. Gelb: Wonks vs. liberals.
Roger B. Porter: Bush's program means jobs.
Robert B. Reich: Clinton's growth plan.


Dominicans Have Contempt for Drug Dealers
To the Editor:
"It's Not the Rodney King Case" (editorial, July 9) speaks of disorders in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan following the death of Jose Garcia at the hands of a police officer and speaks of the town where I was born, San Francisco de Macoris in the Dominican Republic, as a farm town transformed by drug money.
I am a physician and have practiced in New York City almost 35 years.


Industrial Output Off; Inventories Up
Manufacturing lost steam in June and inventories are piling up again, signs that feeble consumer and business buying is beginning to affect the nation's factories, mines and utilities.
"There is no acceleration in the economy's growth," said Allen Sinai, president of the Boston Company.
"The rebound in production has faded."


Austere Muirfield Beckons The Brave
If Muirfield were a person, it might be the kind of grim British schoolmaster that many of its members -- the prideful and all-male Honorable Company of Edinburgh Golfers -- happen to resemble.
Lessons would be delivered with brisk condescension and an undeniable truth: "Place your drives in the fairway, young sirs, or golf for you will be little more than heavy labor."


Coastal Banc Savings Assoc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Modine Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Boise Cascade Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


AMR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Woman at Center of Debate: Model of an Ardent Feminist
Leona Benten, the pregnant, unmarried 29-year-old California woman who is challenging the Government ban's on importing RU486, is the very model of a politically active feminist who leaped at the chance to become the test case for a cause she believes in.
"I don't like surgery, I don't like hospitals, and I believe in self-determination, so I'd much rather take a pill than put myself in the hands of someone who's going to do a procedure on me," Ms.
Benten said.
She had an abortion nine years ago and said she would undergo the procedure again if the Government does not return the 12-pill dose of RU486 it confiscated on July 1 at Kennedy International Airport.


Accounting Asset Rule Is Backed
The Financial Accounting Standards Board tentatively agreed yesterday on a compromise proposal that would force companies to value more of their investments at market value.
The intent is to avoid problems like those in the savings and loan crisis in which institutions carried assets on their books at cost, although they had lost value.
The rules would affect all publicly traded companies, but the greatest impact is expected among banks, savings institutions and insurance companies.


Message Is New, but Words Are the Cuomo of Old
To much of the crowd in Madison Square Garden last night, the power of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's nominating speech for Gov.
Bill Clinton stemmed from the metaphors he used to illustrate the failures of the Bush and Reagan years.
In fact, many of the most enduring images were stock passages lifted from Cuomo speeches in the last two years.


Willamette Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quickly, Clinton Coffers Are Beginning to Fill Up
To hear Democratic fund-raisers tell it, this week they have gone from one kind of nightmare to another.
Coming into the week, the campaign of Gov.
Bill Clinton was so low on money, with about $100,000 in cash, that one senior adviser said privately that it had barely enough to pay for gas for the fleet of rented limousines.


Rise in Sales-Tax Revenue Eases Suffolk Deficit and Layoff Plans
A welcome increase in sales-tax revenues has eased Suffolk County's financial crisis and enabled officials to reconsider plans to borrow money, cut wages and lay off county employees.
After a year and a half of declining sales-tax revenues, collections in the county this year are up about 3.5 percent from the same period in 1991, with all of the gains coming in the second quarter.


Radius Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


William H. Warfield, F.B.I. Agent, 54
William H. Warfield, who was first vice president for security of the Republic National Bank of New York and the former chief of counterintelligence for the F.B.I. in New York City, died on Monday at his home in Stamford, Conn.
He was 54 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his wife, Marynell.


Corrections
A picture in some editions yesterday with an obituary of the historian Oscar Lewis was published in error.
It showed the anthropologist Oscar Lewis, author of "The Children of Sanchez," who died in 1970.


Is It Time for Yanks to Turn Thoughts to '93?
The second half begins right here, which can't be a pleasant thought for the Yankees.
Their season is fading and their record is falling, but their hope is lingering.
But is any of that important?
Maybe not.
As August nears and the race in the American League East leaves them behind, the Yankees -- opening an 11-game trip on Thursday against the Angels -- are likely to begin thinking about other things.


Excerpts From Remarks Delivered by Tsongas and Brown at the Convention
Following are excerpts from speeches at the Democratic National Convention by selected speakers, as transcribed by The New York Times.
Paul E. Tsongas Ex-Senator From Massachusetts
Franklin Delano Roosevelt is our patron saint.
He brought economic hope out of deep economic despair.
We must do the same.


U.S. Surgical Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Pop; Graceful Juju With Its Roots Intact
Familiar as it was, King Sunny Ade's opening gambit in his concert on Monday night at the Ritz still had the power to astonish.
One by one, the percussionists in his band, the African Beats, arrived on stage, each playing a different pattern.
Pounding on talking drums, clinking on cowbells, sputtering on congas, swishing on maracas and gourd, socking on trap drums, each percussionist dovetailed his part with the ones already sounding, until 10 rhythms interlocked as 1.
It was a demonstration of intricate cooperation and a glimpse at the inner machinery of Mr.
Ade's juju music, in which Yoruba traditions meet modern technology.
The 10 percussionists were only half the band, which also includes 3 guitars, bass, keyboard, 4 backup singers (1 of whom plays pedal steel guitar) and Mr.
Ade himself on guitar and lead vocals.
The electrified instruments each moved into the foreground during the band's two-hour set, but the percussion was central, providing the pace and texture of every song, supplying endless subtle variations to an underlying pulse.


CHRONICLE
"Are you passing on the torch?" HUGH L. CAREY, the former Governor of New York, asked MARY HIGGINS CLARK, the best-selling writer of suspense novels, on Tuesday at the party she gave for her daughter CAROL HIGGINS CLARK at the Lotos Club.
It was a logical question.
Mary Higgins Clark has written 10 books that have sold a total of 22 million copies in the United States; her daughter's first book has just been published by Warner Books.
It's a mystery called "Decked," and is a humorous tale of a private investigator named Regan Reilly.


Seeing Lamps in a New Light
IF the Tizio was the lamp of the 1980's, Donna Reinsel's steel table lamp with a gut shade -- you might call it Animal Tech -- may be the light of the 90's.
Her lamp is one of dozens of artists' designs on display (priced from $50 to $6,500) at a lighting show at the Gallery of Functional Art in Santa Monica, Calif.


Northrop Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cityscapes And History In Bronze
MOVE over, Ghiberti.
The paradisiacal bronze bas-relief panels on the Brooklyn Bridge have arrived.
Standing under the bridge's towers on a recent Sunday morning, the designer Keith Godard, of Studio Works in New York, surveyed his handiwork: 14 panels financed by the Brooklyn Bridge Centennial Commission, the city's Department of Transportation and Chemical Bank.
"They're basically historically correct," he said, his white ponytail whipping slightly in the breeze.


Rollins Quits Perot's Campaign; Asserts His Advice Was Ignored
Less than two months after he arrived to help bring an air of professionalism to Ross Perot's grass-roots campaign, Edward J. Rollins resigned in frustration today, citing an unwillingness on the part of the Texas billionaire to follow his advice.
Mr.
Rollins, a veteran Republican strategist, and Thomas W. Luce 3d, the chairman of the Perot Petition Committee, appeared together at a hastily called press conference and made little effort to hide their differences.
Mr.
Rollins said his resignation was effective immediately.


Wolohan Lumber reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Germantown Savings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


DIALOGUE: Adrenaline for the Economy -- Whose Road to Prosperity? Clinton: Spur Growth
Gov.
Bill Clinton's plan to revive the economy calls for some carefully focused private investment.
But the centerpiece is public investment, which in the emerging global economy is critical.
The Administration's economic record, the worst since Herbert Hoover's, stems from the failed "trickle down" logic of supply-side economics.
Today, private investment does not necessarily trickle down: it trickles out to wherever around the world it can get the highest return.


'The Card' Ads Lose in Survey
In one of the first measurements of consumer response to the new American Express advertising campaign, readers of print ads have indicated a preference for the green charge card's previous ads.
Starch INRA Hooper, which measures print-ad readership, found that the previous ads by Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, which carried the theme "Membership has its privileges," had fared considerably better than the initial ads in the new campaign by Chiat/Day/ Mojo Inc. in New York, which carry the theme "The card. The American Express Card."


Fibreboard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Goodrich (B.F.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reuben A. Sheares, 58, a Pastor And a Leader in Church of Christ
The Rev.
Dr.
Reuben A. Sheares, a pastor and a former national leader of the United Church of Christ and ecumenical organizations, died on Saturday at the Osteopathic Hospital in Olympia Fields, Ill.
He was 58 years old and lived in Olympia Fields.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Big Boys Get Excited for Summer Camp
For Kenny Anderson, it's a chance to make up for the basketball summer camp he missed last year.
For Walter Berry, it's a chance to come home and take another shot at the National Basketball Association.
"I played in Spain first and then in Italy, but I just wanted to give the N.B.A. another try, while I'm still young" said the 28-year-old Berry, of his participation with the Boston Celtics in the Doral Arrowwood New York Summer League tournament this week at the Westchester County Center.


Suspect in Stein Case Arrested in Robbery
A paroled convict, suspected of entering the apartment of City Council President Andrew J. Stein last month and locking his two young sons and a baby sitter in a bathroom, was arrested early yesterday during the attempted robbery of a gypsy cab driver in Harlem, the police said.
The suspect, Bryant George, 29 years old, of 1653 Sterling Place, Brooklyn, was arrested by two officers of the 28th Precinct at 12:30 A.M. yesterday as he sat in the back seat of the cab at West 125th Street and Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard, said a police spokesman, Lieut.
Raymond A. O'Donnell.
Moments earlier, the cabdriver, Jose Colon, 29, stopped the car, jumped out and shouted that he was being robbed.


Armistice for Apple and Microsoft
Is nothing sacred in the computer world?
For years, Apple and Microsoft have been at odds with each other, battling -- sometimes bitterly -- in forums ranging from the marketplace to the courtroom.
In the last month, for example, an Apple advertising campaign has lambasted Microsoft's Windows program as being inferior to Macintosh software.


The Art Market
Warhols Attacked as Fake
Andy Warhol was a master of reproduction.
He borrowed images from the Campbell Soup can and the Brillo pad box, the dollar bill and the Coca-Cola bottle.
Warhol even had his mother fake his signature on artworks because he liked her rendition better than his own.
Were he alive today, the artist would no doubt be enjoying the tale of two recent legal battles involving the sale of Warhols that are said to be counterfeit.
What could be more fitting than a dispute over fake versions of the work of this artist who celebrated the ersatz?
But the artist's estate and the foundation started in his memory are not amused, nor are the collectors who have spent thousands of dollars on what may not be real Warhols.


Stein Spends $1 Million On 1993 Mayoral Race
City Council President Andrew J. Stein has spent more than $1 million in the last six months on his mayoral campaign, nearly three times more than either of his two rivals.
Board of Elections reports show that Mr.
Stein spent $1,015,000, Mayor David N. Dinkins, $347,000, and former United States Attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani, $293,000.
The reports filed yesterday prompted sharp words between Mr.
Stein and the Mayor.
Mr.
Dinkins said that Mr.
Stein could not expect to buy the election and Mr.
Stein replied that the election would not be about money, but about the Mayor's performance.


Bausch &amp; Lomb reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


A Leading French Socialist to Face Charges
The Speaker of the National Assembly, France's third-ranking leader after the President and the Prime Minister, was told today that he would soon face criminal charges related to allegations of illegal financing of the governing Socialist Party.
The Speaker, Henri Emmanuelli, said he had been summoned to appear before a court in Rennes between Sept. 8 and 14.
The summons said he would be accused of acting as an accomplice in and beneficiary of influence-peddling while serving as party treasurer from July 1988 until last January.


Captain Perot Jumps Ship
Ross Perot deserves high marks for throwing a healthy scare into both parties and energizing an army of Americans disaffected with the political system.
He deserves failing marks for leaving that army in the lurch, deepening the very disillusion he claimed to be fighting.
His announcement yesterday that he would no longer pursue his Presidential bid included a bizarre exhortation to his supporters to keep on collecting the signatures necessary to put his name on the November ballot.
I'm bailing out, folks, but you keep working.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
Digital Equipment's founder, Kenneth H. Olsen, will retire as president, ending 35 years at the helm of the world's second-largest computer company, after I.B.M.
Wall Street analysts, startled, speculated that the board may have forced the move.
Robert B. Palmer, vice president of manufacturing and logistics, will be named to succeed Mr.
Olsen.  [ D1. ]  Digital's survival is expected to depend on moving quickly to its new Alpha RISC chip.  [ D1. ]
Hewlett-Packard named Lewis E. Platt to succeed John A. Young as president.
Mr.
Platt has been lauded for revitalizing the Silicon Valley company's computer business.  [ D2. ]


Keystone Consolidated Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Anderson Gets 29
For the second straight game, Kenny Anderson was the game's high scorer tonight, getting 29 points and adding 10 assists for the Nets in a 125-122 overtime loss to the Philadelphia 76ers on the second night of the Doral Arrowwood New York Summer League tournament at the Westchester Country Club.


RATE OF MARRIAGE CONTINUES DECLINE
Even as "family values" have become a central theme in the 1992 Presidential campaign, newly released Government statistics show that the decadelong decline in American marriage rates accelerated sharply last year.
The figures, from the National Center for Health Statistics, were followed today by new Census Bureau data showing that in 1991, one in four Americans of ages 18 and older, about 41 million people, had never married.
In 1970, that figure was about one in six adults.


Digital Equipment Founder Is Stepping Down
Kenneth H. Olsen, the founder and president of the Digital Equipment Corporation and a computer industry legend, said today that he would retire, ending 35 years at the helm of the world's second-largest computer company.
Robert B. Palmer, Digital's vice president of manufacturing and logistics, will be named by the company's board later this month to succeed Mr.
Olsen.
Mr.
Olsen, who is 66 years old, co-founded Digital with $70,000 in borrowed money in 1957 and single-handedly built it into a $14 billion force in the computer marketplace.
But in recent years he has been under increasing fire because of Digital's declining financial situation.
Digital staff members and industry analysts have increasingly called for the enigmatic entrepreneur to step down.


Art in Review
'Cross Section'  Battery Park City and World Financial Center Manhattan Through Sept. 20


Apple Computer reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Beverly Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Film Tribute to Clinton Focuses on Simple Values
How many old-fashioned American values can fit into a 14-minute film?
Nearly 57 varieties, when it is by Linda Bloodworth-Thomason, the television producer who made "The Man From Hope," an intimate portrait of Gov.
Bill Clinton, with commentary by Mr.
Clinton and members of his family.
From beginning to end, the film sought to portray Mr.
Clinton not as a charismatic, dynamic political leader, but rather as a man with a modest, small-town background, no stranger to adversity, who matured into a man who believes deeply in family and country.


U.S. Offers Amnesty In Miami Aid Inquiry
In an effort to facilitate its investigation of financial fraud involving athletes at the University of Miami, the United States Attorney's office here has sent letters to dozens of students, promising ammesty in return for full disclosure.
The athletes would have to admit guilt, make restitution for any illegal aid they received in Pell grants and give statements on everything they know about the university's aid procedures.


SCEcorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Top Florio Aide Assails Republican Layoff Plan
Under a constant and sometimes angry barrage of questions from Republicans, the state Personnel Commissioner said today that a layoff plan outlined in the Republican-drafted budget was "unachievable." But Anthony J. Cimino refused to give details of how the Florio administration intended to handle the layoffs.
"I am not at liberty to elaborate on the specific details of layoff plans which have been submitted," Mr.
Cimino said at a hearing before the Joint Budget Oversight Committee.
"The Attorney General has indicated that layoff plans submitted by state agencies are to be treated as internal documents and should not become public record until they have been approved by the Department of Personnel."


Time Warner Has Profit; 4-for-1 Stock Split Set
Time Warner Inc. reported a second-quarter profit of $9 million yesterday, in contrast to a loss of $32 million in the quarter a year earlier, and a rise in revenues of nearly 9 percent, to $3.1 billion.
It also announced a 4-for-1 stock split and a 12 percent increase in its quarterly dividend, effective Sept. 10 for shareholders of record as of Aug. 24.
The split will increase the number of outstanding shares to 370 million, from 92.7 million.
Time Warner said the dividend would be 28 cents a share after the split, equivalent to $1.12 a common share on the shares currently outstanding.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  TRYING TO CURTAIL ILLEGAL VANS' ROUTES
Bolstered by a bill passed by the State Legislature, New York City and the Transit Authority have begun planning a campaign to crack down on an armada of livery vans that illegally shadow bus routes in Queens, Brooklyn and the Bronx.
B3.
STEIN SPENDING MORE THAN RIVALS
City Council President Andrew J. Stein has spent more than $1 million in the last six months on his mayoral campaign, nearly three times as much as either of his rivals.
Board of Elections reports show Mr.
Stein spent $1,015,000; Mayor Dinkins, $347,000, and former United States Attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani, $293,000.
B3.


Time for Bowe To Get Serious
Riddick Bowe is the man who would be Muhammad Ali.
Out of the ring, Bowe practices a brand of humor that includes the standard impressions of a lounge comic: Ronald Reagan, Richard Pryor, Stevie Wonder.
Bowe once even sat with Ali and recited a rhyming poem that the former heavyweight champion recognized, in substance and timbre, as one of his own.
And like the self-styled "greatest of aaaaaaalll time," Bowe on occasion will sardonically label his opponents with nicknames.


Ethyl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Philip Morris Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ted E. Dillow; Bar Executive, 62
Ted E. Dillow, executive director of the Nebraska State Bar Association since 1976, was killed early Tuesday when his car ran off the road near Wisner, Neb., the local authorities reported.
He was 62 years old and lived in Wahoo.
Mr.
Dillow was president of John F. Kennedy College in Wahoo from 1967 until it closed in 1975.
At the bar association he started programs to provide legal aid to the poor.


Review/Film; New Director Puts Dividends in a Conventional Crime Story
Carl Franklin's first feature, "One False Move," says as much about where Mr.
Franklin is headed as about where he has been.
Although he works within the idiom of a conventional crime story, telling of three violent drug dealers running from the law, Mr.
Franklin delivers the kind of symmetry, surprise and detail that easily transcend the limits of the genre.
It's clear that this new film maker could work well with other types of material and on a much more ambitious plane.
Thanks to the thoughtfulness and promise he displays this time, he undoubtedly will.
Too bad it would be unfair to describe the closing image of "One False Move," since this film's resolution lifts it so far above ordinary film noir fatalism.
Despair, terrible irony and the sudden chance of redemption combine to end the story on a wrenching, altogether satisfying note.


Ruddick Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Tennis; Presenting Geezers, The Next Generation
"MARTINA is not Larry Holmes," said Navratilova's agent, patiently, firmly.
"I don't see how you can make that comparison. Holmes is not a competitive boxer. Martina is one of the top five tennis players in the world."
"But Holmes just fought for the heavyweight title," I said.
"And here's Martina ready to do his 'Geezers at Caesars' gig."


T2 Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article on June 11 about the British Government's release of documents on Rudolf Hess misstated the occupation of another German who may have been involved in the Hitler deputy's 1941 flight to Britain.
Two readers have written to point out that the German, Albrecht Haushofer, was a political scientist, not a general.


A Historic Offering


Loss in D.C. Tournament A Blip on Agassi's Radar
You can dress him up in white shorts; just don't try to take him everywhere.
Andre Agassi's virtuoso performance on the staid lawns of Wimbledon less than two weeks ago brought him his profession's seal of approval and a thrill that was enough to make him kiss the stubble he'd won on.


Owens &amp; Minor reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Colgate-Palmolive Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


MORE ON THE CAMPAIGN
With Perot Out, What Now?
While the Bush and Clinton campaigns both called Ross Perot's withdrawal a boon, it was clear that they had no firm ideas about how to win over his elusive backers.
Page A10.
Perot's Rise and Fall
From the start of his wild ride, Ross Perot expressed ambivalence about running for President.
After raising hopes and running into skepticism, he made his decision.
Page A16.
Bush and Baker
The President sent the strongest signal yet that he might recruit his Secretary of State to revitalize the Bush re-election campaign.
Page A17.
A Son of Southern Gentility
The 45 years of Senator Al Gore's life have been as one might guess from that unlined face: a parade of well-planned successes.
Page A9.
The Roots of the Candidates
Hope, Ark., and Carthage, Tenn., are now caught up in myth-making by admiring friends of Governor Clinton and Senator Gore.
Page A11.


Review/Film; The Paris Of Rohmer's 'Springtime'
"A Tale of Springtime" was shown as part of the 1990 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 25, 1990.
The film, in French with English subtitles, opens today at the Lincoln Plaza, Broadway at 63d Street, Manhattan.
The Paris inhabited by Eric Rohmer's characters never prompts thoughts about architecture, color or light.
No picturesque bistros, no chestnut trees in blossom, no Seine, no landmarks.
It is an endless stretch of those unremarkable neighborhoods one drives through on the way into the city from the airport.


Official Acknowledges Delays In Tax Refunds From Hartford
Less than a week after Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. announced that Connecticut would show a modest 1992 budget surplus, the state's top tax official acknowledged that some income-tax refunds were delayed last month, fueling speculation that the size of the surplus was exaggerated.
Allan A. Crystal, commissioner of revenue services, said that the amount of money paid in refunds was limited to $550,000 a day on three days in mid-June because he wanted to insure that the state would have enough money for refunds for the remainder of the month.
In a letter to State Comptroller William E. Curry Jr., who questioned whether many refunds were put off until the next fiscal year to avoid a deficit, Mr.
Crystal denied that his actions were intended to help the Governor achieve a surplus.


Office Depot reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


American Maize-Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press in Business Day on Wednesday about corporate name changes misstated the relationship between Horn &amp; Hardart and Hanover Direct.
Hanover Direct is a Horn &amp; Hardart subsidiary.


Convention Can Still Work Its Magic
For anyone wondering why, in this year of political anomie and broadcast-network cutbacks, the major political parties continue to spend tens of millions of dollars to stage conventions that have no real excitement, Wednesday night's television coverage provided a simple answer.
Conventions still work.
Sometime between the start of Governor Mario M. Cuomo's nominating speech at 9 P.M. and the moment, almost an hour and a half later, when the roll call vote began, the utterly predictable spectacle of the Democratic National Convention seemed to acquire all the trappings of a genuine drama.
Television commentators, who had spent much of Monday and Tuesday remarking bitterly on the lack of suspense, grew contemplative and mused aloud about the grandeur of the scene.


Lopez Calmly Composes A 67
Nancy Lopez may not have shot the lowest round at the $500,000 JAL Big Apple Classic today, but she sure came up with one of the most satisfying ones.
Lopez rewarded her followers and herself with a virtually flawless four-under-par 67 that left her a stroke off the lead and a step closer to getting back on her game.
The 35-year-old Lopez registered five birdies and a bogey on the 6,109-yard Wykagyl Country Club course during an opening round that ended with the lead being shared by Juli Inkster, who has 14 career victories on the L.P.G.A.
Tour, and Kate Golden, a rookie looking for her first victory.


Alltel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Caterpillar Loses $53 Million In Quarter Hurt by a Strike
Caterpillar Inc., the giant maker of heavy equipment, said yesterday that it had a net loss of $53 million for the second quarter, which it attributed to continued weak foreign demand and the impact of a strike earlier this year.
That is more than triple its loss of $17 million in the second quarter of 1991 and was also the sixth consecutive quarterly deficit.
Sales for the quarter declined 3 percent, to $2.6 billion, from the 1991 period.


Paccar Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Do Not Disturb: Costas Studying
Bob Costas is cramming for his biggest test, holed up for 12 hours a day in a luxury hotel in Barcelona, Spain.
The host of NBC's prime-time Olympics telecast, Costas will be on the air each evening for up to five hours weeknights and as many as 11 hours when he pulls afternoon duty on the first and last Sundays.
"America will have its fill of me by the first Monday," Costas said by telephone from his hotel room.
"It'll be, 'Martha, it's that kid again.' "


Earnings Rise to $15.2 Million at Times Co.
The New York Times Company yesterday reported second-quarter profits of $15.2 million, or 19 cents a share, compared with $5.4 million, or 6 cents a share, in the 1991 second quarter.
Revenues for the 1992 quarter were $448 million, compared with $440.4 million a year earlier.
The company attributed the rise in profits mostly to higher advertising revenues in the newspaper and magazine groups and to lower newsprint costs because of discounts.
Profits were dampened, however, by charges stemming from a labor dispute in the New York area early in the quarter.
Last year, second-quarter profits were hurt by a pretax charge of $20 million, or 15 cents a share, to cover severance and related costs resulting from a voluntary early retirement program at The New York Times newspaper.
First-Half Results
The second quarter's results brought earnings for the first six months of the year to $29.2 million, or 37 cents a share, compared with $10.5 million, or 13 cents a share, in the first half of 1991.
Revenues for the period were $888.5 million, compared with $857.3 million last year.


Tears, Anger and a Feeling of Betrayal: Perot's Volunteers Hear the News
Yesterday morning, just hours after Ross Perot's New York volunteers celebrated the start of their petition drive to get him on the ballot, Alice Heyman was busy collecting signatures outside Grand Central Terminal when she heard the news from that ultimate New York herald: a cabdriver.
"He pulled up and yelled, 'He's just withdrawn from the race!' " said Ms.
Heyman, a volunteer coordinator.
She promptly rushed the five blocks back to the Manhattan headquarters of People for Perot on Lexington Avenue to find an office full of stunned and angry workers, all of them wondering, like the faithful around the country, how their hero could have let them down.
"I think it's hurtful," Ms.
Heyman said a few minutes later, struggling to collect her thoughts as reporters swarmed into an office still decorated with a big computer printout reading "Welcome to Our New Home." "I don't think leaders desert an idea, and he had an army of volunteers."


Huffy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. Votes to Send Special Envoy To Break Impasse in South Africa


Court Again Upholds Rights of the Individual; When Dred Scott Was
To the Editor:
In arguing against "judicial activism," Robert H. Bork (Op-Ed, July 8) cites the Dred Scott decision of Chief Justice Roger Taney as the first example of misuse of the due process clause of the 14th Amendment, ratified in 1868.
As anyone who studied high school history should know, the Dred Scott decision was handed down in 1857, precipitating the war that later led to the 14th and other amendments.
EPHRAIM BANKS Brooklyn, July 8, 1992


Transcript of Speech by Clinton Accepting Democratic Nomination
Following is the speech by Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas to the Democratic National Convention last night accepting the party's Presidential nomination, as transcribed by The New York Times.
Governor Richards, Chairman Brown, Mayor Dinkins, our great host, my fellow delegates and my fellow Americans.


Goldman Park Concerts
The Goldman Memorial Band is to play three free concerts this weekend, tonight and Sunday in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center and tomorrow night in Brooklyn, at Seaside Park, Sea Breeze Avenue at West Fifth Street, Coney Island.
Gene Young will conduct works by Rossini, Sousa, Walter Skolnik and others.
The three concerts begin at 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 896-9887.


International Game Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


After Ovation, Cuomo Turns To Legislation
One day after delivering a thunderous national address intended to help elevate Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas to the Presidency, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo returned here today to haggle over local issues with the State Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, the Republican who Mr.
Cuomo said kept him from running for President himself.
The two men, along with the Democratic Assembly Speaker, Saul Weprin, met for an hour and a half this afternoon to try to resolve differences over a package of bills that failed in the waning hours of the legislative session this year, including measures that would authorize Suffolk and Nassau counties to borrow money and raise taxes to close budget gaps.


India's Buddhists and Hindus Live in Harmony
To the Editor:
I found "Where Buddha's Path Crosses the Hindu Cosmos" (news article, July 3), on sectarian conflict in Bodh Gaya, India, exaggerated in characterizing tensions between Buddhists and Hindus in the place where Siddhartha Gautama meditated under a peepul tree and found enlightenment.
The problem is minor and will certainly be resolved peacefully.
The relationship between Hinduism and Buddhism has all along been amicable.
Buddha is deeply revered by most Hindus, and many of the official symbols of modern India are Buddhist in origin.


Tellabs Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Vons Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 14


Barely There From Floor to Floor; Decrepit Elevators, Built for Times Long Past, Torment New York Hospitals
Jeanne Marie Kiss, senior vice president of St.
Luke's Hospital and Woman's Division, recently gave a tour of the hospital's new 10-story building.
She pointed with pride to the state-of-the-art intensive care unit, where television cameras allow nurses to monitor every bed.
She described in detail the kitchen equipment designed to keep hot food hot and cold food cold.
She even demonstrated the latest in toilet technology -- a shiny chrome number that fits in a cabinet under a sink and emerges at the touch of a switch.
But Ms.
Kiss really became excited -- truth be told, she did a little dance -- every time she pressed the elevator call button and, within moments, the elevator actually came.
In New York City hospitals, elevators that work are an event.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.38
5.73
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.16
3.16
5.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.20
5.73
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.33
6.34
8.14
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.60
7.61
8.47
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.59
8.60
9.51
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.26
6.27
7.15
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Running Against His Ambivalence: Five Months of a Not-Quite Campaign
The wild ride of Ross Perot ended yesterday as abruptly as it began on the night five months ago when the crusty billionaire from Dallas appeared on "Larry King Live" and grudgingly told America that if it summoned him to the Presidency he would heed the call.
The invitation on Feb. 20, prefaced by Mr.
Perot's insistence that he couldn't see himself getting "all caught up in a political process that doesn't work," fired the CNN switchboard as nothing had before.


Chaparral Steel Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Rollins Truck Leasing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Buck Buchanan, 51, Star on Line For Football's Kansas City Chiefs
Buck Buchanan, a defensive lineman whose combination of size, strength and quickness carried him to the Pro Football Hall of Fame, died of lung cancer today at his home here.
He was 51 years old.
Mr.
Buchanan, one of the dominant players from 1963 to 1975 for the Kansas City Chiefs, had battled the illness for two years.
But he never mentioned his illness during his acceptance speech at the Hall of Fame ceremony in 1990, so as not to sour the moment for others being inducted that day.


Diner's Journal
May We
The English name is a surprise -- May We rather than Mais Oui -- and so are the prices in this six-month-old bistro at Lexington Avenue and 73d Street.
Main courses top off at $19.50, and most appetizers are $9 or less.
This tightly arranged two-story town house is owned by Mark and Nini May, the chef and the hostess.
Formerly the home of two well-meaning but failed American efforts, Jack's and Ten Twenty-Two, May We strives to serve refined American fare with French and Mediterranean touches.
A recent visit found that more often than not it succeeds.


Enron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Excel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Convention Summary
CONVENTION GIVES BILL CLINTON A BIG BOUNCE
Gov.
Bill Clinton in an acceptance speech prepared for the final night of The Democratic National Convention, sought to assure voters they could trust him to be President, and tried to recast his party's platform and image in a more moderate mold while avoiding splits.
His running mate, Senator Al Gore, won broad acceptance.
And he took the lead in opinion polls.
One glitch: the election is four months off.
SHOCKING HIS SUPPORTERS, ROSS PEROT BOWS OUT
Ross Perot cut short his quixotic campaign, declaring that because the Democratic Party had been revitalized he could not win in the Electoral College.
The election would then have gone to the House of Representatives, a prospect he said would have disrupted the country.
Some volunteers for Mr.
Perot hoped he would reconsider, while others said they felt betrayed by a candidate who raised their hopes and then walked away when the going got tough.
BUSH ANGLES FOR PEROT BACKERS; BAKER MAY RIDE AGAIN
President Bush abruptly interrupted his Wyoming fishing vacation to scramble for Ross Perot's supporters.
At the same time, he opened the door to putting Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d in charge of the White House and the Bush campaign.


Scotland Finds That Floyd Has Aged Well
Flouting Father Time once again, 49-year-old Raymond Floyd fired out to his fastest start ever in the only major championship he has never won, shooting a 64 today to tie Steve Pate for the first-round lead in the 121st British Open.
Amid the mostly gentle zephyrs, patchy rough and carpet-smooth greens that made Muirfield as vulnerable as it ever gets, the two Americans equaled the lowest first-round lead ever in the world's oldest championship.
They also came within a stroke of tying the competitive course record, set by Isao Aoki in 1980.


Times Co. Names Three Senior Executives
The New York Times Company named three senior corporate executives yesterday.
The appointments, made at a board meeting, were announced by Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the chairman and chief executive.
Jack Hayon, director of internal audit, and Nancy Nielsen, director of corporate relations and public affairs, were named vice presidents.
Richard G. Thomas, formerly assistant treasurer, was promoted to treasurer.


TV Audience Is Put at 22 Million
Almost 22 million Americans watched the Democratic convention on the three broadcast networks Wednesday night, according to Nielsen Media Services.
On average, each of the three networks' convention coverage was watched by 4.9 million households and had a 5.3 rating. (One rating point equals 1 percent of all the households in the country with televisions.)


Doubting Thomas No More
When the Jets drafted Blair Thomas in 1990 they thought they had secured the running back who would become the cornerstone of their rush to daylight.
But clouds of doubt have shadowed Thomas, a shifty runner with good field vision, obscuring his path the last two seasons.
A mild erosion of confidence and a buildup of frustration over nagging injuries, on the part of the Jets and Thomas, has frayed the corners of those great expectations.
In only his third season since being the league's second draft choice over all, Thomas has reached a boom or bust milepost.


St. Jude Medical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Executive Changes
THE COCA-COLA CO., Atlanta, named Anton Amon and George Gourlay senior vice presidents.
ELMWOOD FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK, Media, Pa., appointed Richard F. Stipa president.


Mattel Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Art in Review
Marcus Leatherdale  Arthur Roger Gallery 136 Prince Street SoHo Through July 24


War Is a Nasty, Mistake-Ridden Business
To the Editor:
I was in the only major engineer outfit that was in D-day in Normandy and Okinawa.
I feel my war experience allows me to comment on "Operation Desert Sham" by Mark Crispin Miller (Op-Ed, June 24).
I was an instructor at the assault training center in Woolacombe, England, teaching regimental combat teams invasion tactics.
In that time I saw three landing craft capsize in one exercise, killing the "waterproofed" tank crews and sailors.


There They Go Again: Conjuring Up Camelot
A law was made a distant moon ago here.
July and August cannot be too hot.
And there's a legal limit to the snow here, in Camelot.
There is, unfortunately, no limit to how often Democratic candidates will try to tap into the magic of John Fitzgerald Kennedy.
Mr.
Kennedy was blessed not only with that wit and coppery glow, he was also an original.


Awaiting Word on the Future of the Word at The New Yorker
To the Editor:
As a subscriber for 45 years to The New Yorker, whose editorship will be taken over by Tina Brown in the fall, I am an older reader, "one of its primary handicaps," according to people in the business (arts pages, July 2).
My son, whose passionate reading of The New Yorker makes him a primary handicap to my getting first grabs, rates only Rolling Stone ahead of it.
To have grown up with a magazine that always seemed a friend on whom one might rely is to regret its passing and even to hope the passage will be subtle enough not to be recognized in one's lifetime.
I have always found it preferable to be occasionally bored but never titillated (as with the gossipy hype of Vanity Fair, from which Ms. Brown comes); amused by those disingenuous "a friend writes" openers in "Talk of the Town," rather than brought up short by Esquire's merchandised cynicism; delighted to read a substantive profile of someone I might like to know, rather than teased to know about someone People deems a celebrity.


Perot's Withdrawal Leaves Major Parties With Ideological Fight
Ross Perot's withdrawal from the Presidential race has forced the Democratic and Republican campaigns to focus their energies back on the battlegrounds of California and the Midwest, and to sharpen their weapons for what promises to be a meaner and more traditionally ideological contest.
While both campaigns pronounced Mr.
Perot's withdrawal a boon, it was clear that they had no better idea of how to round up his volatile and elusive supporters now that he is out of the race than they had of how to deal with him as a candidate.


CHRONICLE
The Grucci family is used to celebrating holidays and the accomplishments of others with its spectacular fireworks displays, but tomorrow it will be the center of attention, at least for a few pyrotechnic moments.
The family will be honored at the 12th annual fireworks extravaganza to benefit Boys Harbor, which runs a summer camp for poor youth in East Hampton, L.I., and educational programs in East Harlem.


More Than Just a Court
Adding another courtroom to New York City's huge criminal justice system normally wouldn't rate much notice.
But the court Mayor David Dinkins and Chief Judge Sol Wachtler announced this week could improve justice and the quality of life where minor crime has become routine.
The Midtown Community Court will open next year in a city-owned building near the Midtown North police station, to hear misdemeanor cases -- vandalism, small drug deals, minor thefts.
Police often ignore such low-level crimes because of the time and trouble required to take suspects downtown for arraignment.


Market Place; Bethlehem Steel In a Long Battle
WHEN the Bethlehem Steel Corporation announced earlier this week that it would report a $64 million loss for the second quarter, it caused some nervousness among investors who had generally perceived the fortunes of the nation's second-largest steel producer, after USX, to be improving.
After all, the company's losses had narrowed over the last year or so, and Bethlehem was laying off fewer workers and closing fewer plants.


3 Slain in Bronx Apartment, but a Baby Is Saved
Police officers first noticed the stench, then opened the door to a Bronx apartment yesterday and found the bodies of three shooting victims: a middle-aged man, his teen-age son and his 28-year-old wife.
The officers found something else: under a bed, only feet from her dead mother, lay a 3-month-old baby girl, dehydrated but alive.
"In her last dying act she protected her baby," said Lieut.
John W. Se bring, commander of the 43d Precinct.
"She probably knew she was going to die, so she stuffed the baby where she knew it would be safe.


Heavyweight's Mind No Longer on Games
What to you do after a wrist injury forces you to abandon your quest for an almost certain Olympic boxing medal?
If you're Shannon Briggs, the acclaimed Brooklyn heavyweight prospect, you stand up, shake out your golden dreadlocks and begin a new quest.
That's exactly what the 20-year-old Briggs did at a news conference in Manhattan yesterday when he announced that he had turned pro and would face his first opponent next Friday, the day before the start of the Olympic boxing competition in Barcelona, Spain.


Scripps Howard Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Restaurants
How is the sumptuous Rainbow Room faring four years and 4,000 tangos after its multi-million-dollar facelift?
Judging from the nightly crowds and the beaming faces on the dance floor, quite well indeed.
Every cliche imaginable has been applied to this twinkling urban phoenix, which evokes a glamorous, more decorous era in this city, a time when an escorted woman never thought of opening a door and every man wore a dress hat.
From certain tables, diners have expansive views of Manhattan.
Aubergine silk walls, cast-glass balusters, a tiered bandstand, a giant chandelier hanging over the revolving dance floor and a staff decked out in 1940's uniforms all contribute to the illusion.


F.C.C. Approves TV on Phone Lines
The Federal Communications Commission proceeded today with its plan to allow telephone companies to transmit television programming but stopped short of permitting them to produce it.
And while authorizing a new generation of advanced pocket-telephone services, the commission backed away from specific approaches suggested recently by its staff.


Abroad at Home; Jumpers And Doers
So it was not a boring political week after all.
Ross Perot is out.
The Democratic Party lives.
And the Democratic Convention, underneath the hoopla, showed us a profound change in American politics and culture.
Women: They are the change.
Their new status in society -- their political power -- was the message not to be missed at this convention.


Czech Letters Inviting '68 Invasion Found
A Russian envoy delivered copies to President Vaclav Havel today of two letters written in 1968 inviting Soviet forces to invade Czechoslovakia to crush the "counterrevolution."
The letters were written to Leonid M. Brezhnev, who was then the Soviet leader, by five high-ranking Czechoslovak Communist Party officials who opposed the Prague Spring reform movement led by the party leader, Alexander Dubcek.
Copies were made available today to reporters.


California Case Puts Spotlight on Jury Coercion and Peer Pressure
The jurors, tired and eager to go home, wrangled for days, some of them badgering the lone holdout until she capitulated and found the defendant guilty.
Soon after the verdict the erstwhile dissenter, stricken by feelings of guilt, said that she had never really agreed with the majority but that she had been bullied into silence.
Ultimately, the juror said, she was worn down, and changed her decision to conform with the majority.


Waste Management Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gillette Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Centel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Awaiting Word on the Future of the Word at The New Yorker
To the Editor:
As a subscriber for 45 years to The New Yorker, whose editorship will be taken over by Tina Brown in the fall, I am an older reader, "one of its primary handicaps," according to people in the business (arts pages, July 2).
My son, whose passionate reading of The New Yorker makes him a primary handicap to my getting first grabs, rates only Rolling Stone ahead of it.
To have grown up with a magazine that always seemed a friend on whom one might rely is to regret its passing and even to hope the passage will be subtle enough not to be recognized in one's lifetime.
I have always found it preferable to be occasionally bored but never titillated (as with the gossipy hype of Vanity Fair, from which Ms. Brown comes); amused by those disingenuous "a friend writes" openers in "Talk of the Town," rather than brought up short by Esquire's merchandised cynicism; delighted to read a substantive profile of someone I might like to know, rather than teased to know about someone People deems a celebrity.


Gatx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bowater Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Ranking Law Schools by Faculty Publishing Rate
A study that ranks the nation's law schools by how often their professors write in leading law reviews has concluded for the second time that faculty members of the University of Chicago School of Law and Yale Law School outpublish their peers.
The survey, conducted by the Chicago-Kent College of Law of the Illinois Institute of Technology, ranks Chicago No. 1, with 101.58 pages for each faculty member; Yale's rating was 75.48 pages for each faculty member.
The sample period was from 1983 to 1988.


VWR Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mubarak and Rabin Plan to Discuss Mideast Peace Talks in Cairo
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel will meet early next week in Cairo in an effort to press ahead with the peace talks that began last October, Egyptian officials said.
The Egyptian presidential spokesman, Mohammed Abdel Moneim, said the offer was extended to the new Israeli Prime Minister because Mr.
Rabin has expressed "serious readiness to push the peace process forward."


American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sounds Around Town
Jerry Lee Lewis
Jerry Lee Lewis, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Thirty-five years ago almost to the day, Jerry Lee Lewis's "Whole Lot of Shakin' Going On" reached No. 3 on Billboard's pop chart, and the Killer's career was at its peak.
Less than a year after that, it was over.
A handful of country hits, lots of pills and four wives later, Mr.
Lewis, unrepentant and unreliable as ever, remains one of the last outposts of rock-and-roll's original hellfire.
As an early reference point, Mr.
Lewis's benchmark 1964 recording "Live at the Star Club, Hamburg" (Rhino) has just been issued for the first time in the United States.
Show time is tomorrow at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.
Tickets are $30 for reserved seating and $20 for standing room.
Rapping So Peacefully
Arrested Development, Disposable Heroes of Hiphoprisy, Me Phi Me, the Marquee, 547 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 929-3257.
These three groups are a peaceful demonstration of how rap can provoke thought without antagonism.
"Tennessee," Arrested Development's hit single, makes its point about a bitter racial history in a nonaccusatory whisper; live, the group integrates live instruments and samples with gospel-inflected vocals and modern dance into a statement of brother-and-sister harmony.
Me Phi Me's soulful raps are softened with acoustic guitar; Disposable Heroes of Hiphoprisy also incorporate live instrumentation into an overall message of positivity.
Show time is tomorrow at 9 P.M.
Tickets are $14.
Charlie to Charlie
"A Tribute to Charlie Parker," Charlie Watts Quintet with strings, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
The Rolling Stones drummer Charlie Watts's "Tribute to Charlie Parker" is jazz for beginners as well as aficionados; the project actually began, in the 1960's, as a children's book on the life of this saxophonist.
In these club dates, as well as on a new album (Continuum Group), Mr.
Watts translates Parker's work with graceful expertise: from "Dancing in the Dark" to Parker's "Dewey's Square," the arrangements, with Peter King on saxophone, are faithful and fluent in tone.
And in jazz, as in rock, Mr.
Watts's drumming has an implacable sureness and lightness of touch.
Tonight through Sunday at 9 and 11:30 P.M.
Tickets for table seating are $30, with a $5 minimum; admission to the bar is $20.


Pope Takes First Steps After Surgery
Pope John Paul II took his first steps today after surgery on Wednesday to remove both a large, benign tumor from his colon and his gallbladder and was reported to be recovering normally.
While he is expected to leave the hospital in about 10 days, Vatican officials indicated the Pope's full convalescence could take weeks or even months and said a visit to Sicily scheduled for early September had been postponed until next year.


Amid Vichy Storm, Paris Honors Jewish Dead
The French observed the 50th anniversary today of the first major roundup of Jews in Nazi-occupied France amid growing demands that President Francois Mitterrand publicly recognize the responsibility of the Vichy Government for crimes against Jews.
In recent weeks, a flurry of newspaper articles and television programs have sought to dispel the traditional view that only Germans singled out Jews for persecution by demonstrating how the Vichy Government took the initiative in ordering the French police to arrest Jews.


Court Again Upholds Rights of the Individual
To the Editor:
In "Again, a Struggle for the Soul of the Court" (Op-Ed, July 8), Robert H. Bork has presented a carefully contrived argument that the Supreme Court has "usurped" the democratic prerogatives of the people and their elected representatives in Planned Parenthood v.
Casey, on abortion, and in Lee v.
Weisman, on school prayer.
He suggests that the Court has misread both the Constitution and our history, and "trespassed upon the rights of democratic majorities."
It is Mr.
Bork, however, who has ignored the very essence of the American constitutional principle, that there are some human rights so fundamental that they are put even above majority rule.


Upjohn Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Paul Pavel, 67, Authors' Mentor, Psychotherapist and Official, Dies
Paul G. Pavel, a Holocaust survivor who became a New York City official and a psychotherapist who influenced many writers, performers and artists, died on Tuesday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 67 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Corrections
The Schedule of Equity Issues listing in Business Day on Monday misstated the number of units in an offering by Northern Springs.
It is 500,000, not 450,000.
The listing also rendered the company's name incorrectly.
It is the Northern Springs Company, not Northern Springs Resorts Inc.


Thousands Lose Power In Storms
The metropolitan region from southern New Jersey to eastern Long Island was recovering yesterday from a series of fierce and drenching thunderstorms on Wednesday that knocked out electrical power to more than 100,000 homes and businesses, disrupted subway service on four lines in New York City and spawned a small tornado in Clark Township, N.J.
Township officials said yesterday that there had been no injuries but that an unspecified number of homes had been damaged by falling trees and branches.


Grant Is Hoping the Bullets Will Say Goodbye
Harvey Grant will not be happy if the Washington Bullets, as expected, match the Knicks' offer sheet to him.
The Bullets have until 6 P.M. this evening to match New York's six-year, $17.6 million offer sheet to Grant, a restricted free agent forward.
But according to his agent, Grant is angry that the Bullets filed tampering charges against the Knicks, a charge the Knicks were found not guilty of after a hearing this week.


The New York Times Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Children
Target Rock National Wildlife Refuge  Target Rock Road, off Lloyd Harbor Road Lloyd Neck, L.I. (516) 286-0485 Recommended for all ages
Out on the tip of Lloyd Neck, where osprey live amid million-dollar houses and coveted views of Long Island Sound, is an 80-acre national refuge with two wooded paths, both of which lead to a rocky (especially at low tide) beach on Huntington Bay.
Although swimming is prohibited (there is no lifeguard), you can probably stick your toes in the water.
The two downhill hardwood forest paths make a loop around the park; one is three-quarters of a mile, the other a mile.
We took the shorter one, wide enough for two people abreast and cool under a verdant umbrella of vines and ferns and ancient trees.
We passed black-raspberry bushes and heard chipmunks and birds. (The refuge is home to 27 breeding species, including cardinals, chickadees, warblers and screech owls.) At the beach, the famous Target Rock -- the British were said to have used it for target practice during the Revolutionary War -- was within sight of the bluffs.


Affiliated Publications reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


PEROT QUITS RACE, LEAVING TWO-MAN FIELD; CLINTON VOWS CHANGE AND 'NEW COVENANT' AS HE AND BUSH COURT ABANDONED VOTERS
Ross Perot withdrew from the race for the Presidency yesterday, changing the 1992 campaign back into a two-way race and sending President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton scrambling to fill the space he left on the political map.
The announcement in Dallas followed days of turmoil and division in the campaign of the Texas billionaire, who had all but declared his independent candidacy.
It rocked the Democratic National Convention at Madison Square Garden, where Mr.
Clinton accepted his party's nomination last night and offered himself as the instrument of change in a time that demands it.


The Committee to Defend Rakes Meets Here
FOR those who flee the city's tumult, hoping to live amid peace and quiet in the suburbs, disappointment is guaranteed.
The first night can be the harshest.
Start with the neighborhood's barking dogs.
Continue with the sprinklers that swish all night.
Then there are the tree branches that scrape disturbingly against the window screens.
And birds that burst forth with frantic chirping, well before dawn.


Books of The Times; A Thousand Tiny Heartbreaks
Things Not Seen
And Other Stories
By Lynna Williams
213 pages. Little, Brown &amp; Company. $18.95.


2 Delegates Are Hurt And One Loses Purse
A delegate to the Democratic National Convention from North Carolina was robbed of her purse early yesterday while waiting for a bus in upper Manhattan but was not injured, the police said.
Two other delegates, one from Florida, the other from Puerto Rico, were injured in accidents.
The North Carolina delegate, Bertha Crosby, 46 years old, of Hope Mills, had been visiting a relative and was waiting for a bus at East 116th Street and Third Avenue in East Harlem about 4:26 A.M. when a man snatched her purse.
It contained $50, a camera and earrings but not her convention credentials, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina S. Mohrmann.


American Barrick Restaurant reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TV Weekend; An Unconventional Marriage, and It Worked
"Portrait of a Marriage," cut to three and a half hours from four, begins its three-part run on "Masterpiece Theater" on PBS at 9 P.M.
Sunday.
Finally.
The mini-series was originally scheduled for broadcast in the United States about two years ago but kept running into postponements that were said to be entirely unrelated to the production's content.
Public television nervous?
Timid?
Bite your tongue -- and your credulity.
The cuts, we are told, were made only to enliven the pace of the production.
Of course.


After Wild Swings, a Mixed Close
Prices of Treasury securities staged an abrupt turnaround yesterday, and closed narrowly mixed after being down by as much as a point early in the session.
Traders and analysts were left scratching their heads over the cause of the wild price swings.


3 Arrested as Cocaine Suppliers
Police narcotics officers confiscated 97 kilos of cocaine and arrested three people in an apartment in Queen yesterday, the police said.
Armed with a search warrant, officials said, seven members of the New York City Police Department's Queens Narcotics District entered a basement apartment of a two-story house at 78-01 164th Street in Fresh Meadows at 11:05 A.M. and found the drugs wrapped in duct tape in three shipping cartons and one nylon bag in a bedroom closet.


Coors (Adolph) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 14


Genentech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Reluctant Wilander
MATS WILANDER, three-time winner of the French and Australian Opens, looks increasingly unlikely to make a comeback after a year away from the men's circuit.
In an interview on Swedish television yesterday, he admitted that a comeback became less likely as time goes on.
"I have decided to take it easy, and the more time that passes the harder it gets," he said.


Texas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


New President Named For Hewlett-Packard
The Hewlett-Packard Company ended more than a year of suspense today when it chose an aggressive computer industry executive, Lewis E. Platt, to succeed John A. Young as president of the Silicon Valley-based electronics company on Nov. 1.
Mr.
Platt, who has been given high marks for masterminding the company's revitalized computer business, has been mentioned frequently as a candidate to succeed Mr.
Young, 60 years old, who will retire at the end of October after 14 years as Hewlett-Packard's president and chief executive.


Feud Over Geothermal Water Rights Pits Yellowstone Against a Church
Two of the worst neighbors in the West are at it again, feuding this time over the underground currents of hot water that make up the world's largest geyser system and define the character of Yellowstone National Park.
The park and its neighbors to the north, the Church Universal and Triumphant, led by Elizabeth Clare Prophet, have been at odds ever since church leaders moved their headquarters here in 1986 and began installing an elaborate system of underground bomb shelters.
But the latest fight, over geothermal water rights, has brought Congress into the act.


Bauer Buys Magazine
The Bauer Publishing Company announced yesterday the acquisition of Soap Opera Update from Soap Opera Update Magazine Inc.
Jerome and Angela Shapiro, who founded Soap Opera Update in 1988, will continue as publisher and editor in chief of the biweekly magazine, which has a circulation of 200,000.
Bauer also publishes First for Women and Woman's World.


Ameron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


CAMPUS STANDOFF RABIN'S FIRST TEST
A battle of wills that is an important first leadership test for Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has been waged here for the last three days between Israeli soldiers and some 2,000 encircled Palestinian students at the largest university in the West Bank.
It is a standoff that thus far has been essentially peaceful, and both sides say they want to keep it that way and get it over with quickly.
But it is also a highly charged situation, complicated by each side's political concerns and perceptions of honor.


Caterpillar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Selling Themselves: Candidates on TV
ADLAI E. STEVENSON never much liked television, and it showed.
During the 1952 Presidential race, he refused to appear in his own campaign commercials, declaring, "I think the American people will be shocked by such contempt for their intelligence; this isn't Ivory soap versus Palmolive."
Stevenson's opponent, Gen.
Dwight D. Eisenhower, suffered from no such qualms.
In a series of 40 television commercials, "Eisenhower Answers America," the General responded to questions from ordinary citizens who had been enlisted near Radio City Music Hall.
The Republican Party spent almost $1.5 million to put these impressively corny exchanges on the air.


Anger and Disappointment Among Californians
A wave of anger and disappointment, tinged with a deep sense of betrayal, swept over the army of Ross Perot volunteers in Southern California today after he ended his Presidential race even before declaring his candidacy.
"He owes us more than what he gave us this morning," said Michael Ruppert, who gathered with dozens of other followers at the wake-like Perot office in Sherman Oaks in the suburban San Fernando Valley of Los Angeles, where Mr.
Perot had great strength.
He turned away, his faced flushed, stifled a sob, and said, "I did this for my country."


Foreign Businesses Help Raise Earnings at Philip Morris
The Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that profits rose about 19.5 percent in the second quarter, with strong performances by the international cigarette and food businesses offsetting some softness in the United States.
The company's troubled Kraft General Foods division in the United States showed signs of improvement, and an aggressive share repurchase program helped earnings.


Long Wait For Beatty As Parties Heat Up
After four days, the partygoers cracked the invitation code.
Just in time for the convention's last dance last night.
Each of the week's gatherings offered a shimmy up the political power tree, an opportunity to exchange private telephone numbers, political agendas, and sidelong glances.
Invitations indicated whether a party offered a real opportunity for political, social or financial climbing -- or merely a palliative for sociopolitical ambition.
And the "honored guests" that invitations invoked were used like patron saints or graven images.
They represented what a particular group wanted to be, or wanted to be close to.
"Warren and Annette are coming!" was the siren from the week's hottest society tickets.
It beckoned the bold-faced, bicoastal set, those who apologize for their multimillion-dollar real-estate, book and movie deals by their social activism.


Time Warner Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American President Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about Gov.
Bill Clinton's jogging in Central Park misstated the distance around the Reservoir.
According to the New York City Parks Department, it is 1.58 miles.


Palmolive Net Climbs by 33%
Getting a lift from its recent acquisition of the Mennen Company, the Colgate-Palmolive Company reported yesterday that its second-quarter profits jumped 33 percent.
Colgate earned $124.4 million, or 75 cents a share, in the second quarter, up from $93.3 million, or 66 cents, a year earlier.
Sales increased 19 percent, to $1.79 billion, compared with $1.51 billion a year ago.


No Headline
In the name of those who do the work, pay the taxes, raise the kids and play by the rules -- in the name of the hard-working Americans who make up our forgotten middle class -- I proudly accept your nomination." -- GOV. BILL CLINTON.  [ A14:1. ]


The Spoken Word
"THE CHINESE MEDICINE CONTROVERSY," New York Open Center, 83 Spring Street, SoHo.
Jeffrey C. Yuen, a Taoist healing teacher, will discuss ancient Chinese healing practices and their relevance in the late 20th century.
Tonight at 7:30.
Admission: $11.
Information and reservations: (212) 219-3739.
POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, Lower East Side.
The poets Carol Diehl, Eliza Galaher, Barbara Henning and Bahiyyih Watson will read from their work.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.


King Is Arrested for 3d Time Since Videotaped Beating


Sounds Around Town
Jazz, Rhythmically
Gully Low Jazz Sextet, J's, 2581 Broadway, at 97th Street, Manhattan, (212) 666-3600.
The Gully Low Jazz Sextet, a group with a ruggedly rhythmic approach to traditional jazz, has been playing two or three times a month for more than 10 years under the direction of David Ostwald, a tuba player.
Aside from Mr.
Ostwald, who is a lawyer, the sextet is made up of full-time musicians who are specialists in New Orleans, Chicago and New York jazz styles.
They are Randy Sandke on trumpet, Dan Barrett on trombone, Lev Lebedev on clarinet, Eddy Davis on banjo and Arnie Kinsella on drums.
Although Mr.
Ostwald is the only one who is not a full-time musician, he says he has "a full-time attitude toward music." The sextet starts playing tonight at 9 P.M.
There is a $12 minimum at the tables and a $7 minimum at the bar, with no cover charge.
A Pianist's Growl
Bobby Cole, Campagnola, 1382 First Avenue, at 74th Street, Upper East Side, (212) 861-1102.
Bobby Cole is a pianist and singer whose gasping growl of a voice has been shaped by endless nights in smoky saloons.
Its husky limitations are offset by knowledgeable phrasing and a swinging style that create the kind of romantic aura generated in films like "Casablanca." He is to perform tonight and tomorrow from 9:30 P.M. to 1 A.M. as he starts an open-ended engagement at Campagnola, an Italian restaurant.
There is no cover charge and no minimum.
A New York Debut
Straight Ahead, B. Smith's Restaurant, 771 Eighth Avenue, at 47th Street, West Side of Manhattan, (212) 247-2222.
This Detroit-based all-female quintet, which literally stopped the show at the New Orleans Jazz Festival with its swinging, hard-bopping performances of original material, will make its New York debut tonight and tomorrow at B. Smith's.
Instrumentally, the group is made up of a violinist, Regina Carter; a flutist, Cynthia Dewberry; a pianist, Eileen Orr; a bassist, Marion Hayden-Banfield, and a percussionist, Gayelynn McKinney, all of whom also sing.
Shows both nights are at 9 and 11:30 P.M.
There is a $20 cover charge, and a $10 minimum.


Unisys Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Owens-Illinois Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY NEWS: Controversial Calculations; Japan Wants I.B.M. Chips Included in Market Share
Japan's Government has hit upon a way to raise the market share in Japan of foreign computer-chip manufacturers quickly and thereby bring Japan closer to compliance with a semiconductor trade agreement.
The Ministry of International Trade and Industry is proposing to begin counting the chips sent to Japan by the International Business Machines Corporation for its own use, according to Nihon Keizai Shimbun, the Japanese financial newspaper.
But an American official said today that Japan has been trying unsuccessfully for the last three quarters to include I.B.M.'s sales in the market share calculations.


Court Again Upholds Rights of the Individual; Review of Justices
To the Editor:
"Justice Thomas, the Freshman" (editorial, July 5) is more than a critique of Clarence Thomas's first term of service on the Supreme Court.
It is also a serious lament and an indictment of our political system.
Last summer, the preponderance of evidence in Prof.
Anita Hill's charges of sexual harassment at the Justice's confirmation hearings convinced millions of the emotional immaturity and intellectual vulgarity of the Supreme Court nominee, and that he was guilty of gross indiscretion as charged.
Otherwise, the man's record of mediocrity, coupled with his consistent pattern of pandering to the perceived whims of political superiors, marked him as a far-from-ideal candidate for our highest court.


Triplecast Ads Are Cited
The New York City Consumer Affairs Department has charged NBC and Cablevision Systems with deception in its advertising for the pay-per-view Olympics Triplecast.
The commercials say the Triplecast is "live with no interruptions," but half of its 24 hours of programming will be a taped replay of the 12 live hours of action from Barcelona, Spain.
The department wants NBC and Cablevision to disclose in its commercials that the 5 P.M. to 5 A.M. programming will be a replay of the live 5 A.M. to 5 P.M. cablecast.
The Triplecast is subject to fines of up to $500 each time the commercial is broadcast and possible legal action in State Supreme Court.


Constar International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Unifi Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Two Solo Performance Artists Confront the Limits of Personal Experience
The creation of new work poses special challenges for solo performance artists.
How far can one person stretch his or her own experience before the material wears thin?
And how can a devoted audience be kept off balance enough that the work doesn't register as cozy shtick?
Both Eric Bogosian and Karen Finley, who are appearing in Lincoln Center's Serious Fun festival over the next few days, are confronting these questions in their newest works.
Mr.
Bogosian's "Dog Show" had its premiere last night at Alice Tully Hall, and there is a second performance tonight at 8.
Ms.
Finley is performing her new piece, "A Certain Level of Denial," at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday and Wednesday.
Obnoxious and Abrasive
"When I did 'Sex, Drugs, Rock &amp; Roll,' I said I wasn't going to do another show, and here I am doing another solo show, partially because Serious Fun asked me do one," Mr.
Bogosian said in a recent telephone interview.


For Some, Shelters Mean Chaos and Home
For the last four years, home for Pedro Fuentes has been the wooden drill floor of the Fort Washington Armory men's shelter, a world whose rhythms alternate between mind-numbing routine and criminal chaos.
Drug use is rampant, bone-crunching beatings are commonplace, and at night rats scurry across the floor and onto the tightly packed cots.
Soon, though, he may be moving out -- to a smaller, cleaner shelter where he can learn to read and write, or perhaps even to an apartment.
But ask him about the future, and his brow furrows.
The armory, on West 168th Street near Fort Washington Avenue, may be closer to hell than home, but he would rather stay.


INSIDE
U.N. Envoy for South Africa
The Security Council voted to send a special envoy to investigate conditions in South Africa and recommend steps to speed negotiations.
Page A2.
U.S.
Firm on Demjanjuk
The Justice Department stood by its finding that John Demjanjuk was an executioner at the Nazis' Treblinka death camp.
Page A18.
Chaotic Shelter, Bbut Home
New York City is trying to close two large armory shelters to upgrade programs for the homeless, but some residents are skeptical.
Page B1.
Founder of Digital Retiring
Kenneth H. Olsen, founder of Digital Equipment and a computer industry legend, is stepping down after 35 years.
He came under fire as Digital's fortunes declined.
Page D1.


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; Worth His Weight In Gold
AS a young boy growing up in Silsbee, Tex., Mark Henry was hard-pressed to envision a time when being big wouldn't be enough.
By the fourth grade, Henry was 5 feet 5 inches tall and weighed 255 pounds; by his senior year at Silsbee High School, he was a 6-3, 360-pound offensive lineman.
Then the sky fell in when Henry scored below the 700 on the Scholastic Aptitude Test required for a freshman to compete while on an athletic scholarship.


Regulation of Grass Roots Transit Planned
Bolstered by a bill passed by the State Legislature, New York City and the Transit Authority have begun planning a campaign to crack down on an armada of livery vans that illegally shadow bus routes in Queens, Brooklyn and the Bronx.
The vans, which ply bus stops in the boroughs and siphon riders from the city's buses, have increasingly become an irritation to the city and Transit Authority, costing the authority $60 million a year in lost fares.


Bush Switches From Trout And Fishes for Perot Voters
President Bush abruptly broke into a wilderness fishing vacation today to scramble for the remains of Ross Perot's political support, at the same time opening the door to putting Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d in charge of the White House and Bush campaign.
In a brief telephone message to reporters and in a news conference later at a desolate Air Force outpost here, Mr.
Bush said he was confident that voters who had backed Mr.
Perot's independent candidacy would support his re-election now that Mr.
Perot had decided not to run for President.


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Film -- A Stranger Among Us; A Hard-Boiled Outsider In a Sheltered World
AUDIENCES watching "A Stranger Among Us," the latest film directed by Sidney Lumet, must try to believe that Melanie Griffith is Emily Eden, a street-smart New York City police detective who makes remarks like "you wouldn't believe the things that I've seen" and "we were puttin' down some perps, and one of them stuck him with a blade."
They will also have to believe that in the line of duty it becomes absolutely necessary for Emily to go to Brooklyn and infiltrate the Hasidic Jewish community that is this film's real focus.
A new hair color, a chaster wardrobe and endless pointers on this group and its customs are required before Emily can complete her assignment and catch a killer.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  TEST OF ISRAELI'S RESOLVE  Prime Minister Rabin faced a leadership test as Israeli soldiers continued to surround a university in the West Bank.
Palestinian students are challenging the troops' right to search them for arms.
A3  RABIN TO MEET WITH MUBARAK  Israel's Prime Minister will meet with Egypt's President next week in Cairo in an effort to get Middle East peace talks restarted.
A3


McGraw-Hill Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Chief Takes Leave
Responding to a civil investigation of possible illegal trades, the chairman of the New York Mercantile Exchange said yesterday that he would take a leave of absence to deal with the possible administrative proceedings against him.
In a letter to the directors of the New York Merc, the chairman, Z. Lou Guttman, said he felt he had to take the leave to prevent the Government's inquiry from disrupting the exchange's business.


Florida Progress reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Life of Advantage, Enhanced by the Will to Excel
The last time Al Gore was campaigning in New York City, he had a problem with his face.
Up to that point -- March 1988 -- Mr.
Gore's face had served him very well.
It is the sort of face a mother would love -- not just the mother in question, but any mother.
It is smooth and bland and with just a touch of plumpness to take the edge off the planes, and it speaks of wholesome character and honorable intentions.
There is nothing hard in this face, nothing nasty, nothing that suggests anything dark or suspect.


Karakorum Journal; Red Tide Ebbs, Exposing Buddhism
The police came with guns one spring morning in 1938, on horseback and on foot, and surrounded the monastery here in the middle of prayers.
Nearly 1,000 monks, all in red robes, were inside, and the police called them out, one by one, and led them away to be executed.
"The monks were crying, especially the little boys," said Jigjid, a grizzled 78-year-old caretaker who as a young man watched the arrests.
"And I was crying."


CHRONICLE
It turns out that TIPPER GORE -- known for her crusade to have warning labels placed on records with sexually explicit or violent lyrics -- has a touch of rock in her own past.
Mrs.
Gore, the wife of the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee, was a drummer in her adolescence and a founder of an all-girl rock band at her high school in suburban Washington in the 1960's, Entertainment Weekly magazine reports in the issue that goes on sale Monday.


SPX Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Art in Review
'American Photographs'  James Danziger Gallery 415 West Broadway (at Spring Street) SoHo Through July 31


Reply to Cubs Envisions Better Booing
Instead of destroying their so-called traditional rivalries with teams like the Mets, a move by the Chicago Cubs to the National League's Western Division could actually enhance the rivalries by raising them to a higher plateau, lawyers for Commissioner Fay Vincent suggested yesterday.
The lawyers raised that possibility in a 15-page memorandum they filed in United States District Court in Chicago.
The memorandum came in reply to the Cubs' lawsuit against Vincent aimed at blocking his order to realign the National League next season by transferring the Cubs and the St.
Louis Cardinals from the Eastern Division to the Western and moving the Cincinnati Reds and Atlanta Braves into the East.


U.S. Offers Amnesty In Miami Aid Inquiry
In an effort to facilitate its investigation of financial fraud involving athletes at the University of Miami, the United States Attorney's office here has sent letters to dozens of students, promising ammesty in return for full disclosure.
The athletes would have to admit guilt, make restitution for any illegal aid they received in Pell grants and give statements on everything they know about the university's aid procedures.


Art in Review
Paul McCarthy, Joyce Pensato and Arnulf Rainer  Luhring Augustine Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through July 31


On Stage, and Off
Manhattan Theater Club
Remember last season when the toughest ticket Off Broadway was Caryl Churchill's "Mad Forest," which despite rave reviews closed way before most people could see it in New York Theater Workshop's 99-seat space?
Well, Lynne Meadow, the artistic director of the Manhattan Theater Club, has good news.
The original American cast of the play about post-Ceausescu Romania, directed by Mark Wing-Davey, will open the theater's season at City Center this fall.
Although it had been announced that the Manhattan Theater Club season would open with the Royal Court Theater production of Timberlake Wertenbaker's "Three Birds Alighting on a Field," about the art world, those plans have fallen through.
Ms.
Meadow says that the exchange agreements with Actors' Equity proved too costly for the Royal Court, so she is exploring plans to produce the play with an American cast, maybe later in the season.


Schwab (Charles) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


On My Mind; The Perot Mystery
The feeling of living in a world suddenly gone chaotic around him was too much for Ross Perot.
He talks publicly about the political reasons -- the revitalization of the Democratic Party and not wanting to throw the race into the House of Representatives.
Privately close friends say there are other things involved but that he pledged them to secrecy.


Hannaford Bros.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Bard (C.R.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Great Lakes Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Drabek and Pirates Don't Miss a Beat
Pirates 2, Cubs 1
PITTSBURGH, July 16 (AP) -- Doug Drabek, one of baseball's best second-half pitchers, pitched three-hit ball over eight innings and Andy Van Slyke homered as the Pittsburgh Pirates picked up where they left off before the All-Star Game break, beating the Chicago Cubs, 2-1, tonight.
The Pirates, who won their last three games in Cincinnati last weekend, also got a run-scoring single from Alex Cole as they beat the Cubs for the 17th time in their last 19 games at Three Rivers Stadium.
The Cubs have lost five straight.


Perot Qualified for 24 State Ballots
Ross Perot is now on the ballot in 24 states.
Electoral rules vary widely from state to state, and in most cases volunteers had to negotiate a maze of complex regulations to put Mr.
Perot's name on the ballot.
Dan Routman, associate general counsel to the Perot Petition Committee, said he believed Mr.
Perot would not withdraw his name.
But if Mr.
Perot should change his mind, he would face the same state-by-state welter of rules.


Zito's 1-2 Punch In Post Spots 3-4
Strike the Gold and his new "rabbit," Loach, drew adjoining post positions yesterday for the $500,000 Suburban Handicap at Belmont Park as they prepared to double-team their five rivals in the race and in others leading up to the Breeders' Cup championships.
Their immediate goal was for Strike the Gold to win the handicap tomorrow and thereby pass the injured California star, Best Pal, in performance points in the American Championship Racing Series.
The horse who earns the most points also earns a $750,000 bonus.
But Nick Zito, who trains Strike the Gold and his new accomplice, said the strategy also had a deeper purpose.


Perot Says Democratic Surge Reduced Prospect of Victory
In halting his campaign before it ever formally began, Ross Perot explained today that the Democratic Party had become so much stronger recently that he no longer believed he could win the election at the polls in November.
Instead, he said, he feared that a three-way contest would have to be decided in January by the House of Representatives, a prospect he called disruptive to the country.


Review/Film; The Lesson: Don't Take Your Child to the Lab
In the most spectacular sequence of "Honey, I Blew Up the Kid," a gurgling 2 1/2-year-old boy who has soared to 112 feet clomps through the glittering heart of Las Vegas clutching a car he thinks is a toy.
Reaching the Hard Rock Cafe, which is topped by a giant neon guitar, he plucks the sign from its moorings and idly strums it while soldiers in an Army helicopter try to shoot him with tranquilizers.
The movie is the inevitable sequel to the 1989 Disney blockbuster "Honey, I Shrunk the Kids." If the new film doesn't exude quite as much fairy-tale magic as the original, it is still a thoroughly entertaining family romp.


Philip H. Cohen, 80, Radio-TV Producer With Ad Agencies
Philip H. Cohen, a retired radio and television producer and advertising executive, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Cohen started producing radio shows for the United States Department of the Interior soon after he graduated from Harvard in 1932.
His programs included a documentary series, "The World Is Yours," done with the Smithsonian Institution, that drew up to 14,000 letters a week in fan mail.


Outboard Marine reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bush Ads? Try 'Ozzie,' Not 'Murphy'
Which television programs are in good taste and might most reflect the moral values of the President?
Three advertising executives not connected with the Presidential campaign have offered their picks for which shows might be the most and least appropriate for President Bush's re-election advertising.
Their choices ranged from practical to practically outrageous.





Four Surrender In Use of Fetus Against Clinton Four Surrender In Use of Fetus Against Clinton
The leader of the anti-abortion group Operation Rescue and three of the group's members surrendered in Manhattan yesterday on charges of violating a Federal court order prohibiting the group from handing Gov.
Bill Clinton a fetus and disrupting the Democratic National Convention.
In Federal District Court, Judge Robert J. Ward said he would consider criminal charges against Randall Terry, who heads Operation Rescue, and civil contempt charges against the other three men.
All four men were released yesterday after Mr.
Terry secured a $25,000 bond with $250 cash.


Nynex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Court Again Upholds Rights of the Individual; Untrustworthy Ratings?
To the Editor:
"We have good, quality judges. I think I'd take that as a significant accomplishment." You quote that comment by President Bush in the sixth article of "The Bush Record" (July 1), about his appointment of conservative judges.
The reality behind this is that one of every six of President Bush's judicial nominees has been rated "not qualified" by a minority vote of the American Bar Association's evaluating panel.
We believe the real story is not the conservative court built by President Bush but the mediocrities he has nominated for lifetime Federal judgeships.
Our grass-roots citizen group recently submitted a critique to the Senate Judiciary Committee documenting the unfitness of one of President Bush's nominees to the Southern District of New York.
That nominee also received a "not qualified" minority rating by the Bar Association panel.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"CHALLENGING THE PAST: THE PAINTINGS OF CHANG DAI-CHIEN (1899-1983)," Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2; students and the elderly, $1; free on Fridays from 6 to 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 517-2742.


Nicor Inc.  reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a woman who tried to bring an unapproved abortion drug into the United States misstated her legal situation in some copies.
Although the drug was confiscated, no charges were filed.


Excerpts From Perot's News Conference on Decision Not to Enter Election
Following are excerpts from Ross Perot's news conference in Dallas yesterday, as transcribed by News Transcripts Inc., a transcription service.
STATEMENT BY ROSS PEROT
Several million volunteers in all 50 states have done a brilliant job in re-establishing a government that comes from the people.
Both political parties are now squarely focused on the issues that concern the American people.
Being associated with the volunteers across this country in the last few months has been one of the great experiences of my life.


A Candidate, and a Race, Transformed
It has been a remarkable seven days for Bill Clinton.
Beset by fate and his own mistakes early in the Presidential campaign, written off by his peers, the 45-year-old Arkansas Governor entered July sensing a turn for the better but still trailing President Bush and Ross Perot.
He will leave New York and the Democratic National Convention today with his prospects transformed.


Inter-Regional Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


At the Bar; From a court that deals in deaths and wills, a feud that seems likely to live forever.
For the seven years they sat together in Manhattan Surrogate's Court, a Maginot Line of sorts divided the chambers of Judges Marie Lambert and Renee Roth.
For local probate lawyers, it was a fact of life that the two women loathed one another, and that it ill-behooved them ever to get caught in the crossfire.
The feud might have ended in December 1990, when Judge Lambert reached the mandatory retirement age of 70 and returned to private practice.
But now that she is appearing before Judge Roth, the dispute has burst onto the front page of Tuesday's New York Law Journal.
"Surrogate Roth, Ex-Surrogate Lambert Spar Over Will," it said.


Pop/Jazz; Keeping Folk Relevant, No Matter Its Age
The roots of American pop music go back a whopping 30, 50, maybe 80 years.
They stretch to the soul ballads of the 60's, the rockabilly of the 50's, the country and western of the 40's, the blues and jazz of the 20's and 30's.
When Johnny Cash sings about traveling on a train, it's roots music; if the Stray Cats slap out a version of Elvis Presley's 1954 single "Good Rockin' Tonight," it's roots music.
All John Mellencamp has to do is pick up an acoustic guitar and eulogize small-town values, and he's evoking America's roots.
Contemporary pop changes so fast and consumes its predecessors so voraciously that idioms become obsolete or "classic" at a runaway pace.
In 1992, Bon Jovi practically seems ancient.
But in England, where culture has had more time to advance at a less breakneck speed, the roots of indigenous strains run much deeper.
The English folk singer, songwriter and guitarist Richard Thompson, who will perform an acoustic set tomorrow afternoon in Central Park, has songs in his repertory that date back 600 years.
"I do all kinds of traditional songs," he said this week in a telephone interview from Joliet, Ill., where he was on tour.
"There's a song like 'Willie o' Winsbury,' which refers to the Crusades. It's hard to tell with traditional music what's real, but if it refers to the Crusades, then we're talking about an origin in the 1300's."


Ball 4 Produces Loss 46
The second half of the Yankees' season began with an hourlong meeting early this afternoon.
But if Buck Showalter, the rookie manager, hoped to bring some life to his slumping team, it didn't work.
On their first night back, the Yankees wasted a two-run lead and a superb pitching performance from Melido Perez.
But Perez had to shoulder the blame for a 3-2 loss to the California Angels.


For Texas Team, Bitter Frustration
For the volunteers who worked out of a little store front on Houston's decaying Main Street and similar sites around Texas, Ross Perot was not just another candidate.
He was a favorite son who spoke their language and filled them with thoughts of glorious revolt.
Today their bitterness ran deep.
"I feel betrayed," said Jerry Larsen, a 56-year-old accountant who ran the Perot campaign headquarters in downtown Houston.


Glitz to the Right, Kitsch to the Left, Nouveaux Riches Ride Into the Crimea
This traditional resort of commoners and Communist kings is too expensive these days for casual visitors, but for the go-go generation of new business executives, it's the place of choice for showing off, and sometimes taking it off.
It's enough to drive an old apparatchik crazy.


Teleflex Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Seagate Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Johnson Controls reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rohm &amp; Haas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A.T.&amp;T. Net Up 3.6%, as Nynex Profit Rises 13.9%
A.T.&amp; T., the world's largest telecommunications company, reported yesterday that net income in the second quarter grew a scant 3.6 percent, to $961 million, while revenue rose less than 1 percent, to $15.85 billion.
Meanwhile, the Nynex Corporation, which provides local-telephone service for New York State and New England, said yesterday that second-quarter earnings rose 13.9 percent, to $331.1 million, or $1.62 a share.
The sharp rise was partly the result of a one-time credit from a change in a cellular telephone contract.


Fuqua Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Saberhagen at Full Speed
Bret Saberhagen, sidelined for two months with tendinitis in his right index finger, pitched three innings in a simulated game at Shea Stadium yesterday afternoon.
The fastball registered at 93 miles an hour.
The finger, according to Saberhagen, performed with 100 percent efficiency and comfort.
"It's all uncharted waters for all of us," said Mets right-hander.
"But I'm able to pretty much go out there and throw pain-free."


Behind the Times; Even Digital's Supporters Concede It May Be Too Late to Catch Up Now
Can Digital Equipment survive, or does Kenneth H. Olsen's departure come too late?
The answer is a qualified "maybe." And the company can survive only if it is able to execute immediately a strategy that seems to have been recently put in place in spite of Mr.
Olsen.


Nightmare Realized: Gooden Reinjures Shoulder
The scene was staggering.
Dwight Gooden, on the mound and in pain, was standing amid a circle of stares from the club's trainer, the club's manager, the club's infield.
Almost instantly, the signal was given to the bullpen, and Gooden, his stare on the ground, was ushered to the clubhouse.
The Mets' season has been on the brink for weeks, and now it might well have plunged into the abyss with Gooden's disappearance into the dugout.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  U.S.
Beats France in Federation Cup  Gigi Fernandez and Pam Shriver formed a doubles partnership for the first time and gave the sixth-seeded United States a 2-1 victory yesterday over fourth-seeded France in Frankfurt in the Federation Cup competition, the women's version of the Davis Cup.
After a split in the singles, Fernandez and Shriver played like an experienced doubles pair and beat Nathalie Tauziat and Isabelle Demongeot, 6-4, 6-2, to earn the Americans a semifinal meeting against top-seeded Germany.
Fernandez beat Mary Pierce, 6-1, 6-4, in the opening singles, but France tied the score when Nathalie Tauziat beat Lori McNeil, 6-4, 7-5.
Graf and Anke Huber powered Germany to a 3-0 victory over unseeded Poland in today's other quarterfinal at Frankfurt's Waldstadion.
Today, third-seeded Czechoslovakia will meet Australia and defending champion Spain, seeded second, will play Argentina. (AP)


Excerpts From Speech By Gore at Convention
Following are excerpts from the speech last night by Senator Al Gore of Tennessee accepting the nomination for the Democratic candidate for Vice President, as transcribed by The New York Times.
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much.
I have to tell you, I've been dreaming of this moment since I was a kid growing up in Tennessee: that one day, I'd have the chance to come here to Madison Square Garden and be the warm-up act for Elvis.


All Over Town, Delegates Hear About Perot
In the Florida delegation just after the opening gavel fell at the Democratic National Convention last night, Lee Barakat was telling the other delegates how she first heard Ross Perot had thrown in the towel.
She had just bought a Perot button as a souvenir from a vendor in front of Macy's for a dollar, she said, when someone else standing there said, "You know, Perot just dropped out of the race."


Review/Art; Intimations in Wood of Ritual and Refugee Camps
The sculptures of Ursula von Rydingsvard, on view indoors and outdoors in a retrospective here at the Storm King Art Center, can bring different things to mind.
Some of them resemble giant spoons; others look like thrones or tombs or stretchers or huge rock formations.
Her material of choice is wood, particularly 4-by-4 cedar beams, which she cuts, stacks, glues and stains.
She uses chain saws the way other artists use chisels.
The process, which can involve a team of assistants, is labor intensive and craft oriented.
The result, as this show makes clear, is uneven.
But at their best, her sculptures seem possessed by a dark and affecting emotionality.


U.S. Stands By Actions It Took In Case of 'Ivan'
The Justice Department today stood by its investigation concluding that John Demjanjuk is "Ivan the Terrible," despite recently unearthed evidence indicating that the savage executioner at the Nazis' Treblinka death camp may be another man.
In a brief filed with the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati, Government lawyers said that because there was evidence that Mr.
Demjanjuk is the murderous Ivan, there was no reason to reopen the issue of Mr.
Demjanjuk's extradition to Israel, where he was convicted and sentenced to hang in 1988.


A Breakthrough on Mexican Trade
"We are entering the top of the ninth inning on negotiations," said President Bush after meeting with President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico before Tuesday night's All-Star game.
The words were casual but the accomplishment is not.
The two countries have settled many of the issues blocking a free trade agreement that American exporters and investors will find enticing.
Mexico has agreed to open up its banking and securities industries to U.S. investors by the year 2000 and has accepted provisions that would prevent Japanese and other foreign manufacturers from gaining unfair access to the U.S. market via Mexico.
Meanwhile Mr.
Bush is making good on his promise to push through a treaty that would help Mexico and Canada, the other participant.


Xilinx Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Clinton's Policy Trademark: 'New Covenant'
Franklin D. Roosevelt had his New Deal; John F. Kennedy his New Frontier and Lyndon B. Johnson his Great Society.
If Mr.
Clinton has his way, historians in the next century will be studying the New Covenant.
He has often used the slogan in his campaign literature to describe the policies he advocates, and he made sure the term made its way into the party's platform.
He used the slogan again in his acceptance speech last night, defining the New Covenant as "a solemn commitment between the people and their Government -- based not simply on what each of us can take but on what all of us must give to our nation."


Awaiting Word on the Future of the Word at The New Yorker; The Whites
To the Editor:
In "How a Magazine Evolved Into an Institution" (arts pages, July 1), you omit the contributions of two who made The New Yorker an institution.
First was E. B. White, whose prose set the tone for the magazine's opening pages in the early years.


Democratic Team Opens by Appealing to Middle Class
Gov.
Bill Clinton and his running mate, Senator Al Gore, opened their general election campaign last night with a stern attack on President Bush's economic policies and a vision for a Democratic administration that would have as its priorities jobs, health care, AIDS research, the environment and political reform.
In an address intended to dispel the impression that he has character flaws that might disqualify him from the Presidency, the Arkansas Governor spoke of his background as a fatherless child and of his vision of a government based on the values of community, responsibility and compassion.


China Talks of Raising Economic Growth Target
In a sign that advocates of economic change are gaining ground, the Government strongly suggested today that it would revise its five-year economic plan and increase the target growth rate from 6 percent annually to 9 or 10 percent.
Yuan Mu, the State Council spokesman, said that because of changes at home and abroad, the Government was "considering revising" the nation's five-year plan.
That he made such remarks publicly suggests the revisions will be made, but perhaps not until next spring, when China's legislature meets.
Danger in Rapid Growth
The change would be widely seen as a rebuke of Prime Minister Li Peng, who backed the 6 percent target and reiterated his support for it in a speech in March.
Mr.
Li, a hard-liner, has been in some political difficulties since Deng Xiaoping, the country's 87-year-old paramount leader, began a campaign in January to accelerate economic change.


U.S. Defends Border Seizure of Abortion Pills
The Justice Department said today that the Government should not be forced to return the abortion pills it seized from a pregnant woman, arguing that the law required that unapproved drugs be seized and that the Government's leniency in other cases should not mean that it must be lenient in this case as well.
The woman, Leona Benten, flew into Kennedy International Airport on July 1 with the French abortion drug, RU486, to test a Federal prohibition on importing it.
She sued after the pills were seized by Customs agents.
She is seven weeks' pregnant and should take the drug by Saturday.


G.M. Official Shows Shift In Game Plan
PHILIP GUARASCIO just wanted to talk about soccer.
But an overflow audience of reporters, G.M. watchers and automotive enthusiasts had weightier matters to kick around.
Mr.
Guarascio, who on Tuesday was named general manager of marketing and advertising for General Motors' North American operations, was the star attraction yesterday at a monthly luncheon meeting of the International Motor Press Association.


Data Research Associates reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Federal Signal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
GOTTSCHALKS INC., Fresno, Calif., said it would plead guilty to three counts and pay a $1.5 million fine to settle charges stemming from what the Government said was an improper Federal income-tax deduction.
BOEING CO., Seattle, received a $195 million order for two 767-300 aircraft from Qantas Airways of Australia.


Bids Opened For Altering Of Shoreham
The Long Island Power Authority received bids today from three consortiums to convert the Shoreham nuclear power plant to a natural-gas-fired plant by the mid-1990's.
Richard M. Kessel, the chairman of the authority, said, "The fact that the consortiums consist of well-respected energy firms from all over the country shows that the state was prudent in reaching out to determine if there was an alternative use for the plant.


Hot-Wiring the Convention, 1787
Thanking his disappointed followers yesterday, Ross Perot declared, "The Founding Fathers would be proud of you." But would the Founding Fathers have been proud of his electronic town hall, which is based on his belief that technology makes it possible for the people to govern themselves without the corruption of politics?
In Mr.
Perot's "electronic town hall" model of government, we would make the big decisions, based on an hour-long "impartial" documentary presenting the issues and the options.
But if we had had the electronic town hall in 1787 and 1788, would we have adopted the Constitution?.


Progressive Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tredegar Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Awaiting Word on the Future of the Word at The New Yorker; Test for Length
To the Editor:
The New Yorker has never been without critics.
Even during the glory days of the venerated Harold Ross, the writer-director Nunnally Johnson complained, "If it's in The New Yorker, it's too long."  SOL ZATT Long Beach, Calif., July 6, 1992


Through Bill Clinton's Eyes
The person: "I can still see her clearly tonight through the eyes of a 3-year-old," Bill Clinton recalled last night about the time his widowed mother, enrolled in nursing school, put him on the train to go to his grandparents.
It was a poignant, and metaphoric, moment in his speech accepting the Democratic Presidential nomination.
For after months in which others have worked to characterize him savagely on the basis of incidents in his life, he finally got the chance to tell about his whole life, through his own eyes.
He did so not out of defensiveness or sentimentality but because he had to -- to show that Americans can trust him as President.


Art in Review
Bevan Davies  Sonnabend Gallery 420 West Broadway, at Spring Street SoHo Through July 31


Critic's Choice/Jazz; Clifford Jordan: A Tribute
The saxophonist and composer Clifford Jordan has been one of jazz's most important musicians for 30 years.
He has managed to understand a wide territory in jazz, incorporating everything from swing and be-bop ideas to the sound and textures of more adventurous players.
And in the middle of a deep recession, he founded a big band that played at Condon's every Monday night for almost two years.
It's one of the best big bands working, hard-swinging and exploratory all at the same time.


CYCLING: Biking in the U.S.A. -- Day 39; A Faster Track
While the Tour de France was in progress in Europe a few of the coast-to-coast United States riders yesterday tried out an arena that serves the competitive facet of our sport here.
Only days before our visit to the Major Taylor Velodrome in Indianapolis, sprinters on the U.S.
Olympic team actually worked out on the outdoor concrete bicycle-racing track with steep 28-degree banked turns.
The keenest competitive cyclist in our group is Dave Sanderson, a 25-year-old Sacramento State University student from California who was on the school's cycling team.
He had done stage races and road races, but had never ridden on a track before.
He used one of the track's own single-gear special track bikes.


Lockheed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Presidential Ticket Sprouts From Soil of 2 Tiny Farm Towns 450 Miles Apart
Both places have telephone books as thin as pocket Bibles and, as unlikely as it seems, they both now have native sons on the Democratic ticket.
In recent days the candidates have made a point of claiming the towns -- Hope, Ark., the birthplace of Gov.
Bill Clinton, and Carthage, Tenn., home to his running mate, Senator Al Gore -- as cradles of early thought, emotion and values, places that despite the 450 miles between them may even unite the men in some fundamental way.


Signs of Their Time Go Home With the Delegates


Europe Must Help Redraw Yugoslav Borders
To the Editor:
"Symbols Can't Save Bosnia" (editorial, July 1) ignores the reality in Bosnia by arguing against cantonment: "giving substantial autonomy, district by district, to the dominant group -- Muslim, Serb or Croat." You propose cooperation between Serbs, Muslims and Croats, with some "small" presence of international force.
But the carnage in Bosnia would stop at once if the international community would agree in principle to cantonment or the outright breakup of Bosnia, with the pledge that fair new borders would be determined at the conference table.


Intramed Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


General Microwave Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Teledyne Canada Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Prices of Long-Term Bonds Drop Sharply
Bond prices fell sharply yesterday, pushed lower by a regional Federal Reserve bank survey of manufacturers in the Mid-Atlantic region that was stronger than expected, a big drop in the value of the dollar and a negative reaction to opinion polls that show Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas holds a commanding lead over President Bush.
Much of the trading, which was fairly heavy, was done by dealers, market participants said.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about vocational education misidentified an organization that helps educators, business executives and government officials develop education policies.
It is the National Center on Education and the Economy.


Matlack Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Falcon Oil &amp; Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Montana Delegates Head Home After a Rousing Good Time
Larry Mavencamp went home to Montana yesterday with a Yankee cap and a briefcase full of mementoes of his first political convention -- Clinton-Gore buttons, newspaper clippings, autographs from Senators Bob Kerrey and Joseph R. Biden Jr. and, the one that means the most, a snapshot of himself with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.
The picture had been taken near midnight Wednesday when, lingering in the lobby of their hotel on East 50th Street, Mr.
Mavencamp and another Montana delegate, June Hermanson, looked up and saw the man who had electrified them from the podium the night before.


Havel Says He Will Resign as Czechoslovak President on Monday
President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia told the nation today that he would resign on Monday rather than continue to preside over the likely breakup of the 73-year-old nation into separate Czech and Slovak republics.
Mr.
Havel announced his decision to resign only an hour or so after the Slovak Parliament voted overwhelming in favor of "a declaration of sovereignty." By making his announcement when he did, Mr.
Havel underscored his opposition to Slovak separatism.


Standard Register reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sphinx May Really Be a Black African; Long Weather Changes
To the Editor:
John Anthony West conjectures that the Sphinx of Giza is thousands of years older than other Egyptian structures partly because it is more weathered from rain than surrounding monuments (Op-Ed, June 27).


In the End, Grant Can't Dodge the Bullets
The Knicks took their best shot at Harvey Grant, but the Washington Bullets blocked it.
As expected, the Bullets yesterday matched New York's six-year, $17.6 million offer sheet to Grant before the 6 P.M. deadline.
As a result, Grant remains with the Bullets, even though matching the Knicks' offer will make it very difficult for Washington to sign its first-round draft pick, Tom Gugliotta of North Carolina State, and stay within the salary cap.


AMC Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Convention Humor; When TV Turns Politics Into a Laughing Matter
Throughout the closing night of the Democratic National Convention, Tom Brokaw was perched in the NBC News anchor booth, analyzing the spectacle for millions of Americans.
But to find out what Mr.
Brokaw really thought of Gov.
Bill Clinton's acceptance speech, viewers had to stay up for "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno."
"I did an actual calculation," Mr.
Brokaw quipped in a live report to Mr.
Leno from Madison Square Garden early yesterday morning.
"If he had spoken for another 10 minutes, his speech would have been longer than Ross Perot's Presidential campaign."


One Price Clothing Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Bridge
Those attending the Greater New York Bridge Association's Summer Regional Championships at the Vista International Hotel at the World Trade Center will have an unusual opportunity today: At 6:30 P.M. there will be a lecture by one of the bridge world's most brilliant and colorful personalities, Zia Mahmood.
Playing sessions today are at 1 and 7 P.M., not as previously stated in this column.


FirstFederal Financial Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ben Franklin Retail reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quick Ending for Baseball's New Draft
Baseball's arbitrator yesterday struck down the changes in the amateur draft rules that were prompted by the Yankees' difficult and expensive negotiations with pitcher Brien Taylor a year ago.
George Nicolau, the arbitrator, found that the rules giving major league clubs rights to drafted players for up to five years violated the collective bargaining agreement on at least two counts: they involved a change in rules affecting major league players and the clubs did not negotiate the change with the Players Association.
The union had filed a grievance challenging the changes.


Life Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Waiting for Even Cheaper PC's
In the economics taught in college, when prices fall, sales rise.
But many personal computer customers seemed to have missed a few lessons.
Despite the largest price cuts in the history of the personal computer business in recent weeks, they have decided to stop buying, stand back and enjoy the spectacle of an industry whirling into a vortex of hyper-deflation.
"Customers come up to me and say, 'When are the prices going to drop again?' " said Harry Shasho, sarcastically imitating their winks and nudges.
A vice president of Willoughby's camera and electronics store on West 32d Street in Manhattan, Mr.
Shasho recently surveyed a computer department bereft of customers and said, "When a guy's seen Compaq drop, and AST drop, and Leading Edge drop, all in one month's time, he says, 'Hey, I'll wait.' "


Schools Panel Assails Chief On AIDS Issue
In another skirmish in the battle over AIDS instruction in New York City public schools, a four-member majority of the Board of Education yesterday accused the board president, H. Carl McCall, of not managing the issue impartially.
The charge came after a tense meeting on Wednesday at which the board narrowly decided to hire a lawyer to defend its recent resolution on AIDS instruction against a lawsuit.
The resolution requires that lessons on preventing AIDS always place more emphasis on abstinence from sex than on condom use.


3 Greet Priest, 78, on Subway Platform, Then Choke Him
First, the men wished the elderly priest a good morning.
Then one of them sneaked behind him on a Manhattan subway platform yesterday and choked him into unconsciousness while two accomplices stole the priest's wallet and rosary, the Transit Authority police said.
"It makes you wonder about humanity," said Albert W. O'Leary, a transit police spokesman.


Rochester Telephone Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Credit Fraud a Growing Menace, Survey Finds
Last year, as usual, consumer complaints centered on home and auto repairs and on mail-order products, according to a nationwide survey of consumer advocacy agencies.
But the survey also found that the current recession is allowing another abuse to flourish: consumer credit fraud.
Recession-related frauds were far more sinister than repair and mail-order problems, the survey organizers said, adding that they were surprised by the extent of the frauds.


Tennant Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Special Prosecutor on Iraq
President Bush has denounced as "purely political" Congressional pressure for appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate American aid to Iraq before the Persian Gulf war.
But in doing so, he unwittingly helps nail down the case for an independent investigation.
Congress is assessing Mr.
Bush's failed policy of appeasement of Saddam Hussein.
But an outside investigator is needed to pursue evidence of criminality in carrying out that policy, including hiding information from Congress.
The Administration cannot credibly investigate itself.


New York on $12.95 a Week
Sandy Allison, an Oklahoma delegate to the Democratic Convention, put it nicely: "I figured there would maybe be a mugger on the corner, the streets would be dirty and no one would help you. But I fell in love with the city. I'll be back."
It was a good week for the Democrats and New York City.
Skeptics said New York, with all its polyglot poverty, was a poor place to showcase the Democratic nominee.
But starting with a giant reception in refurbished Bryant Park, the city put on a proud show, giving boosterism a good name.


South Africa Police Say 78 Will Be Charged in Township Massacre
The South African police said today that 78 residents of a black steelworkers' hostel would be charged with murder or public violence in the massacre in the black township of Boipatong last month.
The indictments promised to be the largest such case ever brought by the South African Government, and reflected the pressure on the Government to deflect charges of indifference or outright collusion in the killings.


Mai-Mai Sze, 82, A Writer Known Also as a Painter
Mai-mai Sze, a painter and author, died in New York Hospital in Manhattan on Thursday.
She was 82 years old.
Ms. Sze died of throat cancer, said Jean B. Angell, a close friend who was her lawyer.


Alfa Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Critic's Notebook; Defending Tchaikovsky, With Gravity and With Froth
In both practical and artistic terms, the New York Philharmonic's four-concert residency at Carnegie Hall, which ended on Thursday evening, has been illuminating in more ways than its planners could have foreseen.
To begin with the mundane, the series came about when the orchestra lost financial support for a planned Latin American tour (part of which has been salvaged and is to begin next week).
An orchestra that pays its musicians the year round is loath to give them extra vacation: When there are no performances, there is no box office income.
When the Philharmonic announced its plan in April, it described its programs as a Tchaikovsky mini-festival.
Kurt Masur would conduct; the violinist Midori and the pianist Shura Cherkassky would be the soloists, and some of the concerts would be preceded by chamber performances.
Brows furrowed.
Would a bumper crop of Tchaikovsky -- and mostly war horses -- really be of much use?


With 20,000 Scarletts Dying for Role, Drama Is Thick Behind the Scenes
Suitably decked out in a white organdy copy of the hoop-skirted dress Scarlett O'Hara wore in the opening scene of "Gone With the Wind," her chestnut brown hair sculptured like Vivien Leigh's, Lisa Lynn says that in Atlanta one thing is eternal.
"People get off the plane, and the first thing they want to do is see Scarlett," said Ms.
Lynn, whose credits include appearing as Scarlett at the Sixth Annual Spring Fling in Warm Springs, Ga.
"You go to New York, you want to eat bagels. You come to Atlanta, you want to see Scarlett."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
FISCAL INDEPENDENCE FOR HOSPITAL SYSTEM
In an effort to end bureaucratic squabbling and improve the quality of medical care for the poor, the Dinkins administration has agreed to give New York City's public hospital system its financial independence.
Under the agreement, the city's Health and Hospital's Corporation will have new spending powers and the ability to draft its own budget, set its own priorities and even sell its own bonds without interference from City Hall.
Page 1.
DELEGATES HEAD HOME
Hundreds of delegates checked out of their hotels and headed home, leaving behind beaming city officials who declared that the Democratic National Convention had changed the way the world sees New York.
The city returned to its regular rhythms after a week of political hoopla at Madison Square Garden and carefully staged events in other parts of the city.
Page 26.
Montana delegates head home with memories and memorabilia.
Page 26.
DELIVERY OF NEEDLES BLOCKED
Delivery of the first supply of syringes to New York City's needle-exchange program -- an ambitious research effort to determine whether giving clean needles to drug users slows the spread of AIDS -- was blocked by the State Health Department.
The length of the delay was uncertain and whether that delay arose from the methodical process of bureaucracy or resistance from within that bureaucracy was in dispute.
Page 27.
BATTLE OVER AIDS EDUCATION CONTINUES
In another skirmish in the battle over AIDS instruction in New York City public schools, a four-member majority of the Board of Education accused the board president of not managing the issue impartially.
Page 27.
Three men rob elderly priest in a subway station in lower Manhattan.
Page 27.
REGION
ENTHUSIASM WANING FOR VOTE ON PETITIONS
A crucial Assembly floor vote on whether to allow New Jersey citizens to make laws through petitions and referendums is scheduled for Monday, but Republican leaders are already conceding that their members have lost enthusiasm for the concept since they took control of the Legislature.
Page 29.
NEW NAME APPROVED FOR COLLEGE
The New Jersey State Board of Higher Education unanimously approved changing the name of Glassboro State College to Rowan College of New Jersey to honor the businessman who announced a $100 million gift to the school two weeks ago.
Page 29.
PARENTS OF ANOREXIC GO TO COURT
The parents of a woman struggling with anorexia went into New Jersey Superior Court in Paterson this week with a rare motion.
They asked that their 19-year-old daughter be declared legally incompetent and that her father be appointed a "special medical guardian" with authority to compel hospital treatment for his daughter against her wishes.
Page 29.
Governor Cuomo and legislative leaders fail to agree on leftover bills.
Page 29.
About New York by Douglas Martin 26


More Jobs, Jobs, Jobs
Pessimism over New York City's future runs deep.
Most people predict a continued exodus of businesses and taxpayers.
Apparently the experts have not visited Pittsburgh, which has made a strong comeback over the past year.
A key reason is its aggressive approach to economic development.
Yes, it has pockets of poverty but has rebuilt an economic core that provides job opportunity.
In May, Mayor David Dinkins's Management Advisory Task Force compared Pittsburgh's economic plans to New York's, found ours inadequate and suggested sweeping changes.
Our main proposal is the establishment of a development bank that has substantial financing for long-term, job-intensive projects and is insulated from politics as effectively as possible.
We are negotiating with financing sources to try to create one.


Cadence Design Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nationsbank Is Buying MNC Stake
Hugh L. McColl Jr. is on the march again.
And as usual, Nationsbank's chief executive wants plenty of insurance against land mines.
This time, he is headed north to Baltimore, home of his latest acquisition prospect, the troubled MNC Financial Inc.
The Nationsbank Corporation announced yesterday that it had agreed to invest $200 million in MNC for a 16 percent nonvoting stake and an option to buy the whole company for at least $1.2 billion more by Sept. 30, 1997.


Crown Crafts reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Executive Changes
DNA PLANT TECHNOLOGY CORP., Cinnaminson, N.J., an agricultural biotechnology company, appointed Robert Serenbetz, president and chief operating officer, to the additional position of chief executive.
ETIENNE AIGNER, New York, a women's dress shoe, handbag and small leathergoods distributing unit of Hartstone Group P.L.C., named Robert Chavez chief executive.


Beliefs
Every January the nation's religion reporters and other self-anointed authorities construct lists of the "Most important religion stories" of the year: conflicts over sexual ethics, the religious resurgence in Eastern Europe, the furor over the Dead Sea Scrolls, the latest encyclicals from the Pope.
Big deal.


DF Southeastern Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Teppco Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Washington, a Sicilian Mafia Trial Without the Glass Cages
As three reputed members of the Sicilian Mafia ambled into the well of a heavily guarded Federal courtroom here this week, the place took on the atmosphere of a Mafia trial in Palermo.
In fact, the proceedings at the Federal Courthouse in downtown Washington were part of a trial that began in March in that seaport city in Sicily.
The United States is allowing the Government of Italy to use the Washington courtroom for about two weeks, apparently out of security concerns, to conduct a part of a trial of 14 reputed members of the Sicilian Mafia on drug conspiracy charges.


Review/Pop; West African Sounds by Way of Paris
The audience at S.O.B.'s on Thursday night was about two-thirds Senegalese, some wearing West African robes, and one-third Europeans and Americans.
Those proportions were reflected in the music of Ismael Lo.
Mr.
Lo was a member of Super Diamono de Dakar, one of Senegal's leading rock bands, for the first half of the 1980's, until he moved to Paris to start a solo career.
His seven-member band has touches of the Parisian melting pot, with Antillean and jazz influences.


Panel Approves Changing Name of Glassboro State to Rowan College
The State Board of Higher Education today unanimously approved changing the name of Glassboro State College to Rowan College of New Jersey to honor the businessman who announced a $100 million gift to the school two weeks ago.
The board made its decision after listening to two hours of frequently impassioned testimony for and against the idea of changing the school's name for the fourth time in its 69-year history.


TJ International reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


West Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Stephan Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
Some people get to a certain point in their life, and they go out and buy a $40,000 Mercedes or change their career.
I've decided to do whatever it takes to become Scarlett. -- SHEILA O'CONNOR DIXON, who wants to star in a "Gone With the Wind" sequel.  [ 1:1. ]


Pope in 'Normal' Discomfort
Vatican officials reported today that Pope John Paul II was experiencing slight post-operative pain but that he was cautiously moving around his hospital room two days after surgery to remove a large intestinal tumor that his doctors described as benign.
"The post-operative process is normal; the Pope is well," the Vatican spokesman, Joaquin Navarro-Valls, said, dismissing Italian press reports quoting American medical experts as saying the tumor was too big to rule out the possibility of cancer.


40 Million See Party's Finale
Almost 30 million Americans watched the Democratic convention on the three broadcast networks Thursday night, according to Nielsen Media Services, and at least another 10 million watched on cable or public television.
About 9.6 million people watched the convention on ABC, 8.6 million watched on CBS and 9.1 million watched on NBC, Nielsen reported yesterday.


166 Pitches Later, Cone Has a Shutout
A 1-0 lead after the first inning.
It's a modest accomplishment.
For the Mets this season, though, it has more often than not been an entire night's work.
David Cone, then, wasn't deceived by the early good fortune.
The 1-0 lead, he understood, wasn't so much a blessing as a challenge.
Make it stand, the right-hander told himself, because in all likelihood the Mets weren't going to make it larger.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; Advisers Describe Perot Disillusion
Officials of what was the Ross Perot campaign painted a picture of the Texas billionaire today as a candidate so disdainful of traditional politics that he resisted spending money on polls or campaign commercials, even as he spent lavishly to finance grass-roots volunteer groups.
"It wasn't that he was unwilling to spend money," said one campaign insider.
"He didn't want to spend money on things that mattered."


Factions in Bosnia Accept U.N. Custody of Weapons
The three armed factions of Bosnia and Herzegovina agreed today to place their tanks, artillery, mortars and other heavy weapons under United Nations supervision and begin a 14-day cease-fire on Sunday evening.
Whether or not the truce holds, the leaders of the Bosnian Government and of Serbian and Croatian armies also agreed to come back to London on July 27 to begin indirect talks on a political settlement.
They pledged as well that all refugees would be permitted to return to the places where they had been expelled.


Taking a Little Off the Top


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Minority Voters; Jackson Waits for Plan From Clinton
Ross Perot's withdrawal from the 1992 Presidential race has significantly increased the importance of a large turnout of minority voters for Gov.
Bill Clinton, black and Hispanic officials said yesterday.
But the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, whose enthusiastic support can be crucial to generating such a turnout, said his role in the fall campaign would not be determined until he discussed strategy with the Democratic nominee.


Anderson Leads Nets Over Knicks
Led by Kenny Anderson's 23 points, the Nets defeated the Knicks, 141-120, in summer league play at the Westchester County Center tonight.


DINKINS IS BACKING BUDGET AUTONOMY AT CITY HOSPITALS
The Dinkins administration has agreed to broad changes in its relationship with New York City's huge and overburdened public hospital system, giving the system far more control over its finances.
Administration officials said that the change had been prompted by years of bureaucratic squabbling between the Health and Hospitals Corporation and City Hall over how to manage the system, which has been widely criticized for the quality of its care.
Officials said that the changes should make hospital managers more accountable, provide them with incentives to cut waste and improve efficiency and allow them to shift resources to provide better care to poor people.


Patents; Biotech Treatment For Immune System
Anergen Inc., a fledgling biotechnology company in Redwood City, Calif., this week patented a family of compounds that it says could treat rheumatoid arthritis and other illnesses that occur because the immune system begins attacking the body.
Company officials said the patent is based on using a molecule called major histocompatibility complex, or M.H.C., that is found in white blood cells called macrophages.
Normally, the M.H.C. attaches to a fragment of a foreign invader to the body, like a virus, and helps the immune system mount a response.


Gasoline Spill Is Lethal to Inhabitants of a New Jersey Pond


COMPANY BRIEFS
DOW CORNING INC., Midland, Mich., a producer of silicone and related chemicals, has acquired Ara-Werk KraemerG.m.b.H. one of Germany's leading suppliers of sealants and polyurethane foam products.
Operations will continue essentially as before.
Terms were not disclosed.
EVEREX SYSTEMS INC., Fremont, Calif., a manufacturer of personal computer peripheral and related products, has signed a distribution agreement with Highland SuperstoresInc., Plymouth, Mich., a consumer electronic appliances concern.
Under the agreement Everex will make available its line of Maxlogic personal computer systems to Highland's superstores.


Myers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
U.N. Official to Warn Iraq To Comply or Risk an Attack
A senior United Nations flew to Baghdad to warn Iraq that it risks being attacked unless it cooperates with arms inspections under the terms of the gulf war cease-fire.
Page 3.
Havel to Resign as President
Vaclav Havel said he would step down rather than preside over Czechoslovakia's breakup.
Page 3.
Catholics on Homosexuality
The Vatican urged Roman Catholic bishops in the United States to oppose laws that promote public acceptance of homosexual conduct.
Page 7.
Trade Gap Widened in May
Exports fell for the third straight month, as the nation's trade deficit widened to $7.38 billion.
Page 35.
Another Sore Spot for Mets
Dwight Gooden, the Mets' onetime ace, will go on the disabled list with an inflamed right shoulder.
Page 31.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In the Heartland; Clinton Is Reaching Restless Reagan Democrats
When Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas took to the podium to accept the Democratic nomination for the Presidency and wax moderate about the needs of working people, he was likely hoping that a guy like Joe Madden was listening from his sky-blue velour recliner, nodding in agreement.
And he was.
Mr.
Madden, a maintenance supervisor in this working-class suburb southwest of Chicago, is a Democrat's dream.
He is white, male and suburban, a family man who is a Democrat at heart, but was stolen away by the Republicans many elections ago.


BHC Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; Things Money Can't Buy
AS recently as Wednesday evening, Gerry Hunsicker, the Mets' vice president for baseball operations, could look at the standings, glance at the calendar and assure fans that their Mets were still in the hunt.
True, the first half had been a nightmare, on and off the field.
But the Mets had weathered preseason scandals, survived Bobby Bonilla's inconsistency, managed the fallout from Howard Johnson's latest shift, to left field from center.


Review/Film; Romance, It Seems, Is for the Dogs
Not much about "Man Trouble," a sad mess of a romantic comedy directed by Bob Rafelson, written by Carole Eastman and starring Jack Nicholson, suggests that these three collaborated on one of the most haunting and representative films of another day.
The memory of "Five Easy Pieces," plus a few moments in which Mr.
Nicholson cuts loose despite the halfheartedness of what surrounds him, are all that mark "Man Trouble" as a film with a distinguished pedigree.
Mr.
Nicholson and Ellen Barkin play Harry Bliss, a dog trainer who's down on his luck, and Joan Spruance, an opera singer who (according to the production notes, if not to the film) is in some way "trying to find her voice." There is visual evidence to prove that they spent time together while the film was being made, but in effect the two performances seem to come from different continents.
Ms.
Barkin, looking uncharacteristically pert and affecting a stilted, ladylike speaking voice, seems particularly uneasy.
Even Mr.
Nicholson's rare gift for managing to behave comfortably under any circumstances is put to the test.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Watch; Clinton's Big Moment Is Short on Telegenics
You had to feel a little sorry for Bill Clinton watching him on television Thursday night.
As if there weren't enough pressure on him to give a speech that would dispel lingering doubts about his character, reintroduce him to the American people, appeal to the middle class, defend his record in Arkansas and project him as an agent of change, suddenly he had to woo Ross Perot supporters as well.
Weaker men might have crumbled. Mr. Clinton just talked too long.


Chris-Craft Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kellogg Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Condition Worsens for Baby Who Escaped Triple Slaying
A relative stepped forward yesterday to claim a 3-month-old baby who was found near her slain mother, father and stepbrother in a Bronx apartment on Thursday, hospital officials said.
But the condition of the baby, whose name is Tiffany, appeared to be deteriorating, and she was moved last night into an intensive care unit at a different hospital.
Tiffany, who spent up to 24 hours hidden under a bed before police officers found her, had responded to treatment for a 105-degree temperature and dehydration until yesterday, when she suddenly began to hyperventilate, said Karen Crowe, a spokeswoman for Bronx Municipal Hospital Center.


Rex (L) International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


WorldCorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yes, It's the Injured Cuff: Gooden Headed for Shelf
An examination of Dwight Gooden's ailing right shoulder yesterday determined that the right-hander for the Mets had suffered complications involving his surgically repaired rotator cuff.
The club said Gooden would be placed on the 15-day disabled list within 24 hours.
The diagnosis did not find a fresh tear or other major structural trauma, but according to Dr.
David Altchek, the club physician, inflammation and soreness are persistent in the shoulder.
Gooden, who was forced from his Thursday night start against the San Francisco Giants after only three and two-thirds innings, had surgery to repair a partial tear of his rotator cuff and to clean up damaged cartilage in the shoulder last Sept. 7.


Beware the Cookie Monster
Shorn of her claws and fetchingly eager to be a White House wife, Hillary Clinton has returned after several months out of the limelight.
No longer is she taunting, "if you elect Bill, you get me," or alluding to how she will reshape the role of the First Lady.
Her potential White House role has been reduced, she says, to "a voice for children," and her biggest concern at the moment seems to be beating Barbara Bush in a Family Circle bake-off.
She's softened her hair, wardrobe and makeup, and even seems to have abandoned her yuppie headband -- all with the none-too-subtle intent of making her appear more maternal, domestic, average, likeable.


Kelly Goes Along With Latest Shuffle
Joe Kelly started 12 games at right linebacker for the Jets last season, but he was not happy about the time he did not put in.
"I didn't start against Houston, Detroit, Buffalo and Indiana, and I didn't play the second half in the first game against Miami and New England and Green Bay when we went to the nickel," said Kelly, acquired by the Jets in a 1990 trade with the Cincinnati Bengals.


AirSensors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Albany Still Wrestling With Unfinished Business
Another round of meetings today between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and state legislative leaders failed once again to produce an agreement on a package of bills left over from the legislative session, including a fiscal bailout for Nassau and Suffolk counties.
The bills, which also include an $800 million bond act intended to create jobs across the state, unraveled in the early morning of July 3, just before the Legislature went home for the summer.
Since then, staff members from the Governor's office, the Democratic-led Assembly and the Republican-led Senate have been meeting in hope of cutting a deal.


4 Indicted in Slaying Of a Parole Officer
Four men described as top members of a notorious Queens drug ring headed by Lorenzo (Fat Cat) Nichols were charged yesterday with killing a parole officer, Brian Rooney, who was shot to death on Oct. 10, 1985.
The Federal indictment in Brooklyn said that while in prison, Mr.
Nichols ordered his lieutenants to "seriously injure" Mr.
Rooney after Mr.
Nichols had been arrested in July 1985 for parole violations.
Mr.
Rooney brought the charges after Mr.
Nichols was arrested for drug and weapons possession.


Delegates Leave Behind A Satisfied New York City
Hundreds of delegates checked out of their hotels yesterday and headed home, leaving behind beaming city officials who declared that the Democratic National Convention had changed the way the world sees New York.
The exodus of delegates produced luggage-cart gridlock at the New York Sheraton Hotel and Towers, one of the headquarters hotels for convention delegates -- the front entrance was briefly blocked by carts until a bellman cleared a path.
But as the day went on, the city returned to its regular rhythms after a week of political hoopla at Madison Square Garden and carefully staged events in other parts of the city.


American Electric Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


VATICAN CONDONES GAY-RIGHTS LIMITS
A Vatican office has urged Roman Catholic bishops in the United States to scrutinize laws intended to protect homosexuals and to oppose them if they promote public acceptance of homosexual conduct.
"There are areas in which it is not unjust discrimination to take sexual orientation into account," the Vatican's Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, which enforces matters of doctrine for the church, said in a statement sent last month to American bishops.
It specified adoptions, placement of children in foster care, military service and employment of teachers and athletic coaches.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: A Hard Sell; People in Advertising Aren't Surprised Perot Didn't Stay
Ross Perot's withdrawal from the race for the Presidency came as little surprise to advertising executives and people who study the field.
The problems that pressured Mr.
Perot into withdrawing, they said yesterday, can be comprehended if the selling of a candidate is compared to the selling of a product.
Eugene Secunda, a professor of marketing at Baruch College in New York, likened Mr.
Perot's experience to what happens "in almost any consumer-product category you look at, like automobiles or soft drinks."


Scripps (E.W.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FMC Gold reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Britain Warns Sarajevo Over Any Military Help
After weeks of pinning their hopes on Western military intervention against the Serbian nationalist forces besieging this city, the people of Sarajevo were told bluntly today that no Western country has any intention of getting involved in rescuing the city with military force, even if the fall of the city seems imminent.
Douglas Hurd, the British Foreign Secretary, ruled out any Western military action to save Sarajevo when he spoke to reporters here after a two-hour visit to the city.
At one point, replying to a question from an American reporter about the possibility of widespread loss of life if Sarajevo should fall to the Serbian forces, he singled out the United States as being among the countries that had decided not to take military action.


PictureTel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Standard Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sphinx May Really Be a Black African; Not Alone in Belief
To the Editor:
"The Case of the Missing Pharaoh" (Op-Ed, June 27) challenges the notion that Pharaoh Chephren built the Giza Sphinx and implies Egyptologists believe otherwise.
The renowned Sir Flinders Petrie, in "The Royal Tombs of the Earliest Dynasties" (1901), reproduced depictions of the Sphinx from tablets of Egyptian kings of the First Dynasty or even earlier, proving the Sphinx existed centuries before Chephren.


To Help a Hiker Hear a Bird Sing or a Deer Cough
A hearing-aid specialist whose hobby is bow hunting has developed a miniature sound amplifier for the ear that helps hunters and naturalists pick up sounds in the woods.
The specialist, Bob Walker of Media, Pa., who is licensed to fit people with hearing aids, calls his invention the Walker's Game Ear.
The device, which looks like a conventional hearing aid, is designed to pick up only high-frequency sounds, like those that wild animals make.
A regular hearing aid picks up every sound, including low-frequency background noises.


Van Dorn Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Poe &amp; Associates reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stepan Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


More on Politics
HOST CITY -- Mayor Dinkins and New York basked in the convention spotlight.
Pages 25 and 26.
GOING HOME -- Montana delegates leave their ringside seats on history to head back to where canyons aren't man-made.
Page 26.


Texas Meridian Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lukens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Europe Must Help Redraw Yugoslav Borders; Least Bad Solution
To the Editor:
Cantonment into ethnically homogeneous districts may in fact be the least bad solution for what was Yugoslavia ("Symbols Can't Save Bosnia," editorial, July 1).
The tragic history of Northern Ireland shows that a militant 35 percent minority cannot be hypnotized into forgetting its affinity to a neighboring state.
In what was Yugoslavia, the problem is not that Serb militias in Croatia and Bosnia want to join Serbia, but that they want to grab far more than their fair share.
HUGO S. CUNNINGHAM Somerville, Mass., July 4, 1992


Religious Freedom Behind Russian Prison Bars


GFC Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Eagle Precision Tech reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


National Beverage Corp. reports earnings for Year to May 2


Graco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Insignia Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cone Pitches Shutout Against Giants


One Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dura Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; G.O.P. Asks Perot Backers To Give Its Ticket a Chance
In a campaign foray across three Southern states, Vice President Dan Quayle courted supporters of Ross Perot today and vowed to "peel back the veneer to find out what is underneath" Gov.
Bill Clinton, whom the Democrats anointed this week as their Presidential nominee.
Almost a continent away, President Bush took much the same tack toward supporters of the Texas billionaire.


Storage Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Harassment Questions Kill 2 Admirals' Promotions
In the broadening aftermath of a sexual harassment scandal, the Navy is canceling the promotions of two of the service's most senior admirals who were involved in two other sexual harassment incidents.
One officer is Vice Adm.
Jerry O. Tuttle, a three-star admiral whomPresident Bush had nominated to become the chief of naval aviation, one of the top dozen posts in the Navy.
The other is Rear Adm.
Joseph W. Prueher.
Mr.
Bush had chosen him to be promoted two grades, from one star to three, and to assume command of the Third Fleet, based in San Diego.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: At the Truck Stop; The View From the Semi: Long-Haul Drivers Look Down on Politicians
Of the various publics largely ignoring politics as the Democrats convened in New York, few did it with such tooth-picking gusto as the nation's long-haul truck drivers.
They swaggered down to earth from their air-cushioned driver's seats here at Interstate 29's dusty Truck Haven and sounded more intent on tucking into a stack of pancakes than on taking this nation back, getting it moving again, or whatever the convention cliche was back East.
"You think I should pay attention to them politicians when they can't even balance their own damn checkbooks?" asked Jim Wendt, a 63-year-old driver whose rig full of perishables rested at low idle across the Truck Haven lot beside dozens of other panting, rumbling diesel trucks.
Lots of Hissing and Chuffing
"The same sort of 'respected people' who robbed us in that savings-and-loan scandal get elected as delegates to them things," the driver declared, angrily splitting the blame between the parties with cleaver bluntness.
Mr.
Wendt repeatedly used the savings-and-loan and House bank scandals to dismiss the convention promises emanating this summer from politicians to do better next time.


Who Needs a Beach?


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Minority Voters; Jackson Waits for Plan From Clinton
Ross Perot's withdrawal from the 1992 Presidential race has significantly increased the importance of a large turnout of minority voters for Gov.
Bill Clinton, black and Hispanic officials said yesterday.
But the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, whose enthusiastic support can be crucial to generating such a turnout, said his role in the fall campaign would not be determined until he discussed strategy with the Democratic nominee.


Avemco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
The Active Stocks table in Business Day on Monday carried incorrect price and earnings data for Union Carbide.
The company's stock price rose 14 percent the previous week and 51.2 percent for the year to date.
Its five-year high was $13.84 and its low was $4.32.
In the previous 12 months, the company's loss was 28 cents a share.
Union Carbide's stock price was adjusted on July 6 to take account of the spinoff of its Praxair subsidiary to shareholders.
The change was not reflected in the table.


Gorman-Rupp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Digital's Europe Chief Joins Ask
Pier Carlo Falotti, the president of the Digital Equipment Corporation's European operations, resigned yesterday to become president and chief executive of the Ask Companies, a leading software supplier based in Mountain View, Calif.
The announcement about Mr.
Falotti, who is 50 years old and has worked at Digital for 23 years, came the day after the company's president, Kenneth H. Olsen, announced his retirement.
Mr.
Falotti will succeed Sandra L. Kurtzig, the founder of Ask, formerly known as Ask Computer Systems, who will remain chairman.


Noranda Forest reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


West Bank Campus Standoff Ends Peacefully
A potentially explosive standoff between Israeli soldiers and an estimated 2,000 Palestinian students ended peacefully today as a four-day siege came to an end at a university in the occupied West Bank city of Nablus.
The army lifted its encirclement of the An Najah University campus and ended days of curfew that had been imposed on the city.


Bytex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Patents; Using Genes To Aid Sense Of Smell
RESEARCHERS at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore have patented the gene for a protein that could help enhance a person's sense of smell.
Although its precise role is still being explored, the newly identified protein is secreted by a gland near the tip of the nose and attaches to a wide variety of odor-causing molecules.


Ground Round Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Moi? Involved in a Copyright-Infringement Suit?
Will Miss Piggy make a reliable character witness?
Will Kermit the Frog crack under cross-examination?
The discovery of a pair of long-lost Muppets has led to a legal fight in Federal District Court in New York and some conduct unbecoming to a Muppet at a recent trade show here.


Review/Dance; Mining the Richness of Age and Experience
The knolls are alive with the sound of dancers at the American Dance Festival, and as usual they are virtually all young.
Students from various parts of the country and the world can be spotted outdoors and inside studios in technique classes at the modern-dance festival's school here on the Duke University campus.
But this summer the festival, which is known for presenting professional companies and commissioning premieres from them, seems to be offering a reminder that dance does not belong to youth alone.


Cyber Digital Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Virus at Tracks Appears To Have Been Controlled
The horse virus that spread through racing barns in New England this week and led to quarantines in 12 states, including New York and New Jersey, seems to have stabilized, the chief state veterinarian reported at Rockingham Park in Salem, N.H., yesterday.
No new cases were reported at the Rockingham track, and 10 of the 38 horses stricken with the virus have gone back into training.
Racing operations have not been affected at the track, which has 1,425 horses in its stables.
But racing at Foxboro Park in Massachusetts was suspended this week, and horses returning from New England were ordered into quarantine in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware and Kentucky.


Jefferies Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Texas Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Agreement On Software
The Software Publishers Association said today that it had reached an agreement with the Bush Administration to partly relax export controls over mass-market software with encoding capabilities.
Such software is used to enhance privacy and protect information and is playing an increasingly important role as desktop computers become widely used in business.
The agreement was set forth in a letter that Brent Scowcroft, the President's national security adviser, recently sent to several members of Congress.


Cognex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Review/Music; The 'Cav' and 'Pag' Duo In a City Opera Opening
It was heartening, during the opening night of the New York City Opera season on Thursday, to see the company doing precisely what it should be doing: presenting a committed ensemble performance with imagination and flair.
The final scenes of "Pagliacci" even seemed to transform the New York State Theater into an intimate playhouse.
Instead of aiming for grandeur, the production generally preferred a carefully choreographed directness; instead of stars, there was a cast of good singers able to act convincingly and move freely.
There was a company on stage, not just an assemblage of players.
Not everything during the evening was as fine as this opera's play within a play: the performance of "Cavalleria Rusticana" that opened the evening was unconvincing.
But parts of "Pagliacci" were molded into superior chamber opera.


Deprenyl Research Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Parents File Suit to Battle 19-Year-Old's Anorexia
Before she went off to college last summer, 19-year-old Nancy Walsh had been a model and, at 5 feet 10 inches, a star high school basketball player with scholarship offers.
"She had the whole world to look forward to," her father said.
Then Miss Walsh began losing weight: 55 pounds between August and December.


West One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Classical Music in Review
Mostly Mozart Alicia de Larrocha, pianist Avery Fisher Hall


United Missouri Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


E'Town Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wainwright Bank &amp; Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Giga-tronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Corrections
A brief article in some editions on Thursday about a baseball coach who was charged with sexual abuse of a 9-year-old boy on his team misidentified the league in which the suspect coached.
It was a private league, not the Little League.


Oak Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Looters' Booty: A Dream; Korean Immigrants' Harlem Store Is Plundered
If there is a greater meaning behind what happened at KP Original Sporting Goods during the violence that started in Washington Heights 11 days ago, some theory of class or racial antipathy, it is lost on the Hong family.
The frenzy of looting and violence that destroyed their shop, they concluded, can be explained by two words: greed and sneakers.
Other shops and restaurants near the Hongs' store at 145th Street and Broadway, including some other Korean-owned businesses, were virtually untouched by the mobs that surged through the streets following the fatal shooting two weeks ago of Jose (Kiko) Garcia by a police officer.
But KP Original Sporting Goods, built into a thriving business from almost nothing by the Korean immigrants, remained shuttered yesterday, its prospects for reopening uncertain.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4 CAMPAIGN BY THE SERBS
News analysis: Despite the confusing nature of the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina, it seems basically to be a Serbian war of aggression waged mostly against civilians.  1  BOSNIAN FACTIONS SIGN ACCORD
Three Bosnian factions agreed in London to put heavy arms under United Nations supervision and begin a truce.
Two peacekeepers were killed in Croatia.  4  CZECHOSLOVAK LEADER TO RESIGN
President Havel told Czechoslovak citizens that he would step down Monday rather than preside over the nation's likely dissolution.  3  CHARGES IN SOUTH AFRICAN RAID
The South African police said 78 residents of a black steelworkers' hostel would be indicted in a massacre last month in a black township.  4  U.N.
DELIVERING THREAT TO IRAQ
A United Nations official arrived in Baghdad to warn that Iraq faces the risk of attack unless it cooperates with arms inspectors.
A Pentagon official said the United States had the means to back up the threat.  3  ARMY SIEGE ENDS IN WEST BANK
The Israeli Army peacefully ended its siege of a campus in Nablus after six Palestinian fugitives agreed to accept expulsion to Jordan.  3  DEFIANCE IN RUSSIAN ASSEMBLY
Russia's Parliament voted to increase the budget deficit by 100 billion rubles.
Lawmakers also decided to try to seize control of Izvestia, an independent newspaper.  3  BOMBINGS KILL 18 IN PERU
Powerful car bombs left 18 dead and 140 wounded in Lima, casting doubt on the President's claims of inroads against Shining Path rebels.  2  The Pope was reported to be in slight pain two days after surgery.  2  Barcelona Journal: The Olympic torch illuminates Catalonia.  2  National 5-11  GAINS FOR CLINTON
Both parties began intensive bids for former supporters of Ross Perot, and a new New York Times/CBS News Poll showed the Democratic nominee, Bill Clinton, as the main beneficiary of the independent candidate's sudden withdrawal.  1  PORTRAIT OF PEROT
Officials of what was the Ross Perot campaign described the Texas billionaire as a man obsessed with his public image who began to lose interest in the contest when faced with a barrage of critical news reports.  1  ON THE ROAD AGAIN
Bill Clinton and his running mate, Al Gore, used the first full day of their general election campaign to reach out to Ross Perot supporters and open a six-day bus tour that will take them to seven states.  9  BACK IN THE FOLD AGAIN?
In Hometown, Ill., a town full of Reagan Democrats, a majority of citizens have voted Republican for the last 12 years.
But this year, the Democrats may have a chance in that working-class suburb.  8  APPEAL OF A PRESIDENT PEROT
News analysis: It was not ideology, or party affiliation, or political experience that gave rise to the odd quasi-candidacy of Ross Perot.
It was himself; the appeal of a President Perot was simply Mr.
Perot.  11  SETBACK FOR ABORTION PILL
The Supreme Court refused to order the Federal Government to return the French abortion pills it had seized from a pregnant woman.  1  2 NAVY PROMOTIONS CANCELED
In the widening aftermath of the Tailhook sexual harassment scandal, the Navy is canceling the promotions of two admirals who were involved in two other unrelated sexual harassment incidents.  1  ALL AFLUTTER OVER SCARLETT
There were Scarletts who look like Vivien Leigh and Scarletts who look like Madonna; white Scarletts and black Scarletts -- all in Atlanta for a casting call for "Scarlett," the sequel to you know what.  5  BAN ON BUNGEE JUMPING
Florida, a state where potentially hazardous outdoor pursuits are a way of life, has become the first state to ban bungee jumping.  5  MORE COVERT ACTIONS DISCLOSED
C.I.A. officials were apparently involved in more efforts than previously believed to circumvent Congress and to topple the leftist Nicaraguan Government in the 80's, according to newly released documents.  5  CATHOLICS AND HOMOSEXUALS
The Vatican has urged American bishops to oppose laws protecting homosexuals if those laws would serve to promote public acceptance of homosexual conduct.  7  The "hot book" for religion articles is The Weekly World News.  6  Metro Digest 25  HOSPITAL INDEPENDENCE
The Dinkins administration has agreed to broad changes in its relationship with New York City's huge and overburdened public hospital system, giving the system far more control over its finances.  1  Business Digest 35  Arts/Entertainment 15-18  Film: "Man Trouble." 18  Music: "Cav" and "Pag." 15  Critic's Notebook 15  Sounds from Senegal.  17  Dance: American Festival.  15  Consumer's World 13  Disappearing LP's.
Growing menace of credit fraud.
A hearing aid for outdoorsmen.
The cost of renting wheels.
Enter Slovakia, exit Havel.
New York on $12.95 a week.
Let a hundred schools bloom.
Letters  Russell Baker: Bee gotta buzz.
Charles Peters: Who will play Captain Courageous?
Karen Lehrman: Beware the cookie monster.
Roger C. Altman and Arthur Levitt Jr.: More jobs, jobs, jobs.
Ronald Goldfarb: The Supreme Court buys P.C.


Stone &amp; Webster reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Old Stone Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; With No Break, Clinton Initiates Campaign Tour
Bill Clinton and his running mate, Al Gore, rallied the Democratic faithful today, using the first full day of their campaign to romance supporters of Ross Perot and open a six-day bus tour that will carry them through nine states.
"This is our chance to change America," Mr.
Clinton said at a meeting of the Democratic National Committee before leaving New York this morning.
"Let's take it."


National Savings Bank of Albany reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Putting Buoys Inkster
After two rounds of solid putting in the JAL Big Apple Classic, Juli Inkster, in her 10th year as a pro, believes she is regaining her amateur touch.
"I was a better putter as an amateur," said Inkster, who captured the United States Amateur for three consecutive years before she joined the L.P.G.A.
Tour in 1983, "but I putted extremely well today."


Citizen Lawmaking Plan Is Losing Steam in Trenton
A crucial Assembly floor vote on whether to allow New Jersey citizens to make laws through petitions and referendums is scheduled for Monday, but Republican leaders are already conceding that their members have lost enthusiasm for the concept since they took control of the Legislature last November.
Worried backers of the measure called a news conference today and acknowledged that it was in trouble.
They also sent a warning to Republicans who try to wiggle out of the party's commitment to initiative and referendum, as the proposal for citizen lawmaking is called.


Gull Labs reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brooktree Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Burlington Northern reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Perry E. Hall, Founding Partner Of Morgan Stanley, Is Dead at 96
Perry E. Hall, the last of the founding partners of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company Inc., the New York-based international investment bank, died yesterday at the JML Care Center in Falmouth, Mass.
A resident of nearby Woods Hole, he was 96 years old.
One of the most energetic and colorful Wall Street figures of his era, Mr.
Hall was one of six original officers and directors who formed the firm in 1935.
He presided as managing partner for 10 years until 1961, retired in 1972 as a limited partner, but remained an advisory director at the time of his death.


Frankly, My Dear, We'll Call You


Justin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Observer; Bee Gotta Buzz
While waiting for the Democratic Convention to pass like a summer squall, I pondered the birds and the cats.
Among the questions pondered was: Why so much emphasis on the birds and the bees, and so little on the birds and the cats?
Come to think of it, nowadays the birds and the bees don't amount to much either.
That's because Americans today are too sophisticated to think of love as part of nature's embarrassingly corny poetry.


Shirley Greengrass, 71, Partner in Restaurant
Shirley Greengrass, a partner with her husband in Barney Greengrass, a Manhattan restaurant and delicatessen that has been in existence for nearly 90 years, died on Thursday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
She was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Greengrass died of cancer, said a son, Gary, president of the family-run business at 541 Amsterdam Avenue, near 86th Street.


Haemonetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


A War on Civilians; The Struggle for Land in Bosnia Is Waged Mainly by Serbs With Help From Belgrade
Beyond the confusions of the war raging on many fronts in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and regardless of whether the armed factions abide by yet another cease-fire agreement that they signed in London today, what has been going on is fundamentally a Serbian war of aggression waged largely against civilians.
After six weeks of travels in Serbia, Montenegro, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, a visitor gets the overriding impression that whatever old scores are being settled, it is guns and ammunition supplied by Belgrade that are killing civilians in areas beyond the borders of Serbia.
Most of the refugees fleeing battle are running from Serbs.


Consumers Packaging reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Russian Parliament Votes to Increase Budget Gap
The Russian Parliament voted today to increase the state budget deficit by 100 billion rubles, a move that is likely to further complicate the Government's efforts to bring the economy under control.
Parliament's increasingly combative approach was also asserted in an effort to take over Izvestia, the popular and respected daily, which established its independence last August.


Enter Slovakia, Exit Havel
The resignation of Vaclav Havel as President of Czechoslovakia, effective Monday, comes as a distressing anticlimax to the exuberant hopes inspired by the pacific uprising that freed his country in 1989.
Mr.
Havel announced his decision minutes after Slovakia's regional parliament proclaimed the sovereignty of the eastern republic, a first big step to eventual independence.
He could have stayed on until his term expires in October, but when Slovaks blocked his re-election in the federal Parliament, the President concluded he had lost the trust of too many of them.
His parting words yesterday were wholly in character:


Ladd Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Critic's Notebook; The Convention Images: Plenty for Both Sides
Which of the barrage of images fired off at the Democratic convention will turn out to have hit home?
Will it be the old-fashioned rouser of a nominating speech by Gov.
Mario L. Cuomo or the acceptance speech by Bill Clinton or the painfully unprecedented appearance by two people with AIDS?
Will it be the proud display of female candidates or the contrasting styles of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, the event's foremost loser, and the party chairman, Ronald H. Brown, a big winner?
Or will it be entertaining passages like those of the candidate and his family strolling through the gents' furnishings department of Macy's, beneath "Sale" signs and amid stern looking men whose earplugs indicated they were not just floorwalkers worried about Chelsea doing some shoplifting?


Lazare Kaplan International reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Traffic Alert
Third Avenue between 42d and 57th streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. tomorrow for the Third Avenue street fair.


Bell &amp; Howell Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Action Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. reported a fivefold jump in profits to $714 million, or $1.25 a share, for the second quarter, but that was below analysts' estimates.
Investors responded by driving the computer maker's shares down $5.25 each, to $95, in active trading.  [ 35. ]  Texas Instruments reported a profit of $72 million, or 73 cents a share, compared with a loss of $157 million a year earlier.  [ 39. ]
Prices of personal computers have plunged in recent weeks, buyers are not snapping up bargains.
Instead they seem to be waiting for yet-lower prices.  [ 35. ]


Roosevelt Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hexcel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Precision Castparts Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Zurn Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A&amp;W Brands reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dr. Joseph F. Boyle, 67, Internist And A.M.A. President in 1984-85
Dr.
Joseph F. Boyle, an internist who specialized in diseases of the chest and was a president of the American Medical Association, died on Thursday at his home in Williamsburg, Va.
He was 67 years old.
He died of cancer, officials of the American Society of Internal Medicine said in Washington.
Dr.
Boyle retired from the society in March after serving for seven years as its executive vice president.


Trade Deficit at $7.38 Billion As Exports Post 3d Decline
Exports, the mainstay of economic growth since President Bush took office, fell for the third consecutive month in May, with the nation's merchandise trade deficit widening to $7.38 billion, the Commerce Department announced today.
As the Administration sought to minimize the report's significance, Democrats greeted the news as a confirmation of what Gov.
Bill Clinton on Thursday night called a need for strengthening American competitiveness in international markets.


Remember Tom Foley
To the Editor:
Re "Rename Foley Square The African Square" (letter, July 4) by Christopher Moore: Tom Foley was a rare Tammany bird.
Unlike many of his clubhouse brethren, the money this saloonkeeper collected for the needy of his ward actually made its way to them.
All of it.
For other Tammany politicians, some money had a habit of sticking to their fingers, so when Foley died and left an estate no larger than one would expect from an honest saloonkeeper, he was regarded as a wonderful oddity.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.75
3.32
5.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.15
3.16
5.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.20
5.73
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.37
6.33
8.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.68
7.60
8.47
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.59
9.52
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.26
6.26
7.14
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


American Health Properties reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Minnesota Power &amp; Light reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Alpha Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Sphinx May Really Be a Black African
To the Editor:
In "The Case of the Missing Pharaoh," (Op-Ed June 27), John Anthony West shows that the Sphinx does not resemble the Old Kingdom pharaoh Chephren, the traditional attribution.


Peoples Westchester Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In Hindsight; Texas-Size Failure
In the beginning, and also in the end, the promise and the problem with the campaign of Ross Perot was Ross Perot.
It was not ideology, or party affiliation, or political experience that gave rise to the odd quasi-candidacy of a short tycoon from Texas.
It was himself; the appeal of a President Perot was simply Mr.
Perot.
This was true for the millions of people who rushed to support him, and it was true for Mr.
Perot, too.


CHRONICLE
OSCAR DE LA RENTA insisted that his 8-year-old son, MOISES, memorize the Pledge of Allegiance so he could recite it the other day at his naturalization ceremonies in New York.
"I told him that if he couldn't recite it he couldn't be an American," Mr. de la Renta, the fashion designer, said yesterday.
He supports a home and school for 450 children called Casa de Ninos in the Dominican Republic, and that's where he adopted Moises.


Sonic Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Health Authorities Delay AIDS Needle Exchange
Delivery of the first supply of syringes to New York City's needle-exchange program -- an ambitious research effort to determine whether giving clean needles to drug users slows the spread of AIDS -- was delayed yesterday by the state Health Department.
The length of the delay was uncertain yesterday and whether that delay arose from the methodical process of bureaucracy or resistance from within that bureaucracy was in dispute.


Europe Must Help Redraw Yugoslav Borders; Croats Defend Homes
To the Editor:
"Croatia, the Butcher's Apprentice" (editorial, July 8) is not only uncivilized in its language but also unfounded in facts.
Without a shred of evidence you accuse of "brazen lawlessness" Franjo Tudjman, President of a democratic country that barehandedly fought against the aggressor and won its freedom at a staggering human and material cost.


Telxon Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Faldo Is 3 Feet Off Ground And a Record 12 Under Par
Coming frighteningly close to satisfying his own quest for perfection, Nick Faldo made a break from the field today with a record-breaking performance in the second round of the British Open.
Employing near-flawless ball-striking, zoned-in putting and an uncharacteristically joyful attitude, Faldo shot a seven-under-par 64.
His two-day total of 12-under-par 130 broke by two strokes the championship's 36-hole record, which was established by Henry Cotton in 1934 and matched by Greg Norman and Faldo in 1990.


Michael Foods reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Evans &amp; Sutherland reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Prof. H. Verlan Andersen, 77; A Leader in the Mormon Church
H.
Verlan Andersen, a former high-ranking officer of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, died on Thursday at his home in Orem, Utah.
He was 77 years old.
He died of cancer, a Mormon Church spokesman said.


Tridex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Co-Steel reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wider Role Seen In C.I.A. Effort To Aid Contras
Central Intelligence Agency officials were apparently involved in more wide-ranging efforts than previously believed to circumvent Congress and to topple the leftist Nicaraguan Government in the mid-1980's, according to newly released documents.
The disclosures are made in pretrial papers released this week in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George, a former senior official of the C.I.A.
Mr.
George is charged with lying to Congress and to investigators about his knowledge of the diversion of profits from arms sales to Iran to help finance the contra rebels.


Community Health Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Utah Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Justices Uphold Federal Seizure Of Abortion Pill
The Supreme Court today refused to order the Federal Government to return the French abortion pills it had seized from a pregnant woman two weeks ago.
In a 7-to-2 vote, the Court decided the case on an emergency basis.
The woman, Leona Benton, is eight weeks pregnant, and Saturday is the last day she could take the drug to end her pregnancy under the guidelines of the manufacturer, the French company Roussel Uclaf.


Old Kent Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Idexx Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Betrayal, Senecas Say, And New Rage
JoJo Redeye is haunted by memories of a happy childhood.
After work, as the sun dips below the pine-crowned hills, Mr.
Redeye, the 55-year-old maintenance manager for the Seneca nation, often walks to the reservoir created by the construction of the Kinzu Dam, which wiped out the the places where he was born and raised.


Bungee-Jumping Death in Michigan Leads to Ban, and a Fight, in Florida
In a state where water skiing, deep sea diving, alligator hunting, spear fishing, boat racing and other potentially hazardous outdoor pursuits are already a way of life, bungee jumping has caught on quickly.
But now Florida has antagonized devotees of the popular new aerial pastime by becoming the first state to ban it.
Last week, after an accident involving bungee jumping in Michigan in which one man died and one was injured, Florida's Commissioner of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Bob Crawford, announced a temporary 90-day prohibition against the sport, which he says is "patently unsafe." And on Wednesday he vowed to ask the State Legislature to make the ban permanent "at the first opportunity."


International Business Machines Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Digital Leaders: Varied Style, Similar Histories
On the surface, Robert B. Palmer bears no resemblence to Kenneth H. Olsen, the lumbering, bearlike founder and president of the Digital Equipment Corporation, whom he is to succeed.
Slightly built but dashingly handsome, Mr.
Palmer, a 51-year-old Texan, is always impeccably attired and speaks articulately on the state of Digital, in marked contrast to Mr.
Olsen's quirky, sometimes incomprehensible speech.


Dow Off 29.99 as I.B.M. Is Pummeled
Bill Clinton looked good; I.B.M. looked bad.
So investors found reason to sell stocks before heading off for the weekend.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 29.99 points yesterday, or just less than 1 percent, to 3,331.64, putting it 1.08 ahead for the week.
A $5.25 drop in I.B.M., to $95 a share, directly accounted for more than a third of the average's decline.


Barcelona Journal; Catalonia Is Pressing Ahead as Olympic 'Country'
By the time the 25th Summer Olympic Games begin here on July 25, most sports fans will know that Barcelona is in Spain.
By the time the Games end on Aug. 9, the idea is for most people to remember that they were actually held in Catalonia.
The plan, needless to say, is not the work of Madrid or even of Barcelona.
It is simply that Catalonia, the prosperous autonomous region that has Barcelona as its capital, never misses a chance to promote its name and its nationalism -- and what better chance than the Olympics?


Educational Development Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Patents; New Way to Trace Parkinson's Disease
Scientists in Research Triangle Park, N.C., have patented a variation of cocaine that they say can help doctors obtain medical images of the brain that reveal the presence of Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease is a disorder of the nervous system that initially causes uncontrollable trembling but eventually interferes with muscle activity throughout the body.
It occurs when brain cells that produce an essential chemical messenger, dopamine, begin to die in large numbers.
There are no proven cures for Parkinson's, but the symptoms can be relieved for some time by a synthetic form of dopamine.
Early detection could allow people to avoid symptoms for longer periods.


I.B.M.'s Net Is Up, but Stock Dips
I.B.M. yesterday reported a fivefold jump in profits for the second quarter, but its stock price dropped more than 5 percent in heavy trading because the earnings were below the estimates of many analysts.
The International Business Machines Corporation, the world's largest computer company, is in the midst of an ambitious program, announced late last year, to cut costs and improve profitability.
Steve Milunovich, an analyst for Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, said the second-quarter results showed that "I.B.M. is on the comeback trail, but it's going to be an arduous journey."


CHRONICLE
A bare-chested man who scaled a wall of Buckingham Palace on Thursday and got within 50 yards of QUEEN ELIZABETH'S quarters was released by the police yesterday without charges, Reuters reported from London.
The 21-year-old man, whom the police refused to identify, was arrested at the palace after getting past a $2.9 million surveillance system.
The system was installed 10 years ago after an unemployed man, Michael Fagan, sneaked past guards and sat chatting with the Queen at her bedside.


American Fructose reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yugoslav Athletes Still Await Ruling
With nearly 170 countries awaiting the opening ceremonies just eight days from now, organizers of the Barcelona Olympics are waiting to learn whether athletes from Yugoslavia and two of its former republics would be allowed to participate.
Efforts were made on two fronts today to craft a scenario in which athletes from Serbia and Montenegro, the remaining republics in the new Yugoslavia, would compete as one team, while athletes from Bosnia and Herzegovina and from Macedonia might participate as one or two teams.


President Leaving Aramis To Start Financing Concern
Byron Donics will leave his post as president of the Aramis division of Estee Lauder Inc. to head a financing company that plans to invest in the international and domestic health and beauty industries.
Robert Nielsen, an executive recruiter with Herbert Mines Associates Inc. and a one-time Lauder employee, will take over the leadership of the fragrance division when Mr.
Donics leaves at the end of the month.


Text of a Truce Starting Sunday
Following is the text of the cease-fire agreement signed here today by representatives of the three armed factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina:
We hereby agree to a cease-fire, effective from 18:00 on Sunday, 19 July 1992, throughout the entire territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The cease-fire will continue for a period of 14 days.
During this time, all parties undertake to explore measures for strengthening the cease-fire in the longer term.
In addition, all parties agree to observe a strict commitment not to initiate fire of any sort, even in response to provocation.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Overview; Poll Gives Clinton a Post-Perot, Post-Convention Boost
With the 1992 Presidential race in ferment once more, both parties began intensive bids for former supporters of Ross Perot yesterday, and a new New York Times/CBS News Poll showed the Democratic nominee, Bill Clinton, as the main beneficiary of the independent candidate's sudden withdrawal.
The survey, taken Thursday evening as the Democratic National Convention was ending, and yesterday as the delegates began leaving town, showed Mr.
Clinton gaining the biggest post-convention "bounce" in the 50 years such measurements have been taken.
He now leads President Bush among registered voters by 55 percent to 31 percent, with 13 percent undecided.


EMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Europe Must Help Redraw Yugoslav Borders; All Deserve Justice
To the Editor:
In "Bosnia's Forgotten Victims" (Op-Ed, July 8), Tone R. Bringa and Dru C. Gladney state that Muslim Bosnians "straddle ethnic, national and religious lines." It's a contradictory statement.
The very name Muslims defines the group by religion.
Then, "national" and "ethnic" are the same, used in the tradition established in Yugoslavia.
What we call "ethnic group," they call "nation" or, for minorities, "nationality."


Adirondack Park, Not a Local Issue, Belongs to All New York
To the Editor:
"Adirondacks Will Remain a Wilderness Without More Rules" (letter, July 11) by Jeffrey G. Kelly, about legislation on the Adirondack Park, is somewhat misleading.
Mr.
Kelly has not been editor of Adirondack Life magazine for some time, and his views on the Adirondack debate do not represent the views of the magazine.
I have been editor since September 1989 and do not share Mr.
Kelly's opinions on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposed legislation, on State Senator Ronald Stafford or on what the future holds for the Adirondack Park.


A Confident Brazil Leaves the 'Deadbeat' Era
Brazil's new debt agreement with its creditor banks has spurred enormous enthusiasm among government and private economists, despite the country's huge economic problems and a corruption scandal that is sapping the ability of President Fernando Collor de Mello to fight inflation.
The economists say they are encouraged not just by the accord, reached on July 9, but also by a flood of foreign investment, a healthy trade balance, a record grain harvest, a central bank brimming with foreign exchange and widespread popular support for a policy of privatization and deregulation.


Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


1 Week, 5 Losses, No Signs Of Life
It's been more than a week since they last won a game, and the Yankees are still showing no signs of reviving.
Will they ever?
Tonight, they went meekly again, giving up five runs in the first two innings, then making a belated run in the fifth and finally falling flat to the California Angels, 12-4, at Anaheim Stadium.


Baldor Electric reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Span-America Medical Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Let a Hundred Schools Bloom
Last year, as part of his "America 2000" education plan, President Bush proposed a privately financed corporation to help create a "new generation" of American schools.
The corporation was promptly established and, though poorly financed, has now completed its first task.
After studying nearly 700 proposals, the corporation recently announced grants to an impressive list of 11 teams that will develop a variety of model schools.
The ultimate challenge will be to replicate their best innovations among a broad spectrum of public schools.


Guidepost; An Ounce of Prevention In Food-Poisoning Season
Food poisoning is a serious problem in summer, when heat riuns food that should be refrigerated but isn't.
While healthy people usually suffer no more than a little discomfort from food poisoning, it can be fatal to pregnant women, young children, elderly people and those whose immune systems are comprosmised, by AIDS or cancer therapy, for example.
Some food poisoning is caused by the listeria monocytogenes bacterium, which is found in water, soil and dust.
The Federal Government has issued advice on how to avoid becoming ill from these or other bacteria.
In summer it is particularly important to keep foods cold, especially those containing protein, which attracts bacteria.
Thoroughly cook all foods of animal origin: meat should be cooked to an internal temperature of 160 degrees Fahrenheit, poultry to 180 degrees and fish to 160.
Keep hot foods hot - abouve 145 degrees.
Do not leave foods that require refrigeration out at room temperature for more than two hours.
Wash raw vegetables thoroughly before eating.
Separate cooked and uncooked foods, and keep the refrigerator clean to prevent corss-contamination.
Avoid unpasteurized milk or food made from it.
Wash hands, knives and cutting boards after they come in contact wiht uncooked foods.
Follow the label instructions on products that must be refrigerated or that have an expiration date.
High-risk individuals should avoid products on which listeria bacteria ofter grow.
They include soft cheeses like Brie and Camembert, blue-veined cheese like Roquefort, and delicatessen foods.
Before eating leftovers or ready-to-eat foods like hot dogs, heat them until they steam. (Sources: Centers for Disease Control; Food and Drug Administration; Agriculture Department)


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Kennett L. Rawson, a book publisher, misstated the history of his company.
Rawson Associates Inc. was founded in 1974 and merged in 1978 with the Wade Publishing Company to become the Rawson, Wade Publishing Company.
It became a division of the Macmillan Publishing Company in 1984.


Classical Music in Review
Mostly Mozart Itzhak Perlman, violinist Avery Fisher Hall


MNC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cincinnati Bell reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Borrowing From James Bond to Find Stolen Cars
The New York City police are proposing a new way to find stolen cars using technology right out of a James Bond movie.
Residents would have their cars outfitted with hidden homing devices that could then be tracked electronically by police cars.
The Police Department wants to contract with a company to sell the fist-sized radio transmitters to city motorists and to install tracking devices in at least 500 police cars.
Yesterday the city formally requested proposals for the tracking system.


National City Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Acceptance Speech; Not a Sleep-Inducer, but Not Quite a Stemwinder
What would Aristotle, Cicero and Quintilian -- the ancient masters of the art of oratory -- think of Gov.
Bill Clinton's acceptance speech Thursday night?
They would probably hand him a C, said Robert Jeffries, dean of the School of Communication at the University of Texas at Austin.


Convention Spotlight Has Warm Glow for the Mayor
Mayor David N. Dinkins, who brought the Democrats to New York, was no doubt sorry to see them leave yesterday.
Few weeks in Mr.
Dinkins's often stormy 30-month tenure have been remotely like this one.
At one point, within a span of 48 hours, the Mayor delivered a welcoming speech from the podium at Madison Square Garden; addressed tens of thousands of people crammed into Times Square for an AIDS rally and, the next morning, a salute to Broadway; took Nelson Mandela, the head of the African National Congress, to meet with Gov.
Bill Clinton at the Democratic nominee's hotel; was host to mayors from around the country at Gracie Mansion, and kicked off a glitzy fashion show featuring top New York designers under a huge air-conditioned tent in Central Park.


Virginia Beach Federal Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Amax Gold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Havel Says He Will Resign as Czechoslovak President on Monday
President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia told the nation today that he would resign on Monday rather than continue to preside over the likely breakup of the 73-year-old nation into separate Czech and Slovak republics.
Mr.
Havel announced his decision to resign only an hour or so after the Slovak Parliament voted overwhelming in favor of "a declaration of sovereignty." By making his announcement when he did, Mr.
Havel underscored his opposition to Slovak separatism.


U.N. Aide Tells Iraq It Risks Attack for Truce Defiance
A senior United Nations official arrived here today to warn the Iraqi leadership that it faces the risk of attack unless it complies completely with the terms of the United Nations Security Council's Persian Gulf war cease-fire.
United Nations officials said that Rolf Ekeus, head of a commission charged with destroying Iraq's most dangerous weapons, would warn the Iraqi authorities on Saturday that they risk possible allied military intervention unless they provide access to the Agriculture Ministry, which United Nations arms inspectors want to search for documents about Iraq's chemical, biological and nuclear weapons programs.


Your Money; I.R.S. Crackdown On Trust Wording
FOR those who have long suspected that the Internal Revenue Service does not want people to enjoy too much comfort, here's a court case to back up that feeling.
Edward A. Slott, partner in E. Slott &amp; Company, certified public accountants in Rockville Centre, L.I., who spoke at the annual Estate Planning Conference of the New York State Society of C.P.A.'s and the Foundation of Accounting Education on Tuesday in Rochester, cited the recent Florida case of the Estate of Norman H. Vissering v.
Commissioner (96 T.C. No. 33).


Pope Evans &amp; Robbins reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Short Journey Into Obsolescence for LP's
Shoppers who enter a Tower Records in Manhattan in search of a 33 1/3-r.p.m. record album are stunned to discover that, despite its name, Tower Records sells no records.
"People are really shocked," said Victor Morales, 22 years old, a supervisor at the chain's Broadway store.
"They say, 'What do you mean Tower Records doesn't have records?' "Most of the people working here are young kids who don't even own records."
The recording industry's shift to compact disks has led to the virtual obsolescence of LP technology.
Nine years ago, when compact disks were introduced, record companies shipped 295.2 million LP's and 800,000 CD's, according to the Recording Industry Association of America.
In 1991, 4.8 million LP's were produced, compared with 333.3 million CD's.
Squeeze on Cassettes, Too
The production of cassette tapes has also been squeezed by the popularity of CD's; shipments of cassettes fell from a high of 450.1 million in 1988 to 360.1 million last year.


Business Made Easy, Or Easier At Least
"IT'S still very much the old boys' network," said Heather Faulding, an architect who owns her own firm.
"It's no picnic."
Ms.
Faulding made the remark in a monthly meeting of female chief executive officers.
They gather to chew over common problems, from collecting bills to marketing.
What they don't discuss are the touchy-feely sorts of things men might imagine women would bring up in a support group.


Two Former Winners Make a Move in Tour
The Tour de France tightened dramatically at the top today as two former winners of the world's premier bicycle race, Stephen Roche and Pedro Delgado, moved close to the leader.
Another former winner, Greg LeMond, struggled again on the climbs and conceded that his hopes of victory at the finish July 26 are flimsy.
"Victory?" LeMond said this morning.
"Not unless I can turn myself around 100 percent in the next day or two."


Silicon General Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Great Western Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Baker (Michael) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Andres Wines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Illinois Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Figgie International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Unitel Video Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Banctec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Lewis Jumps 27 Feet  Carl Lewis felt sluggish yesterday but jumped 27 feet to win his last long jump competition before the Olympics.
Still recovering from a virus that affected his form during the United States Olympic trials last month, Lewis won with his fourth jump in the Gateshead invitational meet in northern England.
Lewis was beaten over the seldom-run distance of 300 meters by John Regis of Britain, whose 31.67 was the third-fastest 300 ever and established a British Commonwealth record.
Lewis was timed in 31.82.
Elana Meyer of South Africa ran the second-fastest 3,000 meters of the year in 8 minutes 39.11 seconds. (AP) TENNIS  An Easy Day for Spain  Spain breezed into the semifinals of the Federation Cup yesterday in Frankfurt as Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and Conchita Martinez lost a total of only four games in singles matches against Argentina.
Spain, the defending champion, will next play Australia, which upset third-seeded Czechoslovakia, 2-1, in the other quarterfinal match.
Top-seeded Germany and the United States will play in the other semifinal today.
Argentina was playing without Gabriela Sabatini, No. 3 in the world, who decided to skip the tournament after being disqualified from the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, for missing last year's Federation Cup.
Martinez, ranked eighth in the world, swept past Florencia Labat, 6-0, 6-1, in 59 minutes, and Sanchez Vicario, fifth worldwide and unbeaten in Federation Cup singles play, needed only 54 minutes to rout Mercedes Paz, 6-2, 6-1, at the Waldstadion.
Helena Sukova put Czechoslovakia ahead by beating Rachel McQuillan, 7-6 (8-6), 4-6, 6-1, but Nicole Provis even the match by upsetting Jana Novotna, 7-5, 6-0.
In the decisive doubles, Provis and Rennea Stubbs teamed to beat Novotna and Andrea Strnadova, 6-3, 6-3. (AP)
Medvedev Upsets Edberg: Stefan Edberg became the latest seeded player to be bounced from the $1.04 million Stuttgart Grand Prix tournament in Germany yesterday.
The Swede, top-seeded and ranked No. 2 in the world, lost, 1-6, 6-4, 6-4, to Andrei Medvedev in the quarterfinals.
Medvedev, a qualifier from Ukraine, dealt Edberg the same fate met in the tournament previously by Boris Becker, Michael Stich, Michael Chang and Goran Ivanisevic.
Ivanisevic, seeded second, was beaten, 6-3, 6-7 (7-9), 6-4, by seventh-seeded Wayne Ferreira of South Africa earlier yesterday.
Medvedev will face Thomas Muster of Austria in the semifinals.
Ferreira's semifinal foe will be Karel Novacek of Czechoslovakia. (AP)
Capriati Advances; Fernandez Hurt: Top-seeded Monica Seles and second-seeded Jennifer Capriati advanced to the semifinals of the $150,000 Pathmark Tennis Classic at the Crossroads Corporate Center in Mahwah, N.J., yesterday.
But third-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez, ahead in her match, was forced to withdraw from the exhibition event after she felt a pain in her right hip.
Capriati, who beat Seles in the 1991 final, had an unimpressive day of serving, but her strong ground strokes carried her to a 6-3, 6-2 quarterfinal victory over unseeded Caroline Kuhlman.
Seles eliminated Robin White, 6-2, 6-4.
Fernandez held a 6-4, 1-0 lead against sixth-seeded Tami Whitlinger when she retired from the match after 55 minutes of play.
She was the second player from the United States Olympic team to suffer an injury during a match in Mahwah this week.
On Wednesday, fourth-seeded Zina Garrison tore a ligament in her left ankle after playing only five games.
Both are expected to be sidelined for a week before resuming their training. (AP) Lendl Is Upset: Henrik Holm of Sweden beat third-seeded Ivan Lendl, 3-6, 6-3, 6-3, last night in the NationsBank Classic in Washington.
Lendl's serve was broken three times in the final set, including the final game of the match. (AP)


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Branford, Conn. 236,000
2 Tanglewood Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; hardwood floors, crown moldings, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,653.
Greenwich, Conn. 440,000
23 Dialstone Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old ranch; large deck overlooking fenced yard, security system, 0.25 acre; taxes $3,139.
New Canaan, Conn. 860,000
439 Lost District Drive  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; pool with natural rock waterfall, three terraces, 4.1 acres; taxes $8,234.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 332,000
77 High Ridge Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, 2 acres; taxes $8,921.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 315,000
Trinity Pass  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, den, eat-in kitchen, deck, 1 acre; taxes $5,769.
South Salem, N.Y. 172,500
Ridgeland Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, dining room, living room, oak floors, stone fireplace, lake rights; taxes $2,687.
OTHER AREAS Wading River, L.I. 221,900
Betsy Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; fireplace, den, basement, skylights, central air-conditioning, 2-car garage; taxes $2,800.
Metuchen, N.J. 185,000
38 Bounty Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, over-50-year-old colonial; newly painted exterior, deck, close to transportation; taxes $2,572.
Mountain Lakes, N.J. 625,000
203 Laurel Road
6-bedroom, 4-bath, 35-year-old ranch; pool, cabana; taxes $11,794.


Editorial Notebook; Japan Confronts Global Warming
Japan has adopted one of the world's most demanding programs to control global warming.
It sets short-term goals and looks a full century ahead.
It envisions brilliant technical fixes to capture heat-trapping greenhouse gases and bravely contemplates massive restructuring of cities and industry to lessen the threat.
But is the program real -- or mostly a charade?


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Road to Barcelona Via Santa Monica
On any given day, you can see the best of them at either of their training sites, in the Los Angeles suburb of Santa Monica or at the University of Houston.
As the leading contributor to the United States Olympic track and field team in Barcelona, the Santa Monica Track Club includes a world record-holder (Carl Lewis in the 100 meters), a former world record-holder (Leroy Burrell in the 100) and two Olympic champions, Lewis and Steve Lewis, who is no relation.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; Noncandidate Tells His Supporters to Look for Real Candidates to Support
Ross Perot, who ended his short-lived Presidential campaign this week, told his state coordinators today that for the moment he would stick with his decision not to seek the White House.
But he told the leaders of the grass-roots movement that supported him that he would leave his name on the ballot in states where he had qualified, and he encouraged them to continue their petition drives.
Mr.
Perot met for about two and a half hours with a delegation of his state leaders at the headquarters of his stillborn campaign here.
The group of several dozen had traveled to Dallas to try to persuade Mr.
Perot to reconsider his decision and re-enter the race.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Felipe Hoists Flag for Spain
His Royal Highness, the Prince of Bourbon, Felipe of Asturias, is the only son of King Juan Carlos I and the heir to the Spanish throne.
Felipe will compete in the Soling Class of the yachting competition at the Olympics, along with teammates Fernando Leon and Alfredo Vazquez.
They won the Spanish Cup trials in March in Barcelona, and have since come to dominate the European circuit.


A la Carte; For Rib Lovers
WYLIE'S RIBS II, a branch of the well-known Manhattan restaurant, is as distinctive for what it is not as for what it is.
Wylie's, at 521 Montauk Highway in Amagansett, is ribs, pork, chicken, barbecue sauce, chili, french fries and coleslaw.
It is also doggie bags, hand wipes, extra napkins, greasy hands and informal fun.
There are no goat cheese, monkfish, balsamic vinegar, mache lettuce or innovative pastas.
All of which makes this an unusual entry in the fashionable East End restaurant sweepstakes.


THE YALE SCHMIDT LEAVES BEHIND
As an undergraduate at Yale in the 1970's, I went through three presidents in three years (Kingman Brewster, Hanna Gray and A. Bartlett Giamatti), a divisive four-month, blue-collar strike and countless discussions about the strength of certain academic departments ("The Yale Schmidt Leaves Behind," by Richard Bernstein, June 14).
Yet by the time I graduated in 1980, Yale had put these crises behind it.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; G.O.P. Plotting 2-Edged Effort To Bolster Bush
Republican strategists are mapping out a two-pronged effort to restart President Bush's sputtering campaign in the month before their convention.
They hope to raise Mr.
Bush's dismal approval ratings with a new push on the economy and to blunt Gov.
Bill Clinton's surge by redrawing him as a high-taxing, big-spending liberal who cannot be trusted with the nation's security.
Fearful that Mr.
Clinton struck what one Bush aide called a "devastating" blow at the Democratic National Convention with his attack on Mr.
Bush's leadership and vision for the country, the White House is casting about for new ideas to spur the economy.


THE MAN FROM TEXARKANA
When did Ross Perot last hire someone to run one of his corporations who had
no
experience in business at all? Isn't that what he's asking us to do? MIKE DENNEHY
Washington Township, N.J.


Movies of Iran Struggle for Acceptance
THERE ARE NO NUDE SCENES.
In fact, men and women rarely ever touch.
There are no "Lost Weekends," featuring Iranian Ray Millands, no alcoholics -- no alcohol -- no "Saturday Night Fevers," bars or discos.
There is, in short, nothing remotely resembling sex, drugs or rock-and-roll.
But despite the daunting limitations imposed by the Koran, or the Islamic Republic's literal-minded interpretation of Islam's holy book, Iranian film is flourishing.
Some 13 years after the revolution that toppled the Shah and his Western-oriented regime, Iran is turning out a growing number of impressive, small-budget, quintessentially Iranian movies.
They explore with candor that often borders on bitterness the searing social, economic and personal problems of ordinary Iranians in post-revolutionary Iran.
Overcoming the obstacles of censorship at home and suspicion abroad, these films have increasingly been winning critical acclaim and prizes at international film festivals.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Wilmington, Del.; A New Sears In Final Stage
THE first new Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company store north of Wilmington in 40 years is in the final stages of construction.
When it opens in September, it will be the third anchor store in the 25-year-old Concord Mall in Talleyville on Route 202, just south of the Pennsylvania state line and about six miles north of Wilmington, the state's largest city.


Lydia Rhodes, Robert Petty
Mr. and Mrs.
John Rhodes of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lydia Black Rhodes, to Robert Dean Petty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Petty of Chevy Chase, Md.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Rhodes, 31 years old, is a partner in Schwalbe &amp; Partners, a New York arts management firm.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father, who is retired, was the chairman of Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton International, the management consultant firm in New York.


Robin Detweiler, David Allen Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh McB.
Johnston 3d of Philadelphia have announced October wedding plans for Mrs.
Johnston's daughter Louise Roberts Detweiler and David Wilford Allen Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Sr. of Valley Forge, Pa.
Miss Detweiler, who is 28 years old and is known as Robin, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her fiance.
She is studying for a master's degree in interior design at the Pratt Institute.
She is also a daughter of the late Lynn L. Detweiler Jr., who was an associate in the Philadelphia law firm of Ballard, Spahr, Andrews &amp; Ingersoll.
Her mother, Louise R. Johnston, is a sales associate for the Emlen Wheeler Company, a Philadelphia realty concern.
The prospective bride's stepfather is a vice president of the Provident National Bank in Philadelphia.


The Climate For Call-In Radio
The article "A Call-In Radio Station Shakes Up State" (June 21) has done a great service by examining the phenomenon of the radio station known as New Jersey 101.5, particularly the style of the station's call-in show.


Alisa Pines, Ronald Emanuel
November 1993 wedding plans have been announced for Alisa Pines and Ronald Bruce Emanuel, a son of Carole A. Goldstein and Barry A. Emanuel, both of New York, by the prospective bride's parents, Doreen and Ira Pines of Glen Cove, L.I.
Miss Pines, 25 years old, is the special-events coordinator for Esquire magazine in New York.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her father is the owner of Allied Tackless Corporation, a St.
Albans, Queens, manufacturer of carpet-installation strips.
Her mother is a medical assistant at Long Island Pediatrics Associates, in Mineola, L.I.


Policeman And Friend Shot to Death
An off-duty Housing Authority police officer who had apparently helped to break up a fight outside a bar in Bayside, Queens, early yesterday was shot to death as he escorted some bystanders and those who had been fighting to their cars, the police said.
The officer, Paul Heidelberger, 28 years old, was shot in the head and neck at around 3:30 A.M. as he walked on a crowded sidewalk in front of a Radio Shack store at 39-07 Bell Boulevard.
He died at the scene.
A friend, John Camarta, was shot in the head and chest and died a short time later at Booth Memorial Hospital.
A third man, Steven Moran, 25, of Levittown, was wounded in the shoulder and was in stable condition yesterday at North Shore Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.


Crossing The State on Old Route 20
LOOKING west along the rambling thoroughfare that bisects New York State, you see the archetypal American landscape.
The green hills dotted with cows, the cornfields and hayfields and barns conjure up a life that is part romantic anachronism and part hard muddy reality.
That life is what has sustained the towns and villages in this part of the state for the last 250 years -- that and the road, known as the Cherry Valley Turnpike, the Great Western Turnpike and now U.S.
Route 20.
For 150 years, from the early 1800's to the 1950's, Route 20 was the quickest way west, and the towns that sprang up alongside it -- Sharon Springs, Cherry Valley, Richfield Springs, Madison -- starting some 20 miles west of Albany, grew fat on its bounty.
Then along came the New York State Thruway, a few miles to the north, and the towns along Route 20, deprived of a steady stream of travelers, sank into decline.
The last five years have seen something of a renaissance, thanks to urban runaways from both coasts, who have brought much-needed cash.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Bubka's Anthem: A Broken Record
At age 20, Sergei Bubka vaulted into the international track scene when he won the world championship in Helsinki in 1983.
He has yet to come down.
Since then, he has set the indoor and outdoor world records in the pole vault a combined total of 30 times, including eight times in 1991.
And now the 29-year-old Ukrainian, who lives in Berlin and will compete for the Unified Team, is the prohibitive favorite for the gold medal in Barcelona.
The reasons are countless.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Archery
HOW IT'S DONE: Imagine standing on the goal line of a football field aiming at an apple 100 yards away and splitting it open with an arrow.
This fairly describes the performance and expectations of Olympic-level archers.
The object of this ancient sport is to score as many points as possible by hitting the bull's-eye of a five-color target that has 10 concentric circles.


Cabby Stabbed to Death
A 22-year-old yellow cab driver was stabbed to death in Queens last night, apparently by a passenger, the police said.
The driver, Samim Salim, an Indian immigrant who lived in Flushing, died at Booth Memorial Medical Center shortly after 9 P.M.
The passenger attacked him as he drove on 161st Street near Oak Avenue in Flushing, the police said.
A spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis, said that Mr.
Salim was stabbed twice in the shoulder and crashed.
He tried to flee on foot, but the attacker chased him and, a block away, stabbed him four times in the chest, the officer said.
Mr.
Salim had $197 when the police found him.


West Point Makes List of Plants
With the sound of the firing of mortar reverberating overhead, a team of botanists combed the grounds of the United States Military Academy here looking for rare and endangered plants.
In two Jeeps, they drove on dirt roads closed to the public to a marsh where a plant on the state list of protected species had been reported.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Don't Get Fooled by Savon's Looks, or by His Right
At first glance, Felix Savon doesn't look like the lethal one-punch destroyer who has dominated the amateur heavyweight division for nearly nine years.
Although he is a rangy 6 feet 5 inches and a solid 201 pounds, the Cuban fighter does not have the intimidating demeanor of a Teofilo Stevenson, the man he succeeded as Cuba's national boxing hero.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Cycling
HOW IT'S DONE: Olympic cycling does not have the prestige of the world championships or the Tour de France.
Professionals, now barred from the Games, might be invited to compete by 1996.
In the meantime, the Olympics offer amateur sprinters and more limited specialists a chance at some glory.


It Could Be the Piazza Scene From an Opera
ENTER SMILING is the way a script might direct a diner's first sight of Il Forno, Stamford's newest Italian restaurant.
The dining room walls look like the facades surrounding an Italian village piazza.
A plaque on one wall simulates a street sign, Piazza Sforza (the owner's name).
One terra cotta tile-roof wall cuts away to a real interior where live chefs bake pizzas in a wood-burning oven, with wooden piels hung on the wall when not in use.
Another cut away leads into an alcove with a few tables under a portion of wood ceiling as well as arched windows with cafe curtains.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Weight Lifting
HOW IT'S DONE: There are 10 weight classes, ranging from flyweight (114.6 pounds) to superheavyweight (anything over 242.5 pounds).
Weight lifters are judged by three referees and a jury who oversee the competition and make certain that the lifts are mechanically correct.
There are stringent rules about weighing in, proper attire and the composition of the weights themselves.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Misleading Echoes of Carter in Clinton
We've seen this before: a moderate Southern Governor, running as a Washington outsider, offering a non-ideological vision of fundamental change at a time of widespread disgust with the nation's politics.
That sounds like Jimmy Carter, the last Democrat to win the White House, and Bill Clinton, the Democrat who is now trying.


Lori A. Geldzahler, Arnold D. Herz
Sol and Lucy Geldzahler of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Lori Ann Geldzahler to Arnold David Herz, a son of Stuart and Myra Herz of Hewlett Harbor, L.I.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Geldzahler, 27 years old, is a law clerk for Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy of Federal District Court in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she and her fiance received law degrees from Fordham University.
Her father is the president of Gloss Enterprises Inc., a wholesale diamond company in Manhattan.
Her mother is a corporate-gift consultant.


Carol A. Irish, Scott R. Brakebill
Carol Anderson Irish, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Loomis C. Irish of Tuxedo Park, N.Y., was married yesterday in Craftsbury Common, Vt., to Scott Ragan Brakebill, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cecil A. Brakebill of Tulsa, Okla.
The Rev.
James A. Carpenter performed the Episcopal ceremony at the United Church of Craftsbury
Mrs.
Brakebill, 28 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.
She graduated from Stanford University and received a J.D. from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a professor of communications at the City University of New York.
Her mother, Diane Irish, is the head of the lower school at the Chapin School in New York.


Newport Reopens Old Lighthouse
The recently renovated Rose Island Lighthouse, one mile from downtown Newport, R.I., opens this weekend in its new role as a museum and environmental center.
Abandoned by the Coast Guard decades ago, the 122-year-old structure is now maintained by the Rose Island Lighthouse Foundation and will be open this year through Labor Day. (This weekend the Newport area will also have the Tall Ships on hand.)
Accessible by launch from Newport and Jamestown, the lighthouse has a weather station as well as the first-floor museum.
The island is a good spot for bird watching, and has heady masses of perfumed white and pink Rosa Rugosa.
Those interested in helping rejuvenate the historic site -- 14-acre Rose Island was home to three 18th-century forts -- can also become foundation members for $5.
Members who sign up in the Keeper's Category ($250) join a list of guests invited to spend a night in the two-bedroom lighthouse.
Directors warn, however, that guests may be asked to do some necessary outdoor work.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; An Affordable-Rental Program Takes Off
AN affordable rental-housing program begun in Connecticut in 1985 is emerging from relative obscurity.
With commercial lending at a nadir, the Private Rental Investment Mortgage and Equity Program, known as Prime, is one of the few paths to construction money for developers who once shunned subsidized rental housing.
The program requires that 20 to 40 percent of a project's units rent below market rate, keyed to a state formula.
Rents cannot exceed 35 percent of gross monthly income.
The remaining units rent at full price, ensuring Prime's objective of economic integration.


Hotels Reward Frequent Guests
FREQUENT GUEST reward programs at hotels are probably here to stay, although they may offer leaner rewards.
In 1990 and 1991, for instance, the Marriott program twice tightened its rules for collecting frequent flier miles for hotel stays.
New programs are unlikely to emerge because experts say starting one up requires the whole marketing budget; some groups that got out of the gate late and could not catch up have left this particular race, notably Omni, Howard Johnson and Radisson.
The rest seem committed.
Some hotel groups without programs are offering diverse "recognition" rewards as a way of competing without a long-term investment.
In this department, the five high-priced Fairmont Hotels have created a President's Club: a Fairmont terrycloth robe is sent as a gift after a third stay before Sept. 7.


In Whose Best Interest?
To the Sports Editor:
It is time for someone to call a halt on Fay Vincent's high hand, "in the best interests of baseball."


Ms. Wasserman, Michael Schiffer
Wendy Beth Wasserman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Wasserman of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there last night to Rolfe Michael Schiffer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Schiffer of New York.
Rabbi Emily Korzenick performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Wasserman, who is 23 years old and is keeping her name, is a legislative assistant in Washington to Representative Patricia Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is a lawyer and business consultant in New York.
Her mother, Cecille Wasserman, is the executive director of the Turtle Bay Music School in New York.


Vancouver Adds Ferry Service
A new harbor-to-harbor passenger ferry service is scheduled to begin today between Vancouver and the central Vancouver Island city of Nanaimo.
The Nanaimo Express offers four sailings a day in each direction aboard a twin-hull Flying Cat catamaran that cruises at up to 37 knots (nearly 40 miles an hour).


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
FLORA AND FAUNA
The Northeast Audubon Center in Sharon is celebrating its 25th anniversary with a Family Environmental Festival on Saturday and Sunday from 8:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Dozens of activities will be keyed to the theme of protecting the hundreds of endangered species of animal and plant life in the northeastern United States.


Pushy Peppermint, and Flavorful Friends
SQUARE stems.
Opposite leaves.
Tubular, lipped flowers.
Sound familiar?
These are common characteristics of the mints and these are some of the easy-to-learn clues to their identity.
And if these clues are not enough, just crush the leaves between your fingers and smell the lovely aromatic scents that give them their popularity.
What would many favorite summertime recipes be without them?
Iced teas, iced soups, sherbets, roast lamb and even fresh peas are made delectable with just a few mint leaves.


Los Angeles Had and Lost a Subway System
To the Editor:
Your entertaining July 7 Los Angeles Journal about riding buses in a city where "everybody" travels by car observes that Los Angeles has a bus system with 1.3 million daily riders, a number that approaches New York's network.
But you fail to mention that the first subway in Los Angeles opened in 1925.
That line was part of the sprawling Pacific Electric interurban train system, whose 1,000 miles of track (about one-third more than the New York subway) formed a web of rapid transit lines connecting all parts of Los Angeles.


In a Spinoff of the Week's Main Event
One guest had his eyes on the Vice Presidency, while the others had their eyes on him.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: Demonstration Sports; PELOTA
HOW IT'S DONE: The exact origins of this demonstration sport are difficult to trace.
Some believe the game evolved from one played in Central Europe by the ancient Romans and Greeks; others say there is evidence the ancient Egyptians created the game.
Still others believe the explorer Hernan Cortes brought the game back to Europe after raiding what is now Honduras.
Both the French and English claim to have created the game as well.
What is certain, however, is that the modern version of pelota came out of the Basque country in the western Pyrenees of France and Spain.
Games were originally improvised using the exteriors of church walls as backstops, part of the reason so many churches in the Basque region today still include frontons.


Imagery With a Surrealistic Accent
A YEAR or so ago, there was talk of Staten Island's seceding from New York City.
But now the separatism has moved to the other side of the Arthur Kill.
A Hoboken dealer, A. J. Lederman, is not urging New Jersey to the barricades, but in the press release for her group show, "Breaking Space," she implies that where art is concerned, the state can go it alone.
Whether such Balkanization of art is possible or even desirable, Ms.
Lederman deserves credit for having the courage of her convictions.
After all, it is one thing for the State Council on the Arts to support New Jersey artists, but quite another for the head of a private gallery to go out on a limb in their behalf.
This she did last year when, having invited submissions, she selected first a painting show, "Garden and Gomorrah," and then the present anthology of sculpture.


Skippering a Canal Boat
"IS that one of Libby's boats?" the man in the baseball cap said.
It was more of a greeting than a question.
There I was, staring up at him from the bottom of what seemed like a rectangular well.
I had nosed in at just the right angle and just the right speed and was hoping that he would not realize that it was my first day on the New York State Barge Canal System, the 525-mile liquid highway that traces the route of the old Erie Canal.
I was determined not to slam the bow into the slimy green walls of Lock 26, east of Clyde, N.Y.


W. Colston Leigh, 90, Who Ran Top Agency in Lecture Business
W.
Colston Leigh, who parlayed a moment of fluke publicity into the creation of the world's leading speakers' agency, died on Wednesday at his home in Tampa, Fla.
He was 90 years old.
The cause of death was not given. His family said he had been in declining health.


Yankees Figure Out a Way to Lose Again
For once, the Yankees had some power and some pitching. And, it appeared, a victory.
But a 3-1 lead that was built on home runs by Don Mattingly and Danny Tartabull dissolved into one more upsetting defeat, this one a 5-3 loss to the California Angels tonight that extended New York's losing streak to six games, matching a season high.


Why This Recession Is Different
To the Editor:
To make sense of the seemingly conflicting economic statistics spewing forth in great profusion, we must ask, "Why is this recession different from almost all other recessions?" The unequivocal answer: "This is not only the usual cyclical recession, but also a structural recession."


Making a Difference; Winning Big At Airbus
When John Leahy, the vice president of marketing for Airbus Industrie in the United States, was given the job of selling the A320 airplane to United Airlines early this year, he knew he faced a Herculean task.
United had bought nothing but Boeing planes since 1978.
It had always been Boeing's biggest and most loyal customer and Mr.
Leahy knew Boeing would make every effort to keep it that way.


Business Diary/July 12-17
THE ECONOMY Clinton Will Run on a Lackluster Economy


Kimberly Sanders, Scott Friestad
Kimberly Ann Sanders, a daughter of Capt. and Mrs.
T.
L.
Sanders of Fairfax, Va., was married there yesterday to Scott William Friestad, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Friestad Jr. of Johnston, Iowa.
The Rev.
Dale K. Brudvig performed the ceremony at the Truro Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Friestad, 30 years old, is an elementary teacher at the Marymount School of New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia, where she also received a master's degree in education.
Her father is a retired naval officer.
Her mother, Martha McE.
Sanders, is a family therapist in private practice in Fairfax.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Wednesday
June Federal Budget, billions
-$49
5
Thursday
Mid-July 10-day car sales, in millions
6.5
6.5
Early July jobless claims, in thousands
401
410
Friday
June durable goods, percent change
-2.4
1.0
Monday: Congress reconvenes after vacation *
European foreign ministers meet *
Court decision on B.C.C.I. expected  Wednesday: Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan testifies to the Senate *
Bank of Japan's governor Mieno holds news conference *
Personal income by state *
Continental Airlines bankruptcy court hearing on plan by Houston-based investor Charles Hurwitz to buy a controlling interest in the company  Friday: White House releases its midyear economic forecast


Making a Difference; Leaving Some Customers at the Counter
Sometimes, the secret of making money in the intensely competitive car rental business may be to turn away customers, at least the high-risk ones.
So far this year Hertz and Avis have tried separate strategies in New York City to cut their losses from accidents and lawsuits.
Last week, William N. Plamondon, head of the Budget Rent a Car Corporation, the No. 3 company, began a nationwide effort.
Mr.
Plamondon's company began asking "local" renters -- the ones who do not arrive by plane and are not employees of big corporations who contract with Budget -- about their driving records.
People with more than one accident in the last three years, or with serious moving violations, are turned away.
The company says that about 5 percent of its renters, mostly people who are not employees of big companies and are not traveling by plane, cause half of Budget's accidents that end in damage suits.


Corrections
A picture caption on July 5 with an article about artists whose families were chicken farmers misidentified an artist who is a professor of visual arts at Rutgers University.
He is Philip Orenstein.


A Week's Endings And Beginnings
NEXT Friday in Toronto will be a beginning for several thousand players in the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals, but it will be an ending for 100 or so who have been battling since November in the Grand National Teams and have now reached the playoffs.
In San Francisco, several teams have players with strong world and national credentials.
But they were all beaten, for the second straight year, by a dark-horse squad: Ed Barlow, Lynne Weber, Rich Spitalnick, Steve Levy and Peter Friedland.


Mary M. Fearon, Wellborn Jack 3d
The Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
H.
Dana Fearon 3d of Lawrenceville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Mackie Fearon, to Wellborn Jack 3d, a son of Virginia J. Martin and Wellborn Jack Jr., both of Shreveport, La.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fearon, 27 years old, is a freelance writer and art historian in Dallas.
She graduated from the College of Wooster.
Her father is the senior pastor of the Presbyterian Church of Lawrenceville.
Her mother, Janet A. Fearon, is the executive director of the Charlotte W. Newcombe Foundation of Princeton, N.J.
Her grandfather, the late Dr.
Arthur M. Adams, was dean of the Princeton Theological Seminary.


All About/Electronic Bulletin Boards; It's No Longer Just Techno-Hobbyists Who Meet by Modem
A communications explosion is under way across America, though about the only sound from it is the clacking of computer keyboards.
People by the tens of thousands are plugging their telephone lines into their personal computers and using them to argue Presidential politics, discuss scuba diving in underwater caves with experts or view satellite pictures of Jupiter's moons.
Much of this, of course, has been available for years to techno-hobbyists and to people willing to pay fairly high connection fees to link up with Compuserve and other on-line information services.
But as the sheer number of people with computers has surged, so has the variety of electronic meeting places known as computer bulletin boards.


POSTINGS: Downtown Redevelopment; 35 Condo Units for Danbury
Three buildings with a total of 35 condominium apartments are to be the first private undertaking in the redevelopment of downtown Danbury, Conn.
The $3 million residential project, by Davon Development Corporation, is on Liberty Street.
It will be called Liberty Terrace.
The buildings will have two-story, two-bedroom units arranged over two-bedroom basement apartments.
Prices will range from the mid-$70,000's to the upper $90,000's.
Ground-breaking is scheduled for this fall, with completion expected in the fall of 1993.
Financing comes from the Union Savings Bank and the Savings Bank of Danbury.
The architect is Lewis Zurlo of Danbury.
The project includes the relocation of the New Bethel Church of God in Christ, which stands on the site.


Strike the Gold Doesn't Hop to It
There was the "rabbit," Loach, racing far in front of the pack, just the way he was supposed to do.
There was the star, Strike the Gold, lagging far in back of the pack, just as he always does.
But this time, everybody knew that Strike the Gold was waiting to uncork his finishing kick after everybody else got worn out chasing the rabbit.
The stage was set, and the two new stablemates were poised to execute their one-two tactical punch and capture the $500,000 Suburban Handicap at Belmont Park yesterday.


Noted With Pleasure
Tending the Tree of Life
True immortality for artists, Henri Matisse asserts, consists of the manner in which their art provokes or challenges those who come after.
This is from "Matisse and Picasso: A Friendship in Art," by Francoise Gilot (Anchor/Doubleday).


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
AN 'OLD BOY' RETURNS
Once in a while an actor's role parallels his or her personal life, as in the case of Jay O. Sanders, who plays Sam, the title role in "The Old Boy," the Phoenix Theater Company production at the State University of New York at Purchase through Aug. 2.


Jock Citadel
IN the heart of Chicago's Michigan Avenue shopping district, the Nike Town building looks as tranquil as the Saks Fifth Avenue store it once housed.
Then you pass through the revolving doors.
New Age music is playing, mixed with the tape-recorded clamor of playoff crowds.
Banners hanging from the ceiling read: Performance, Technology, Innovation.


Violence to Children Echoes Down the Years
To the Editor:
With all respect for the history of European society, admired and emulated for its contribution to the arts and technology, one can see a source of violence now, and in the past, by looking at the history of childrearing in Europe.


On Painting Trim Properly
MANY painting projects have been spoiled by poorly painted trim.
Unlike painting walls and similar broad surfaces, painting trim requires skill with a brush and an overall strategy to avoid smudging adjacent areas, creating unsightly brush marks and getting paint on hardware or glass.
Masking the surfaces to be protected is sometimes an answer, but applying masking tape adds time to large projects and can pull paint from finished surfaces when the tape is removed.


Washington Journal; Urging Blacks to Help Themselves by Buying From Each Other
The shopping center sits on a small hill overlooking a struggling black neighborhood, a pocket of stores surrounded by poverty and neglect.
A few shoppers strolling in oppressive afternoon heat stop to puzzle over a sign in one store's window: "Going out for business."
But it is not a mistake, as a tall man in a hat and carrying a thick stack of leaflets makes clear.
It is part of a new campaign by black merchants and a black business group to promote black-owned companies and to convince black consumers that they are responsible for their neighborhood's economy.


The Executive Life; Home Is Where the Megabytes Roam
New owners of personal computers quickly learn a bitter lesson: There is never enough speed or storage capacity.
The hoi polloi of computer users have enough time to cook breakfast while waiting for a puny PC to nibble its way through some poky little program.
But in places like Silicon Valley, a few executives and top scientists, by dint of employment at the right companies, have been able to stuff their dens and home offices with some of the most powerful computer systems in the world.
Their experiences offer a glimpse of what home computing will be like for the rest of us by the end of the decade.


Q and A
Pool Privileges Question: I am one of many rent-stabilized tenants in a co-op complex that has an outdoor swimming pool and deck with open cabanas.
As in days prior to the conversion, rent-stabilized tenants and shareholders pay an additional fee for pool membership.


U.S. Runs Out of Money To Pay for Defense Lawyers
Federal courts in the New York metropolitan area, already burdened by too many cases for too few judges, are coping with the latest judicial crisis: the Federal Government has run out of money to pay lawyers for many indigent defendants.
The lawyers who have not been paid since June 17 are those in private practice who, along with salaried public defenders, provide the representation required by the Constitution for poor people charged with crimes.


Dione N. Green and Arthur E. Mitchell
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Green of Philadelphia have announced the engagement of a daughter, Dione Nicole Green, to Arthur Early Mitchell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman M. Mitchell of Pittsburgh.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Green and her fiance are 23 years old and graduates of Howard University.
She is a microbiologist at Elkins-Sinn, a pharmaceutical company in Cherry Hill, N.J.
Her father is the chief probation officer in Trenton for Mercer County, N.J.
Her mother, Cheryl Y. Green, is an elementary-school teacher in the Philadelphia school system.


The Soviet Archives; What Answers Lurk in the Billions of Secret Pages?
WERE there American P.O.W.'s in Soviet labor camps?
Was Alger Hiss a spy?
Did Lenin have an affair with a beautiful French Socialist?
Will the opening of the Soviet archives really allow questions like these to be answered?
A thrill of anticipation is running through American Soviet scholars as roughly 250 million files in several archives of the former Soviet Union are opened, and many of the researchers are spending their summer poring over the records.


Street Patrols Work to Allay Fear of Downtown
WEARING bright red baseball caps and white T-shirts, Caroline Bochnia and Andy Matthews emerged from Danbury Police Headquarters armed with a walkie-talkie and headed north on Main Street, the city's major business artery.
It was early afternoon on a gorgeous summer day, but there was little automobile or pedestrian traffic.
Most stores on Main Street have suffered since the 235-store Danbury Fair Mall, situated three miles to the west, opened in the fall of 1986, and that, no doubt, accounts at least in part for the decline in activity downtown.
But, according to Danbury Police Lieut.
Kevin N. Barry, there is another reason.
"There is a popular perception that it's not safe downtown," said Lieutenant Barry, who is the commander of the department's crime-prevention unit.
"And that's not true, since downtown is probably as safe as anyplace in the city. But the perception prevails."


Senecas Dismantle Roadblocks After Claiming Victory on Tax
After a night of celebrating victory in a weeklong tax revolt that led to several clashes with state police, Seneca Indian reservations south of here were calm today.
The Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway and the Southern Tier Expressway were reopened and traffic was flowing smoothly after the Senecas dismantled roadblocks erected earlier in the week to protest state plans to collect sales taxes on outsiders' purchases.


'Taming of the Shrew' at Boscobel
IT'S no secret that the Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival eases the transition from contemporary stress to Elizabethan casualness.
Under a tent on the rolling lawns of the 40-acre restored Boscobel estate, with its formal gardens, apple orchards and unobstructed views of the Hudson, the play -- this year "The Taming of the Shrew" -- takes place, otherwise unadorned.


Wall Street; Israeli Stocks' Post-Shamir Rally
Anyone in Yair Shamir's shoes would have felt torn watching Israel's latest exercise in democracy.
The son of the man whom voters cast out of office last month is currently in China and unavailable for comment.
But even as he must have mourned the loss of power of his father, Yitzhak, he must also have been pleased by investors' euphoria over the election results.
The younger Mr.
Shamir, after all, is executive vice president of one of Israel's hottest growth companies, the Scitex Corporation Ltd.
Scitex, a maker of computer graphic systems, is one of many Israeli companies whose stocks have surged in the weeks since the country's Labor Party, led by Yitzhak Rabin, trounced the Likud Party at the polls.


The Publishers Versus the Bells
To the Editor:
"Phone Companies Join Their Rivals in the Facts Business" (June 7) provides an excellent overview of why information services via the telephone have millions of small businesses excited about this new technology.


Doc Who? Mets Pitch 9 More Zeros
The Mets cannot worry about the loss of Dwight Gooden with an injured right shoulder.
They have to forge ahead with one of their marquee players stuck on the disabled list for what could be a long time.
And they are doing just that.
Sid Fernandez made the pitching woes seem minuscule last night when he tossed a shutout into the eighth inning to lead the Mets to a 3-0 victory over the Giants at Shea Stadium.
Only hours after Gooden was placed on the disabled list and Bret Saberhagen was activated to pitch Tuesday, Fernandez toyed with San Francisco in a manner that probably made both former Cy Young Award winners envious.


Conversations/William Julius Wilson; Responding to Urban Alarm Bells At Scholarship's Glacial Pace
IT wasn't exactly beach reading, but it quickly became a classic.
In 1987, Professor William Julius Wilson of the University of Chicago published a 223-page volume called "The Truly Disadvantaged" that offered an ambitious, nuanced and plausible explanation for the deterioration of America's black ghettos.
The book became a paradigm, the starting point for a subsequent explosion of research.
Now five years have passed, a city has burned, and Mr.
Wilson is on the verge of issuing a sequel.
For several years he has presided over a small army of Chicago researchers, surveying thousands of ghetto households in search of further insight.


Julie Landman, Devon Engel
Julie Kay Landman, a daughter of Robert E. Landman of Glen Rock, N.J., and the late Susan Berg, was married last evening to Devon Steven Engel, the son of Herbert Engel of Westport, Conn., and Lee Reitman of Marietta, Ga.
Rabbi Hyman Krantz performed the ceremony at the Chanticler in Short Hills, N.J.
Ms.
Landman, who is 26 years old and keeping her name, is a financial management associate at the Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation in Washington.
She and her husband graduated from Emory University.
Her father is a national partner in New York in the accounting firm of Arthur Andersen &amp; Company.


Racial Differences in Mortgage Lending
New Government data on mortgage lending show that black and Hispanic residents of the New York region are far more likely to be turned down for home loans than whites.
But the figures do not reflect broad patterns of "redlining," or discrimination against designated communities.
The data, gathered under disclosure rules enacted by Congress in 1989, provide a detailed portrait of mortgage-lending patterns in 1990.
The information was made available for public scrutiny in recent months.


All Dressed Up and Somewhere to Go
THE dowager queen of the East End has taken on a radiant new identity.
The Maidstone Arms, an East Hampton institution built in the 17th century, has changed its look, owners and chef.
Yet, traditional habitues of the venerable inn will find its decorous style intact.
The dolled-up doyenne is a beauty, with sumptuous floral bouquets, crisp white napery and gentle lighting.
Dining rooms have an antique air.
One features blue and white plates on butter-yellow walls.
The other sports seascapes, model ships and floors of dark wood.


Taking Aim and Hitting the Mark With Legislators
Richard Suessenbach sits motionless in his wheelchair.
Since he tumbled out of a tree five years ago while hunting deer with a bow and arrow, he has been unable to move his legs, arms or hands.
His life is one of total dependence and unrelenting pain.
But in the last few months, through tireless letter-writing, petition-circulating and telephone-calling, Mr.
Suessenbach has moved the New York State Legislature to pass a bill that would enable quadriplegics like himself to go back into the woods and continue the hunt, with a crossbow that can be operated without the use of his hands.


Mark Portugal Is Set for Elbow Surgery
Houston Astros pitcher MARK PORTUGAL will undergo surgery Wednesday on his right elbow to remove five bone chips.
He is expected to miss about six weeks, team officials said.
"It's not career-threatening, but we think he'll be out until the first of September," Astros pitching coach BOB CLUCK said.


Britain's Labor Party Chooses Moderate as Leader
Still reeling from its election defeat in April, the British Labor Party today elected John Smith, a 53-year-old Scottish lawyer and a moderate, as leader, to replace Neil Kinnock and try to convince voters that Labor is ready for government.
Pledging to put economic growth, jobs, community and quality of life at the top of the party's agenda, Mr.
Smith sounded at times like Gov.
Bill Clinton with a Scots burr as he addressed the party's conference.


County Cites New Progress In Reducing Homelessness
WESTCHESTER's homeless population has reached its lowest level in five years, county officials announced last week.
They credited their recent efforts to reduce welfare dependency, including tough new assessment procedures and required programs to increase self-sufficiency.
But advocates for the homeless are objecting to the county's new get-tough policies, which they say appear to have reduced homelessness but have in fact left people without help.
A growing population of "hidden homeless," who cannot or will not abide by the new rules, live doubled up with friends and relatives, they say, challenging the new social service model and putting new pressures on voluntary agencies.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Fencing
HOW IT'S DONE: Fencing, one of six sports included in every modern Olympics, employs three disciplines based on the kind of sword used.
They are foil, which is rectangular and uses only the point to score; epee, a triangular sword that is heavier than the foil and, thus, stiffer; and the sabre, which has a V-shaped blade and, unlike the others, can be used to score points by slicing and slashing.
Also, the events are differentiated by the target parts of the opponent.
Athletes in the foil score by touching the torso of the body, from the neck to the groin or hips.
In epee, points are awarded for touches anywhere.
In sabre, the target is anything above the waist.


Don't Give Up Now
Take cuttings of lantanas, geraniums and fuchsias for potted plants this winter.
Divide crowded bearded iris, and cut leaves back to six inches.
Divide poppies.
As ferns wither, cut fronds to the ground.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton-Gore Caravan Refuels With Spirit From Adoring Crowds
Skating along on the potentially slippery surface of new popularity, the Clinton-Gore campaign bus tour attracted delirious crowds of new supporters today, many working their way to the rope lines to tell the candidates that they were once Republicans or Ross Perot supporters.
The six-day, 1,000-mile bus ride, from New York to St.
Louis, has attracted scores of reporters and forced the Clinton organization to balloon into a robust but often disorganized general election campaign.


Cash Flow


CORRECTION
An article on July 5 about Monroe, Conn., misstated the date of completion of the manmade Lake Zoar.
It was completed in 1919.


Mutual Funds; Who Really Pays for the Charity?
"Socially responsible" mutual funds apply ethical criteria to investment decisions, avoiding positions in the stock of companies that operate in ways deemed injurious to the environment, for example.
But at least three of these funds carry their mission even further: they donate all or part of their profits to charitable environmental groups.


When Dreams Meet Harsh Realities at Shea Stadium
IN a fashion parade of pinstripes and Spandex, 80 young men gathered outside Shea Stadium in Flushing.
White sox mingled with red sox.
Baseball caps offered a guide to college and local teams.
Once a year the New York Mets have an open tryout.
For a few hours Shea Stadium becomes a genuine field of dreams.
Run faster than the wind.
Make an impossible fielding play.
Hit the ball over the fence.
And maybe, just maybe, you will make it to the big leagues.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Gymnastics
HOW IT'S DONE: The sport that brought you those darlings of Communism, Olga Korbut and Nadia Comaneci, also produces complicated competition and scoring formats that make it virtually impossible to know precisely who the next darling is liable to be.
For the men through their six disciplines and the women through their four, it all works like this: Competition begins with a round of compulsories, in which all athletes, grouped by random draw, do the same routines.
Exciting, it's not.
But those scores are critically important.
They are combined with scores earned on the next round, in which athletes, now in groups with their own teammates, perform individual routines.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Swimming
HOW IT'S DONE: Swimmers will keep wet and busy during the first week at Barcelona.
There are a total of 26 individual races for men and women at varying distances, from 50-meter sprints to 1,500-meter floatathons.
In addition, there are three relay races for men and two for women.


The Young, the Restless And the Socially Aware
Ridiculous!
Preposterous!
Yes, and indestructible!
The daytime soap opera, television's most original contribution to popular entertainment, has faced possible extinction more than once over the past decades and then has confounded detractors by striking out in new directions and ending up livelier than ever.
And it's happening again.
No daytime executive is likely to insist that, after decades of creeping change, soap operas are now enlightened arenas of social awareness and responsibility.
Certain subjects, abortion being the most prominent right now, remain off limits.
Lower rungs of the social ladder are virtually ignored; residents of soaps could hardly have been prepared for the recent racial explosions in Los Angeles.
Weddings, births and murder trials are still most favored gimmicks for grabbing an audience.


'Maltese Falcon' Sequel?
To the Editor:
It is obvious to anyone with the slightest knowledge of art crime where the trail of the mysterious silver hoard leads, as traced by Peter Watson  [ "The Case of the Silver Treasure," June 28 ] .
Find Caspar Gutman and Joel Cairo and you will have your answers.
They were last seen in San Francisco, leaving Sam Spade's apartment on their way to Istanbul.
DAVID B. PITTAWAY New York


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Water Polo
HOW IT'S DONE: This intense, sometimes brutal sport is played in a pool that is never quite big enough for its 14 participants.
Each team has a 13-man roster, with seven in the pool (a goalkeeper plus six field players) at any given moment.
The pool is 98.4 by 65.6 feet (30 by 20 meters) -- think of an area one-third the size of a football field -- with a maximum depth of 6.5 feet.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Basketball
HOW IT'S DONE: Twelve countries will compete in the men's Olympic basketball tournament.
But Yugoslavia, the reigning world champion, won't be there because Olympic sanctions against the country weren't lifted in time for its team to compete in the European qualifying tournament.
The 12 teams are divided into two pools, A and B, and will play a preliminary round of five games against the teams in their pool.
The top four teams from each pool advance to the quarterfinals on Aug. 4th, with the top finisher in Pool A meeting the fourth-place team from Pool B and so on.
The semifinals are scheduled for Aug. 6, and the gold- and bronze-medal games set for Aug. 8th.


The Lord of Hudson's Bay
MERCHANT PRINCES
Company of Adventurers, Volume Three.
By Peter C. Newman.
Illustrated. 502 pp.
New York: Viking. $25.


Smile Lantern, $45
Latest bedside accessory: Geodessence Essential Oil Lantern, an amethyst geode on a metal stand.
It works on the chafing-dish principle to diffuse "beneficial" aromas from room scenting oils into the immediate atmosphere.


Utah Execution Hinges on Issue of Racial Bias
A bitter fight over the definition of murder and the influence of racism, old Mormon teachings and new legal interpretations has come down to this: Should William Andrews live or die?
Mr.
Andrews, a black man who is scheduled to be executed on July 30, was not present when his accomplice, also black, shot three white people to death in a robbery in 1974.
But he admits that before he left the scene he tortured five people by forcing them to drink Drano, a caustic drain cleaner.
Two of them survived, one with serious brain damage.


Brazil's Besieged President Returns the Fire
Battling a congressional corruption inquiry, President Fernando Collor de Mello has returned to two weapons that served him well on the campaign trail: a street fighter's vocabulary and a television commentator's polished delivery.
"Let the pigs wallow in the mud," the President said here recently, referring apparently to journalists and members of Congress who are uncovering a corruption trail of telephone bills and bank statements leading to the presidential office.


JULY 12-18: A Necessary Reward?; Whistleblower Collects $7.5 Million for His Tip
Six years after Congress passed legislation promising private citizens a portion of any money they could help the Government recover from crooked Pentagon suppliers, a growing number of whistleblowers are claiming multimillion-dollar rewards, sharpening the debate over whether the Government should pay people for evidence of fraud.
Last week a Federal judge awarded $7.5 million to Christopher M. Urda, a 35-year former pricing analyst for an upstate New York maker of flight simulators, for leading the Justice Department to a scheme in which the company allegedly overbilled the Pentagon by $77 million from 1980 to 1988.
The award was the largest yet under the whistleblower law, although larger ones may come soon.


The Italian Connection
Italian wine varieties are the hottest thing to come out of California since square tomatoes.
The trendiest wineries are racing to produce wines made from nebbiolo, sangiovese and malvasia grapes.
Wait a minute.
Hasn't California always been Italian wine country?
What about Franzia, Foppiano, Gallo, Martini, Mondavi, Parducci, Pecota, Pedrizzetti, Pedroncelli, Pepi, Rafanelli, Rochioli, Sattui, Sebastiani, Seghesio, Signorello, Trentadue, Trinchero and the rest?
What have they been making all these years?


More Americans Are Saying, 'I Don't'
If the political exhortation of the week was "Let's get together," the demographic response was, "Not at the altar."
The Census Bureau released a study of marriage patterns showing that 22.6 percent of Americans 18 years of age and older have never married, up from 16.2 percent in 1970 and 20.6 percent in 1980.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CHEATING DEATH By Edwin Chen. Onyx, paper, $4.99.


The Shrinking of the American Oil Industry
The latest statistics on the American oil industry make it sound as though the oil patch has discovered time travel.
Oil imports are at their highest levels since 1978 and domestic production has fallen to where it was back in 1961, the American Petroleum Institute said last week.
And the number of oil and gas drilling rigs at work in the country recently hit a low not seen since records began to be kept 50 years ago.
As for the future of the American-based oil industry, it appears to be somewhere abroad, where companies are drilling with a vengeance.


Olympics Crossing The Magic Line
SORRY, all you kayakers paddling out there on the water.
Gotta go check out Jordan's villa.
Wish I could catch the hot table-tennis match, but there's a daily briefing on Bird's back.
All those wonderful characters who used to emerge from the mists -- like Brigadoon -- every four years may never enjoy the temporary spotlight when the Summer Games begin this week.


Why Paris Works
In a hidden, walled-off area, just west of the Boulevard St.-Michel, Paul Rissel looks like a figure borrowed from the 19th century as he opens the door to the lush greenhouse.
Wearing a rough brown tweed sport coat and a long camel-colored scarf, he pushes past some ficus and stops next to a dozen unobtrusive black trays.
These trays, he points out, are one of the secrets behind the ageless beauty of Paris's ornate Jardin du Luxembourg, which was built for Queen Marie de Medicis some 370 years ago.
Rissel, one of the two chief gardeners, explains that the trays produce seedlings for the tens of thousands of geraniums, dahlias and petunias that the Jardin's 80 gardeners meticulously replant each May around the majestic central fountain.
The resplendent array of flowers gives the garden the idyllic air of a Renoir painting.
During the gentle rains of spring, lovers stroll hand in hand, and when the sun breaks through, 5-year-olds scamper around the fountain to chase after their toy sailboats.


Pope Is Recovering Normally
Pope John Paul II was said by his physicians today to be maintaining a normal recovery from an operation to remove a tumor from his colon, and his spokesman said he would be strong enough to transmit his regular prayers on Sunday by radio from his hospital bed to the crowds in St.
Peter's Square.
The 72-year-old Pope underwent almost four hours of surgery on Wednesday to remove both a large intestinal tumor, described by his doctors as benign, and his gallbladder.


Convention Fever
When delegates came for cocktails, Macy's got it.


Buyer Closing In on Deal to Get Astros
DRAYTON McLANE Jr. said that he expected to conclude negotiations next week to buy the Houston Astros from JOHN McMULLEN.
McLane, who owns a food distributorship in Temple, Tex., has reportedly offered McMullen more than $100 million for the Astros and other assets, including the Houston Sports Association's lease on the Astrodome and some of the association's hotels. (AP)


In Katonah With Nothing But the Abstractions to Consider
TODAY, the common factor in an anthology is liable to be anything but esthetic.
Artists are grouped together because they are for the environment and against nuclear war, belong to the same ethnic group, live in Westchester, and so on.
It is a system of packaging that has become an aid to the appreciation of art, and when it is not used the results can be disconcerting.
An example of this is furnished by the six artists now at the Station Gallery here.
Two of them have had previous exposure in Manhattan and elsewhere, but the others are lesser-knowns -- unknowns to me.
All are in their 50's or older and work more or less abstractly, keeping their convictions, intentions and even their backgrounds to themselves.


When Rabin Meets Baker, Expect Warmth (and Politics)
WHEN Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d starts a scheduled visit to Israel this afternoon, he presumably will be carrying a postdated check in his wallet, with the dollar amounts to be filled in later.
The check will be figurative, of course, and in any event it will need the signature of Mr.
Baker's boss and political soul mate, President Bush.
The point is that Israel's new leaders expect to receive a signal that the United States is ready at last to hand over loan guarantees to help in resettling Jews from the former Soviet Union; these have been held up for months because of the previous Government's insistence on building Jewish settlements anywhere it wished in the occupied territories.
So the Baker trip, announced as part of a broader Middle East journey intended to give a jolt to mired peace talks, has taken on certain aspects of a love-in even before it starts.


Interpreting Eleanor Roosevelt
To the Editor:
There have now been several letters to challenge my alleged interpretation of Eleanor Roosevelt, women's lives and feminism.
Since the letters have little to do with what I wrote in "Eleanor Roosevelt," a reply seems in order.


Albee's Attack on the Middle Class
ALTHOUGH "Everything in the Garden" is credited to Edward Albee, the play, which opened in 1967 on Broadway, is Mr.
Albee's adaptation of the work of an English playwright, Giles Cooper.
The British original is an absurdist comedy about a middle-class couple who find sudden wealth when the wife begins selling herself at a London bordello.
It turns out that all women in their neighborhood are also involved in the same sort of part-time work.
It is how they earned the extra money to keep up appearances in front of the others.


In Washington, The Dollar Has Few Friends
As the Democrats recounted the list of economic woes for which they hope voters will hold George Bush responsible, there was a curious omission.
The steady slide in the value of the dollar went unnoted and unlamented.
Yet the dollar's fall is in some ways the signal indicator of the decline of America as an economic power over the last three decades.
In contrast to such countries as France, where the value of the currency is deemed to be a measure of national accomplishment, the Government of this country has tended to see a sinking buck as a painless way out of economic binds.


Population Growth Imperils the Planet
To the Editor:
"There's Plenty of Room" (letter, June 30) by Sheldon L. Richman, senior editor of the Cato Institute, merits serious questioning on several counts.


Cartoon Turn-Ons
"HEY Wayne," says Garth in his tenderest, most starry-eyed tone, "did you ever find Bugs Bunny attractive when he put on a dress and acted like a girl bunny?" Only an adenoidal, perpetually adolescent and affectionately geeky guy like Garth from "Wayne's World" could have articulated this dark secret at the heart of the American trash-cultural cosmos: cartoons are sexy.
The new film "Cool World" -- by Ralph Bakshi, of "Fritz the Cat" fame -- plays off the American infatuation with cartoons in an even more explicit fashion: the plot line revolves around the attempts of Holli Would, a scantily clad bimbette in the highly willing tradition of Jessica Rabbit, to bed a human being.


Crossing the Seine
To the Editor: I enjoyed the articles on Normandy in the Travel section ("Stories in Stone Along the Lower Seine" and "In Honfleur, the Essence of Normandy," June 14).
Just this time last year I was driving in that beautiful section of France, experiencing the difficulties mentioned by one of your writers in finding bridges over the River Seine.


Mutual Funds; Potential in the L.B.O. Leftovers
As the leveraged buyouts of the 80's are dismantled, a handful of "vulture managers" sift through the rubble looking for profit opportunities.
Chief among them is Martin J. Whitman, who has built a strong reputation for spotting gold among financially distressed companies.
While the bulk of his business is managing private accounts, Mr.
Whitman has plied his investing style in two mutual funds: Equity Strategies, which is winding down, and its successor, the Third Avenue Fund.
Third Avenue, begun in October 1990, gained 34.4 percent in 1991, 4 percentage points more than stock funds on average, and it shines so far among 1992's dismal performance figures.
The fund rose 4.7 percent through June 30, compared with a drop of 2.1 percent in all stock funds, according to Morningstar Inc., the Chicago-based research company.


Amy E. Moorhus, James Gordon Jr.
Amy Elizabeth Moorhus, a daughter of Donita M. Moorhus of Alexandria, Va., and the late Dr.
Roger W. Moorhus, was married yesterday in Sea Bright, N.J., to James Power Gordon Jr., the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gordon Jr. of Rumson, N.J.
The Rev.
William A. Weisenbach, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at McLoone's Restaurant.
Ms.
Moorhus, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, will attend Fordham University Law School this fall.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her late father was an associate dean at the College of Staten Island.
Her mother and her stepfather, Dr.
Robert P. Grathwol, operate R &amp; D Associates, an Alexandria firm specializing in historic research.


Seeking an Old-Time Pastor, Finding Uncertainty
To many members of the First Church of Christ, Congregational, their small church overlooking Amity Road here is a second home, and they are all family.
On a recent Sunday, someone new was called to stand at its head; after an 18-month search, the congregation had found a new pastor.
Bethany Congregational, as the 230-year-old church is known, had found the search long and confusing.
Its last pastor had stayed 17 years, and those years had wrought great changes in its members' lives.
Now, stepping beyond their sanctuary, they discovered that the ministry had changed, too.


Helping Welfare Recipients Help Themselves
THE recent legislative overhaul of Connecticut's General Assistance Welfare Program, which is administered by the Department of Income Maintenance through cities and towns, has set stricter guidelines for eligibility and placed limits on the amount of time someone can receive benefits.
People who abuse drugs and alcohol will have to seek treatment to qualify and people who have entered the United States illegally will not be eligible.
The state will also begin an employment program to help welfare recipients upgrade their skills and find work.
The guidelines went into effect July 1.
Since 1988 the number of people receiving general assistance in Connecticut increased to 34,000 from 11,000.
The program, one of several components of the welfare system in Connecticut, provides monthly grants of $314 for people who are able but cannot find work and $356 for those who are unemployable because of medical problems.
Audrey Rowe, the Commissioner of the Income Maintenance Department, and a member of a state welfare reform task force formed last year, said that proposals to reform the Aid to Families With Dependent Children program would be examined in the upcoming legislative session.


Levittown Experiment Had Many Warm Sides
I think "At 45, Levittown's Legacy Is Unclear"  [ June 28 ]  devoted a disproportionate amount of space to the racial-discrimination issue.
Certainly your reporter was right to point to rules that effectively kept black people out of Levittown in its early days.
But he may have left the impression that the residents themselves were bigoted, and that, speaking as a native of Levittown, was certainly not the case.
Your emphasis on the racial issue also produced, in my opinion, a rather "colorless" overview of this community.
When I was growing up there in the 1960's and 1970's, it was a community whose residents shared gossip, recipes and baseball scores across clotheslines and picket fences.
In fact, Levittown was family, connected by blood and the blocks they lived on.
It was sledding down sumps in winter, playing Levittown Athletic Club softball in spring and spending summer afternoons in free community pools at village greens.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Volleyball
HOW IT'S DONE: An Olympic sport since 1964, volleyball is one of the most popular team events in the Games.
The game combines the brute strength needed for spiking, the finesse necessary for setups and fakes and the quickness required for diving after balls spiked by the other team.
The game is played with six to a side on a court about 59 feet by 29 feet.
In the men's tournament, the top of the net is slightly higher off the floor, 7 feet 11 1/2 inches, than in the women's tournament, 7 feet 1/4 inch.


Chorus Joins Norfolk Chamber Festival
THE Litchfield County Choral Union adds a welcome note of song to the Norfolk Chamber Music Festival every summer, but this afternoon's 3 o'clock concert has the added advantage of the rarely performed vocal music of Anton Bruckner.
Under the direction of Jonathan Babbitt, the Union is presenting "Three Graduals for the Church Year"; another short sacred piece, "Ecce Sacerdos Magnus," and the expansive "Grand Mass" in F Minor, written by Bruckner in gratitude for his recovery from a breakdown that had, for a time, threatened to plunge him into insanity.
Friday at 8:30 P.M., the cellist Janos Starker is featured in an evening of solo and chamber music, playing the Solo Suite of Gaspar Cassado.
He will be joined by the violinist Erick Friedman and the pianist Elizabeth Sawyer Parisot for the Mendelssohn D Minor Trio.
He will also perform the Haydn D Major Concerto with the Norfolk Chamber Orchestra under the direction of another cellist, Aldo Parisot.


A Genius in Love
ALBERT EINSTEIN/MILEVA MARIC
The Love Letters.
Edited by Jurgen Renn and Robert Schulmann.
Translated by Shawn Smith.
Illustrated. 107 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.


Valerie H. Speyer and Jeffrey R. Peltier
Jerry I. Speyer and Lynne Tishman Speyer, both of New York, have announced the engagement of a daughter, Valerie Hope Speyer, to Jeffrey Richard Peltier, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Peltier of Tipp City, Ohio.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Speyer, 25 years old, graduated from Harvard University.
She is a third-year law student at Columbia University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Tishman Speyer Properties, a New York real estate firm.
Her mother is a social worker in New York.
The prospective bride's maternal grandfather is Robert V. Tishman, who founded the firm with her father in 1978 and is its chairman.


Elizabeth A. Old, Robert W. Ker 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Jonathan W. Old Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Adams Old, to Robert Walker Ker 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ker Jr. of New Canaan, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Old, 30 years old, is a marketing manager in the American Express Company in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received an M.B.A. from Duke University.
Her father is a retired president and chief executive of Grandmet U.S.A.
Inc., a consumer products company in Montvale, N.J.


The Tanning Obsession
MANHATTAN
Boyd's of Madison Avenue, 655 Madison Avenue (60th Street): Clarins Self-Tanning Face Cream SPF 15, $18.50; Clarins Sunblock Total Protection SPF 25, $15.
The self-tanning cream outsells the sunblock by
3 to 1.
"Clarins is made from plant and herbal extracts," said Carol Fader, the owner of Boyd's.
"It doesn't smell bad."
SOUTH MIAMI
Sunset Stores, 5640 Sunset Drive: Bull Frog Sunblock SPF 18, $6.24; Clarins Self-Tanning Milk SPF 6, $16.50.
The sunblock sells slightly better than the self-tanning cream.
"Bull Frog is a concentrated gel," said Ada Press, a Sunset Stores saleswoman, "and it goes a long way. It's waterproof and you don't have to keep applying it because it stays on. And you can sweat."
BEVERLY HILLS
Neiman Marcus, 9700 Wilshire Boulevard: Estee Lauder Oil-Free Tanning Formula SPF 6, $12.50; Estee Lauder Self-Action Tanning Spray, $19.50.
The self-tanning spray outsells the sunblock.
"It's all in the promotion," said John Stabenau, a vice president and divisional merchandise manager at Neiman Marcus.
"With the self-action tanning spray, in one day you can look like you've been in the sun for days."


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Shooting
HOW IT'S DONE: The competition includes seven events for men, four for women and two in which gender is inconsequential.
They are differentiated by the equipment, rifles or pistols; the size of the target; the kind of target, paper or clay; the distance from the target; the position of the shooter, and the time allowed.


Networking; On Line (Let's Hope) From the Garden . . .
It's a network manager's worst nightmare: install a local area network with up to 100 personal computers, provide word processing and electronic-mail services, allow for access by laptop-computer users, coordinate the hookup of data transmission lines with the phone company, and connect to a mainframe thousands of miles away.
And do it all in about a week.
Welcome to the Democratic and Republican National Conventions, where every news organization has to replicate its computer system.
No one has a complete count on how many systems were installed for last week's Democratic event in New York, but about 125 major news organizations were there, according to the Democratic National Committee, installing anywhere from 2 to 100 PC's each.


Jacqueline Unternahrer, T. S. Sfikas
Jacqueline Antoinette Unternahrer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Unternahrer of Huntington, L.I., was married in New York yesterday to Thomas Spero Sfikas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Constantine Sfikas of Bradenton, Fla.
Msgr.
George F. Bardes performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Thomas More Church.
Mrs.
Sfikas, 27 years old, is an assistant vice president of Junior Achievement, a New York nonprofit group that teaches public school students about business.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is the executive vice president of Hart Ski International, a sports equipment company in Huntington.


Commercial Property: Older Industrial Space; 'Repositioning' Buildings for a New Marketplace
AT the end of a dead-end street -- improbably named Progress Drive -- in a tumbledown part of Stamford, Conn., is a 25-year-old rectangular industrial building whose simple concrete-and-glass exterior stands in humble contrast to the glittering office towers less than a mile away.
But with a bit of fixing up, the 116,000-square-foot, two-story structure on a 4.6-acre paved site may turn out to be more in tune than its more glamorous neighbors with the needs of the 90's.


Royal Couture Gets a Showing
Court Couture '92, a new exhibition at Kensington Palace, presents a contemporary view of royal ceremonial dress.
The 20 fashion designers taking part include Gianfranco Ferre for Christian Dior, Vivienne Westwood, Hartnell, Katherine Hamnett, Sir Hardy Amies, Workers for Freedom and Bruce Oldfield as well as students from the Royal College of Art.
They have created contemporary -- and in some cases zany -- costumes that adhere to the strict regulations for court dress required in 1937, the last year they were issued.
Court dress was worn by women when they were presented to the monarch, a tradition that began in 1700 and continued to 1939.


Pushy Peppermint, and Flavorful Friends
SQUARE stems.
Opposite leaves.
Tubular, lipped flowers.
Sound familiar?
These are common characteristics of the mints and these are some of the easy-to-learn clues to their identity.
And if these clues are not enough, just crush the leaves between your fingers and smell the lovely aromatic scents that give them their popularity.
What would many favorite summertime recipes be without them?
Iced teas, iced soups, sherbets, roast lamb and even fresh peas are made delectable with just a few mint leaves.


When Do We Learn To Age Gracefully?
To the Editor:
"A Team Dream," Anna Quindlen's July 8 column on turning 40, appeared the day before my husband's 40th birthday, and she hit the nail on the head: the importance of love, friendship, experience.
In Jewish tradition, 40 is the age of the understanding of life.
Much better than over the hill.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: Demonstration Sports; TAEKWONDO
HOW IT'S DONE: To appreciate taekwondo it helps to understand that these athletes do not call themselves fighters or martial artists.
They like to think of themselves as practitioners.
In North and South Korea, the home of this sport, which is based on continuous kicking and parrying, taekwondo is enjoyed not only as a competition but as a dual exercise benefiting both practitioners.


Update; Investigation to Beginc On Handling of Arson Case
Two former Federal prosecutors have been appointed to conduct an independent investigation of alocal police department's handling of an arson fire that killed an infant last Dec. 2 and led to the indictment and eventual acquittal of a Swiss au pair on murder and arson charges.
The Mount Pleasant Town Board acted at a special meeting Wednesday night, one week after the au pair, Olivia Riner, 20 years old, was acquitted second-degree murder and arson after a bitterly fought trial.
Miss Riner was charged in the death of the infant, Krystie Fisher, at the Fisher home in Thornwood.


Tete-a-Tetes
MIDTOWN, after midnight, Monday.
Bruce Willis and his band, the Red Devils, had just finished bludgeoning eardrums at Planet Hollywood.
Outside, on West 57th Street, an ice sculpture was beginning to melt, and a silver limousine pulled into the traffic.
Riding inside, Zelma Davis, the 21-year-old pop singer who performs with C &amp; C Music Factory, and Tommy Page, a 22-year-old singer who used to open for New Kids on the Block, were headed to the China Club to catch more of Bruce Willis.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; NBC Calls Its Venture With PBS A Success
As Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo addressed the Democratic National Convention, Michael Gartner, the president of NBC News, burst into the NBC production truck, thrilled that the competition was not carrying the speech live.
"Look at ABC," he said, pointing to a wall of television monitors.
"They're in 'Doogie Howser' at the moment. This is the advantage of my PBS deal."


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Badminton
HOW IT'S DONE: This is not the windswept, backyard game of our youth.
Badminton, is considered one of the world's fastest racquet sports.
The velocity of the birdie or shuttlecock off the surface of a lightweight racket has been timed as high as 200 m.p.h.
Competitive badminton requires split-second reflexes, stamina and power.
A demonstration sport in 1972 and an exhibition sport -- the next step to inclusion in the Olympic program -- in 1988, badminton makes its Olympic medal debut in 1992.
Competition includes men's and women's singles and doubles matches, which are the best two out of three games.
For singles play, the court is 44 feet by 17 feet; the doubles alleys widen the court to 20 feet.
The net is five feet high in the middle, one inch higher at the posts.


Fire Dept. Files Sex Charge Against Doctor
Reversing the findings of an earlier inquiry, the New York City Fire Department has filed internal charges against a department doctor whom a firefighter accused of sexual harassment during a medical examination a year and a half ago.
In a statement issued on Friday, Fire Commissioner Carlos M. Rivera said the department had decided to file disciplinary charges against the doctor, Selig Ginsburg, after "a further review" of the complaint by the firefighter, Brenda Berkman.


Ms. Eisenstadt, Haydn Evans
Elizabeth Smith Eisenstadt, a daughter of Abraham Eisenstadt of Brooklyn and the late Paulette Eisenstadt, and Haydn Barry Evans, a son of Laura Evans of Falls Church, Va., and the late Haydn Evans, plan to marry in September.
Ms.
Eisenstadt, 37 years old, is the vicar of St.
David's Episcopal Church in Philadelphia and a freelance journalist.
She graduated from Kirkland College and received her master's degree in divinity from Princeton University.
Her father is a professor of American history at Brooklyn College.
Her mother was a teacher in Brooklyn.


Quayny Porter, James Wyatt-Brown
Quayny Lyman Porter, a daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
William L. Porter of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday in Chocorua, N.H., to James Alexander Wyatt-Brown, the son of the Rev.
Hunter Wyatt-Brown of Beaufort, S.C., and Helen Wyatt-Brown of Woodstock, Conn.
The Rev.
Guthrie Speers, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Chocorua Island Chapel.
Mrs.
Porter-Brown, 32 years old, graduated from Vassar College and received a master's in architecture from Yale University.
Her father is a professor of architecture at M.I.T.


About as Fer As They C'n Go
Three delegates to the Democratic National Convention were standing on Fifth Avenue after lunch one day last week when a woman in a large straw hat and black linen dress with ankle-length hem walked by.
One of the visitors remarked: "They're wearing their evening dresses during the day."
It would seem that way for anyone who equates a stiflingly humid, 90-degree day with short skirts.
But fashion is not the stuff of logic.
And for some women, challenging the status quo -- above-the-knee skirts -- is a fresh expression in the art of dress.
The hemline that is dropping at an accelerated rate is a straw in the wind of skirt lengths to come.


Streetscapes: The Bronx Zoo; Animal House Landmarks?
IF you're not expecting them, the Bronx Zoo has some of New York's funniest buildings -- neo-Classical temples festooned with heads of elephants, hippos, monkeys and other wildlife.
But the New York Zoological Society is not laughing as it fights the proposed landmark designation of 10 of its turn-of-the-century buildings.
It contends that preservation restrictions threaten the safety of its animals because of the society's need to move quickly when making changes.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Rerot; Not Ready to Quit Just Yet


Stein Raises Stakes For Mayoral Race
The word last week that City Council President Andrew J. Stein had spent $32,000 just for flowers at his fancy winter fund-raiser with Frank Sinatra prompted a bigger question about next year's New York City mayoral race: Just how much will it cost to run?
The short answer is a lot, with Mr.
Stein setting the pace, and he is raising the stakes in more ways than one.


Money of the Future May Look Like Cards
SINCE the first coins were struck in Lydia more than 3,000 years ago, the principle has remained the same: Find some metal, set it on something hard, cover it with something hard that holds a design, strike forcefully.
The designs may be complex and cover both sides of the coin; the something hard is no longer struck but is itself the striker.
But coins from Lydia and from Philadelphia are remarkably similar.
Paper money, too, has not changed much from early Chinese examples through American colonial currency to today's $20 bill.
True, some countries use elaborately colored designs to foil counterfeiters, and microprinted threads are now used in the paper of larger United States denominations, but the printing process is so similar in all that they are basically the same as the earliest notes.


Surveying the Myriad Meanings of Simplicity
Simplicity and Complexity in Games of the Intellect" is the enigmatic title of a new book by Lawrence B. Slobodkin, a Stony Brook biologist, recently published by Harvard University Press. The book jacket features a photograph of a strange and fanciful sculpture in plywood and mylar, "All Terrain Fish," by William Wainwright. It is a vehicle-like art work grounded on three wheels, yet the body is arched upward and its wings are extended, as if poised for imminent takeoff.
Is this a new puzzle book designed to entangle the unwary, though intrepid, reader?
Or is it about yearning-to-fly fantasy art?


Sara Erickson, Stephen Kuehn
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Erickson of Belmont, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Sara Jane Erickson, to Dr.
Stephen Edward Kuehn, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul G. Kuehn of South Windsor, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Dr.
Erickson, 30 years old, graduated from Smith College and received her M.D. from Tufts University.
She is a lecturer in internal medicine and pediatrics at the University of Michigan Hospitals in Ann Arbor, Mich., where her fiance is a lecturer in gastroenterology.
Her father is a retired television engineer in Boston.
Her mother, Jean Erickson, is the administrative director at the Powers Music School in Belmont.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League


Anne Coyle, Ralph Gill
Anne Maureen Coyle, a daughter of Lawrence and Mary Joan Coyle of East Haven, Conn., and Ralph S. Gill, a son of Drs.
Ajit and M. Pal Gill of Willowdale, Ontario, plan to marry in November 1993.
Ms.
Coyle, 29 years old, is a consultant in city and regional planning in Ithaca, N.Y.
She graduated from Harvard University, from which she received a master's degree in public administration.
Her father, who is retired, was a tool-design engineer at Pratt &amp; Whitney Aircraft in North Haven, Conn.
Her mother is a nursing-care coordinator at the Hospital of St.
Raphael in New Haven.


Inkster Pads Lead but Won't Rest Easy
The JAL Big Apple Classic is Juli Inkster's to lose.
She is running away from the field at Wykagyl Country Club, taking an eight-shot lead into the final round of the $500,000 tournament.
"As far as I'm concerned, no lead is too big in golf," Inkster said after shooting a two-under-par 69 today to add one shot to the seven-shot lead she took on Friday when she came up with a sizzling 64.
But despite her words of caution, she seems unbeatable.


Wall Street; Initial Public Offerings Are Selling -- but for What?
Investors are still stepping up to buy initial public offerings.
Last month $2.4 billion in such offerings were sold, up from $981 million a year earlier.
And in the first half of July an additional $931 million was raised.
But even with such big numbers, the word on Wall Street is that it is a horrible market.
The problem is that buyers -- particularly the big mutual fund companies that have the most available cash these days -- have been pushing prices lower.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Miller's Crossing: A Rival Leaps Out of the Shadows
Shannon Miller looks enough like Kim Zmeskal to be her sister: both are 4 feet 7 inches, under 80 pounds, fair in complexion, well-muscled and well-disciplined for the rigors ahead.
Miller, who at 15 is a year younger than her archrival, trains in her hometown, Edmond, Okla., under Steve Nunno, who first noticed her as a 9-year-old during a training tour in Moscow.
He was impressed with her fortitude and obsession to compete.
Recently, Miller's competitive desire has been tested by injury and honed by her developing rivalry with Zmeskal.


INSIDE
New Leader for British Labor
In a triumph for its old guard, Britain's Labor Party elected a Scottish lawyer to succeed Neil Kinnock and try to woo back the voters.
Page 3.
Mollie Parnis Is Dead
The fashion designer, whose Manhattan living room was a salon to actors and writers, was in her 90's.
Page 36.
Iraq Resists U.N.
Pressure
After hours of largely futile talks, a United Nations official said he would stay in Baghdad to press Iraq to admit arms inspectors.
Page 12.


Seeing Red
WHEN TWO TRENDS collide, the effect can be incendiary.
That may well be the case this fall, when the craze for red and the craving for leather meet.
The resulting styles are classic in shape, but their bright coloring and smooth, luxurious texture make them sizzle.
Suddenly a pair of jean-tight leather pants or a slithery chemise dress looks much fresher when colored like a tomato.
The trend toward tinting leather a tantalizing shade of red started -- as many fashion notions do -- in Paris.
At the fall collections in March, the fire-engine-red leather styles at Chanel and the sharply tailored, rosy-red leather jackets by Claude Montana were impossible to overlook -- and seemed infinitely desirable.


NO BEDFELLOWS
Susan G. Hauser's Hers column "No Bedfellows" (May 31) was a delight.
William A. Baker responded in the June 21 Letters column that men in their 40's who make money are winners who go on to marry "younger and prettier" women.
He also contends that feminism has confused women because it acknowledges that our worth as human beings is not founded on an arbitary standard of beauty or on our relationship to a man.


MAJOR SHIFT LIKELY AS LAW BANS BIAS TOWARD DISABLED
A law to ban job discrimination against disabled people takes effect in a week and is widely expected to force changes in employment practices as far-reaching as those that followed the laws that opened jobs to women and blacks.
As half a million businesses -- all those with 25 employees or more -- prepare to comply with the law, organizations representing people with disabilities are calling it their own emancipation proclamation.
The law, the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, challenges the myths, attitudes and working conditions that its bipartisan authors blame for keeping many disabled adults housebound and impoverished.
Applying to Many Businesses
The provisions that take effect July 26 are intended to outlaw discrimination against the 14 million working-age Americans with physical or mental impairments.
In two years, the provisions will be extended to three-quarters of a million other businesses with 15 to 25 workers.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 23 about Baden, Austria, referred incorrectly to the Kurhotel Herzghof.
A reader's letter dated June 16 points out that its spa was discontinued some years ago.


Dita Moore, Thomas Carhart
Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Moore 3d of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Edith Bradley Moore to Thomas Carhart, a son of Dixie Caulkins of Hobe Sound, Fla., and the late H. Whitfield Carhart.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Moore, 24 years old and known as Dita, graduated from New York University and is studying for a master's degree in art history at Columbia University.
Her father is a partner at Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company, an investment banking firm in New York, where the prospective bridegroom is a senior manager.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Metuchen 185,000
38 Bounty Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, over-50-year-old colonial; newly painted exterior, deck, close to transportation; taxes $2,572.
Mountain Lakes 625,000
203 Laurel Road
6-bedroom, 4-bath, 35-year-old ranch; pool, cabana with half bath and wet bar; taxes $11,794.
Old Bridge 127,000
115 Diamond Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old patio home; fireplace, full basement, skylights; taxes $3,759.
Parsippany 141,500
67 Glouster Avenue
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; h/w floors, c/a, deck and patio, alarm system; taxes $3,000.
Ringwood 146,000
474 Conklintown Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; level property, large rooms, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,980.
Wyckoff 425,500
292 Merrywood Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old center hall colonial, on cul-de-sac, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,351.
OTHER AREAS New Canaan, Conn. 860,000
439 Lost District Drive  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; pool with natural rock waterfall, three terraces, 4.1 acres; taxes $8,234.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 332,000
77 High Ridge Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, 2 acres; taxes $8,921.
Jericho, L.I. 370,000
138 Golf View Drive  2-bedroom, 2-bath, condominium town house, dining room, tennis courts; taxes $8,000, monthly common charges $400.


Impossible Dreams
Two roars, one of enthusiasm and one of pain, shook the political rafters last week.
They revived one of the most deeply rooted images of American culture -- the underdog who persists against vast odds, the Minute Man vs. the Redcoats, the dreamer who achieves the impossible dream.
The two roars gave Americans a lesson in political character.


Democrats' Spending Gets Mixed Reviews
Aside from getting mugged, Ron Squires's experience in New York City last week was a lot like that of many other delegates to the Democratic National Convention.
He didn't spend much money -- no theater, shopping or five-course meals -- but he had a swell time anyway and he doesn't mind talking about it.
And therein may lie the story of the true economic effect of a four-day national spectacle to which the city has hitched enormous psychological, promotional and dollars-and-cents hope.


C.I.A. Had Warned Bush Over Iraqi Farm Loans
The Central Intelligence Agency and other intelligence organizations warned President Bush and his aides early in November 1989 that failure to approve a pending $1 billion agricultural loan guarantee program to Iraq would create further tensions in American-Iraqi relations, according to a classified intelligence document and Administration officials.
The brief warning, included in a secret report known as a National Intelligence Estimate, also noted "possible illegal transactions" involving the United States Government loan program through the Atlanta branch of the Italian-owned Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, said Administration officials familiar with the report.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Yachting
HOW IT'S DONE: Unlike Summer Games of the past, where yachting competitors were relegated to seaport outposts far from the center of Olympic action, the 1992 sailing teams will race in Mediterranean waters adjacent to Barcelona's Olympic Village.
There are 10 yachting events, with 17 sailors per team, beginning on July 27.
Competitors will sail one-design boats, so-called because they are identical in shape, size and weight.
They include the Soling, a 27-foot keel boat; the Star, a 22-foot keel boat; the Tornado, a 20-foot catamaran; the Lechner II, a 12-foot sailboard; and four classes of dinghies with centerboards -- the 19-foot Flying Dutchman, the 14-foot Finn, the 15-foot International 470, and the 11-foot Europe.


Hopefuls, Yearning for Home Run, Usually Strike Out:


CAREY TAKES THE WHEEL
In advancing the claim that "Democrats in Congress no longer routinely support the labor agenda," Peter T. Kilborn is falling prey to the common illusion that there was once a time when organized labor regularly got its way in national politics ("Carey Takes the Wheel," June 21).
In fact, in the decades following the New Deal unions were much more likely to encounter massive defections by Democrats than routine deference.
In the late 1940's, for instance, huge numbers of Southern Democratic Congressman voted with Republicans to pass the Taft-Hartley Act.
Since that time, the same conservative coalition has obstructed any pro-union reform in the nation's labor laws and frequently has thwarted union demands in such areas as health care, urban development, taxes, housing and job training.


Gangs Abiding By Cease-Fire In Los Angeles
To the astonishment of the police, a cease-fire among the black gangs of Los Angeles appears to be holding, nearly three months after it began at the time of the riots.
Rival Crips and Bloods have been partying together and calling each other "cuz." And although some drive-by shootings have recently been reported, nervous residents say there is a new quality to nights in the inner city, with fewer sounds of gunfire and police sirens.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Baseball
HOW IT'S DONE: The Olympic baseball tournament is an eight-team competition, with every team playing one game against all others, with the top team after seven games playing the fourth-best and No. 2 meeting No. 3 in the semifinals.
The two winners will play for the gold medal and the two losers for the bronze.


Roberto Benigni Readies More Laughs for Export
In the foothills of Provence, smoke curls through nocturnal pines.
A van packed with high explosives begins a terminal roll over a cliff.
There are kidnappers, cables, lights, cameras, fake bombs and real urns of tea and coffee.
Obviously, a film crew is at work.
The movie, "Son of Pink Panther," to be released next year, is Blake Edwards's 50th and the eighth in the "Pink Panther" series, the comic detective tales made famous by Peter Sellers as the manic-obsessive Inspector Clouseau.


Away From the Spotlight
A newly married couple went out for dinner.


Buyer Closing In on Deal to Get Astros
DRAYTON McLANE Jr. said that he expected to conclude negotiations next week to buy the Houston Astros from JOHN McMULLEN.
McLane, who owns a food distributorship in Temple, Tex., has reportedly offered McMullen more than $100 million for the Astros and other assets, including the Houston Sports Association's lease on the Astrodome and some of the association's hotels. (AP)


2 County Music Schools Win National Grants
SAYING that community schools of the arts are playing an increasingly important role in American education, the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund has named two music schools in the county and seven others nationwide as recipients of its first Community Arts Education Initiative grants.
Hoff-Barthelson Music School in Scarsdale and the Westchester Conservatory of Music in White Plains will each receive $300,000 over three years to use for scholarship and faculty development programs.
The schools must also match these amounts in contributions.


Restlessness Reaches Mongols In China
RELATIONS between the Chinese and the Mongols have been a bit strained ever since Genghis Khan slaughtered millions of Chinese in the 13th century.
By one account, the Mongols considered converting all of northern China into a vast pasture; they relented when an adviser pointed out that the Chinese, if spared, could be taxed.
The tradition of mutual distrust is again bubbling to the surface in Chinese-controlled Inner Mongolia, a desert region more than twice the size of California.
More and more Mongols there are reasserting their ethnic heritage, establishing links with the outside world, and even organizing underground networks to press for democracy and autonomy.


'Bag of Toys'
To the Editor:
As a lawyer with 20 years of experience in New York City, and as Andrew Crispo's attorney and friend, I was -- sadly -- not shocked when Warner Books published David France's "Bag of Toys" and launched a major public relations campaign to boost sales.
But I was not expecting to see a review of such a book in The Times (June 21).


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Modern Pentathlon
HOW IT'S DONE: Replicating the plight of an ancient soldier on a mission, the modern pentathlon combines five events, which earn points for the athletes toward individual medals and determine team medals.
Spread over four days, the competition features 66 athletes engaged in a round-robin fencing tournament, a 300-meter swim, a shooting event with a .22 caliber semi-automatic pistol for 20 seconds, a 4,000-meter run and an equestrian event over a 600-meter course that includes 15 jumps.


In Germany, Too, an Effort to Mobilize Political Outsiders
ONE night last week, 79-year-old Stefan Heym, one of the most prominent writers in the former East Germany and a co-founder of a group that seeks to give easterners a stronger political voice, was enjoying dinner at a hotel in Cologne.
Suddenly a young man appeared and began haranguing him.
He shouted that the newly formed Committee for Fairness was a "gang of criminals" who had served the former Communist dictatorship and were now plotting a return to power.
Before help could be summoned, the man punched Mr.
Heym in the face, inflicting cuts that required hospital treatment, and then fled.
Formation of the Committee for Fairness was announced last weekend by a group of politicians, writers, artists, clergymen and professors who say the western-dominated Federal Government has been inattentive to the needs of easterners as they try to merge with the west's economy and political system.
Not all reaction to the Committee for Fairness has been violent, but many politicians deplore the idea of a regional political force emerging in eastern Germany, particularly one that embraces some former Communists.
They fear it could become a platform for demagoguery, dividing the country at a time when it is striving toward unity.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
RETELLING A LIFE Narration and Dialogue in Psychoanalysis.
By Roy Schafer.
Basic Books, $30.


JULY 12-18: Appeal Planned; Nurse Who Contracted HIV Wins $5.4 Million Judgment
There is no dispute that an agitated prisoner with AIDS started thrashing at a medical team one morning in August 1988 at a Utica, N.Y., hospital, a frenzy that led to one nurse's being jabbed with a hypodermic needle containing his blood.
The nurse contracted the HIV virus, and last week a Binghamton, N.Y., judge awarded her $5.4 million, including the largest pain-and-suffering verdict ever against New York State.


Threat of Zebra Mussels Puts Reservoirs on Alert
WORRIED that zebra mussels might infiltrate the Croton reservoir system, New York City officials have opened a steam-cleaning operation in Cross River to cleanse boats that come from other waters to reservoirs in Westchester and Putnam Counties.
The steam cleaning is free, requiring only a reservation.
So far, though, only one boat has been steam cleaned -- and that was involuntary, according to John Duffy, chief inspector for the reservoir system.


Catherine Bahlke, Robert Hornstein
Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Bahlke of Clinton, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Catherine Worth Bahlke to Robert Eric Hornstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard B. Hornstein of New York.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bahlke, 28 years old, is a public relations officer for the Girl Scout Council of Greater New York.
She graduated from Oberlin College.
Her father is a professor of English at Hamilton College in Clinton.
Her mother, Valerie Worth Bahlke, is an author of children's books.


The Prime of Tipper Gore
THE times seem to have caught up with Tipper Gore, wife of the the Democratic candidate for Vice President.
A vision of blondness, she gathered her four beaming children and her broad-shouldered husband for a family tableau on the convention podium last Thursday night and laid claim to being an updated version of the traditional political wife.
Mrs.
Gore and her friends are trying to undo the cartoonish image of her as the prissy, humorless Carry Nation of rock-and-roll.
She's really funky and soft-hearted, they say.
Her assistant faxed a newspaper article that described her as a woman "whose passion for homeless, poor and mentally ill children carries a world of weight."


Cold Pasta: Absolved and Redeemed
THE APPEAL OF COOL pasta on a warm day runs deeper than the obvious.
In addition to being an edible moment in the shade, pasta salad is a perfect medium for the mood of summer cooking; it can be made ahead and trotted out in times of surging hunger.
The neutral noodle will take about anything a garden has to offer, absorbing flavors and changing like a tomato in the sun.
The downside, of course, is the not-too-distant history of the farinaceous melange.
Sometime before "spaghetti" became "pasta," the cold-pasta genre consisted of macaroni and mayonnaise, a mainstay of bad picnics and last-chance deli counters.
Recipes for more sophisticated salads evolved slowly.
Fusilli, farfalle and rotelle replaced the innocent elbows of macaroni.
Garlic and herbs appeared in the mayonnaise, and the mayonnaise itself became vinaigrette.
Then sun-dried tomatoes, pesto, black-olive puree, roasted peppers and garlic entered the picture.
Pasta salad has once again become cool -- in ways that far exceed its proper serving temperature.
Not long ago, no self-respecting summer menu would be caught without an inspired cold pasta dish.
And then they disappeared.
It was as if "The Futurist Cookbook," by F. T. Marinetti, had become required reading.
In the book, the early 20th-century social thinker blames a dependency on pasta for the lack of modernity in Italian culture.
When his countrymen tuck into pasta, "they develop that typical ironic and sentimental skepticism which can often cut short their enthusiasm," he wrote.


Past and Present Clash as Bedford Fights a Historic Traffic Light
The village green here, ringed with enough post-Revolutionary buildings to make the district a National Historic Site, stands at a crossroads -- three of them, in fact.
Court Road, Pound Ridge Road and Seminary Road are the boundaries of the triangular green.
In earlier times wagons traveled over them into town.
But today they are filled with station wagons full of commuters buzzing between homes and corporate offices in Westchester County and Connecticut.
An average of 2,000 cars travel the roads at peak hours, and about 10 serious accidents occur each year as drivers funneling off Interstate 684 two miles away are rapidly turning the Bedford Green into northern Westchester County's newest traffic hub.


JULY 12-18: Mapping Venus; Scientists Decide Magellan Should Get a Rest
Just as scientists were trying to persuade NASA to spare the life of the Venus-orbiting Magellan spacecraft, its only surviving radio transmitter began coughing and sputtering.
The noise often drowned out signals bearing the radar images for mapping the cloud-shrouded planet.


The Disappearing -ed
'Your column is a pack of damn lies," writes a concerned reader, referring to work I do in a political mode. That comment troubled me; should it be
damn
lies or
damned
lies?
If meaning is to determine spelling, the
-ed
is necessary;
damned
is the past participle of the verb
to damn
, and is used by my irate reader as an adherent adjective -- that is, it is a modifier stuck on before its noun.
That is why Benjamin Disraeli quoted Mark Twain as saying, "There are three kinds of lies: lies,
damned
lies and statistics."


U.S. DOCTORS SEEN AS BALKING AT AIDS
Young American doctors are much more reluctant to care for AIDS patients than comparable groups of doctors in Canada and France, the first such international study shows.
In the study of more than 2,600 doctors in the three countries, American doctors said that AIDS patients were denied care by surgeons and other specialists more often than by surgeons and specialists in Canada and France.


U.S. IS SURE PHOTO OF MISSING IS FAKE
A year after the release here of a puzzling photograph from Cambodia purporting to show three Vietnam-era American servicemen still in captivity in Indochina, Defense Department officials say they are convinced that it was in fact a reproduction of a 1923 photo of three Soviet farmers published in the December 1989 Khmer-language issue of a magazine called Soviet Union.
A copy of the magazine arrived at the Pentagon on Monday from the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh, where it was found in the National Library.
It was released by the Pentagon on Tuesday after being shown to relatives of the three men.
Family members were convinced last year that the photograph was real.


Noble Intentions
To the Editor:
The pecking order of the peerage is hardly one of the "backwaters of British snobbery," as Peter Watson claims.
It's the wellspring of the whole swamp.
The system may be "ridiculously intricate," but the peerage, at least, is not so bad as Mr.
Watson seeks to make it.
According to him, "a marquess ranks immediately behind a duke and ahead of a count." In fact, count is not and never has been a British noble rank.


At Work; Data on Disabilities, True and False
Among the early pages of a new study on the impact of the Americans With Disabilities Act is a chart listing 10 dearly held attitudes about people with disabilities and their ability to work.
Among them:
* Employees with disabilities cannot succeed in the competitive job market.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; The Highest Season for One Summer
She is named Summer, even though she was born in October.
She competes with a happy face drawn in ballpoint pen on the top of her left foot and a plastic power ring on her left hand.
Summer Sanders is the sort of alliterative invention that some writer might have imagined to teach young girls that they, too, can compete in the Olympic Games.
She is graceful, outgoing, optimistic.
The 19-year-old swimmer from Rosemont, Calif., is also the most versatile athlete on the United States Olympic swimming team.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Economy; Old Economic Ideas or Bold New Plan? Bush Team Is Divided.
With the economy the biggest threat to President Bush's re-election and little that he can do to give it a jolt, the White House plans to make a big push on an updated version of its growth package, even as the President's advisers continue to debate whether bold new proposals are also needed.
The package, which could be presented as early as next week will rely principally on the main elements of the economic plan the President outlined in January, the officials say, including tax credits for first-time home buyers, a tax allowance for investments, new types of individual retirement accounts and a renewed drive to lower the tax rate on capital gains.


Blurred Vision


On Painting Trim Properly
MANY painting projects have been spoiled by poorly painted trim.
Unlike painting walls and similar broad surfaces, painting trim requires skill with a brush and an overall strategy to avoid smudging adjacent areas, creating unsightly brush marks and getting paint on hardware or glass.
Masking the surfaces to be protected is sometimes an answer, but applying masking tape adds time to large projects and can pull paint from finished surfaces when the tape is removed.


200 Years Later, the Xhosa Fight On
FRONTIERS
The Epic of South Africa's Creation and the Tragedy of the Xhosa People.
By Noel Mostert.
Illustrated. 1,355 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $35.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Track and Field
HOW IT'S DONE: Citius.
Altius.
Fortius.
The words of the Olympic credo, translated from the Latin to "Faster, Higher, Stronger," apply most appropriately to track and field, or athletics, as the sport is known in most of the world.
This is competition in its purest, simplest form.
Whoever runs faster, vaults or jumps higher and throws farther wins.
There are no panels of judges, no subjective scores, no debates.


Courtney Flood, Peter E. Bennett
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen B. Flood of Chappaqua, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Courtney Heatherton Flood to Peter Eugene Bennett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard J. Bennett of Wayzata, Minn.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Flood, 24 years old, graduated from Kenyon College.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in health education at Columbia University.
Her father is a retired senior partner of the New York law firm of Wilkie, Farr &amp; Gallagher.
Her mother, Cynthia Flood, is an artist in Chappaqua.


Making the Veggies More Appealing
IT'S hard to get some people to eat enough vegetables, no matter what the health guidelines are.
A plate of steamed spinach is, after all, a plate of steamed spinach.
But different kinds of vegetables cooked together and seasoned in interesting ways appeal to even the most diehard of meat eaters.
Baking vegetables concentrates their flavor in a way that steaming does not.
Potatoes, beets, carrots, artichokes, broccoli and mushrooms -- whatever looks good from the garden or in the market -- can be seasoned with herbs, wrapped in foil and baked in the oven.
This method works very well for a dinner party, when a variety of vegetables can be used and arranged attractively on a serving platter.


Toward Deeper Debates Of the Public Agenda
IMAGINE this: A hand-picked panel of voters spends hours on national prime-time television grilling Presidential candidates, who sweat nervously through what amounts to a public inquisition.
Then the panel retires to deliberate, and later emerges with its judgment on the candidates.
A "National Issues Convention" is what James S. Fishkin calls it.
Mr.
Fishkin, chairman of the government department at the University of Texas at Austin, thought up the idea, which he describes as having only the word "convention" in common with modern political party gatherings.


Jennifer C. Gay, Keith DeAngelis
Jennifer Campbell Gay, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Gay Jr. of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., was married there yesterday to Keith Christopher DeAngelis, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
John DeAngelis of Huntington, L.I.
The Rev.
T.
Carlton Lee performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
DeAngelis, 25 years old, graduated from Denison University and received a master's degree in education from Fordham University.
She is an elementary teacher at the John Paterson School in Newington, Conn.
Her father, who is retired, was a partner in Mercator Partners, a New York stock-specialist firm.


JULY 12-18: Europeans Worry; As Yugoslavia Breaks Up, Millions of Refugees Seek Haven From War
Much of Europe's concern and involvement with the war raging in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been based on the thought that unless rules of civilized conduct can be imposed on the nationalistically crazed, dangers can spread.
The latest United Nations-brokered truce is supposed to go into effect today, but diplomats have expressed only the most tentative hope that the fighting might stop.
And now, with the war setting off the greatest mass movement of refugees and displaced people in Europe since World War II, many European countries question what rules should apply to them regarding hospitality to the dispossessed.


For Poison Ivy, Call Your Doctor
To the Editor:
Jane E. Brody, in her June 24 column on poison ivy, advises sufferers to call a dermatologist.
Poison ivy is most suitable for treatment by primary-care physicians, general internists and family practitioners.
Prescriptions for adrenalcorticosteroids make suffering patients get better faster, long before a dermatologist would have time to see them.


New &amp; Noteworthy
A VERY THIN LINE: The Iran-Contra Affairs, by Theodore Draper. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $16.) Mr.
Draper's concern is that very fine line that separates legitimate from illegitimate use of our Government's power.
The Iran-contra affairs, he concludes, were the most startling contemporary example of the latter.
Last year our reviewer, Tom Wicker, found this book "meticulous and disturbing," "the most exhaustive examination" of the Iran-contra events.
WARTIME LIES, by Louis Begley. (Ivy, $4.99.) Only the most elaborate kinds of deceit could rescue Maciek, this novel's Polish Jewish narrator, from the horrors of the Holocaust.
A middle-aged man when the story begins, he relates his boyhood flight from the Nazis, which he made in the company of his Aunt Tania, a high-spirited young woman.
Her quick wits and imaginative acting helped save their lives, but not Maciek's faith and innocence.
This is a "masterly first novel," Judith Grossman said here last year.
"It seems no less than justice that Maciek and Tania should be given their honorable place . . . in fiction, where lies may be reconciled with truth."


A Welcome To New York
For a young British editor who is headed for Vogue.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: Television; NBC's Games Show: Live Connection and Cable Jeopardy
When vying for the television rights to the Barcelona Olympics nearly four years ago, Arthur Watson, then the president of NBC Sports, feigned indifference by talking about how NBC had lost money on its broadcast of the Seoul Games a few months before, then swooped in with a winning $401 million offer.
Asked about the tactic, Watson said: "Not a bad strategy, eh, coach?"
Now the wisdom of Watson's action is finally going to be tested.


For the Buyer, a Customized Risk Report
IT is the first night in your new home.
You've assured yourself that the walls are as watertight as they can be, that the boiler works, the electrical supply is adequate and the appliances still have a few good years in them.
Your head hits the pillow.
At that moment, an after-hours club across the street, which had appeared to be a shuttered storefront, bursts into rowdy life.


Budget Crisis Forces California Colleges to Bar the Doors
Like millions of others of his generation, Jorge Garcia took the well-trod road to success in California, parlaying a nearly free public-college education into a good job.
Now he must tell those who would follow that the road is closing in front of them.
He grew up in the 60's, the golden days of California's ascendancy.
That was when Mr.
Garcia, a farm worker's son in the San Joaquin Valley, could pick peaches for 50 hours to earn the $50 needed to enroll at Fresno State College, and then obtain a bargain doctorate at the University of California.
Today he is dean of humanities here at California State University, Northridge, where he has had to cut nearly a third of his teaching faculty and tell angry students that many classes will not be available this fall.


Update; Cleaning Up New York Parks And Paying for the Privilege
At least a thousand rusting hulks of abandoned cars used to despoil New York City's parklands each year, forcing the Parks and Recreation Department to operate its own unwanted and unprofitable tow-truck operation.
Sometimes, particularly in the case of Highbridge Park in upper Manhattan, the department had to bring in a huge crane-like device -- officially called an articulating knuckle-boom loader -- to hoist wrecks that had been dumped over a steep cliff.


CRIME
It takes a special talent to write sympathetically about someone who rapes and kills a 6-year-old child.
John Harvey, a British poet and novelist who only recently turned to crime fiction, manages this literary feat in OFF MINOR (Holt, $18.95), the fourth in his superb series of police procedurals set in the grubby industrial city of Nottingham.
When the body of little Gloria Summers, who has been missing for two months, is found amid the rubble of an abandoned railroad yard, people attribute the crime to some depraved monster.
But Inspector Charlie Resnick, an uncommonly perceptive detective who lives with four cats named after great jazz musicians, understands that "there was a place in most people's lives where they were capable of every evil thing." So, when another schoolgirl disappears, he and his officers do not overlook the capacity for evil within this child's own troubled family.


Marion Love, William Couzens
Marion Perkins Love, a daughter of Howard M. and Jane V. Love of Pittsburgh, is engaged to William Ulrich Couzens, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Couzens Jr. of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Love, 35 years old, is a government affairs representative in Washington for the National Steel Corporation.
She graduated from Colgate University.
Her father, who is retired, was a chairman and chief executive of National Intergroup, a Pittsburgh steel maker and pharmaceuticals distributor.
She is a granddaughter of Mrs.
George A. Vaughn of New York, whose late husband was a World War I flying ace and a founder of the College of Aeronautics in Flushing, Queens.
She is also a granddaughter of the late George H. Love, a chairman of the Chrysler Corporation.


Sailing Off to Save Long Island Sound
POLLUTION was the catalyst when Sound Waters, a grass-roots movement dedicated to the restoration of Long Island Sound, was formed in 1989.
The 110-mile-long Sound is considered one of the nation's most environmentally endangered estuaries.
The 350-member nonprofit environmental group, started in Greenwich by Len Miller, set out to educate the public about the history, marine life and ecology of the Sound.


COULD THE RED WOLF BE A MUTT?
When a family group becomes isolated from its kind, two alternatives are available ("Could the Red Wolf Be a Mutt?" by Jan DeBlieu, June 14).
Interbreeding with another species is the option that seems to have resulted in the red wolf.
The alternative is incest -- less desirable from an evolutionary standpoint, as illustrated by the cheetahs.
If humans inadvertently created the red wolf, then we have a responsibility to allow this experiment of nature a chance to succeed.
If the red wolf is a mistake, we will soon learn it, as signs of sickness, instability and infertility will appear and successive generations will not breed "true."


THE MAN FROM TEXARKANA
Thank you for your intriguing article on Ross Perot.
Bottom line: Perot appears to be a man who has strived to be a perfect human being.
This is a goal not enough Americans even consider, because reality keeps getting in the way.


Elizabeth McCain, Alexander Mucelli
Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur W. McCain Jr. of Fairfield, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Dale McCain, to Alexander Louis Mucelli, the son of Dr.
Louis A. Mucelli of New York and Tonia J. Mucelli of Sarasota, Fla.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
McCain, 29 years old, is the human resources manager at the Loral Corporation, a defense electronics firm in New York.
She graduated from Hamilton College, as did her fiance.
Her father is a vice president of the Intersec Research Corporation, a consulting company in international investment diversification in Stamford, Conn.
Her paternal grandfather, the late Arthur W. McCain, was president and vice chairman of the Chase National Bank, now the Chase Manhattan Bank, in New York.


Time to End Embargo Against Vietnam
To the Editor:
The concern expressed in a full-page advertisement July 10 for Do Ngoc Long, a Vietnamese economist, and Doan Than Liem, a Vietnamese lawyer, arrested for contact with an American businessman, is well taken.
There appears no legal justification under widely accepted international standards for their lengthy detention and Mr.
Liem's conviction.


Take a Lesson, Armonk
To the Editor:
The July 5 articles on the International Business Machines Corporation and Michael Dell ("Pulling One's Weight at the new I.B.M." and "Michael Dell Says He's More Than Ready for a Good Fight") were striking contrasts.


Making the Veggies More Appealing
IT'S hard to get some people to eat enough vegetables, no matter what the health guidelines are.
A plate of steamed spinach is, after all, a plate of steamed spinach.
But different kinds of vegetables cooked together and seasoned in interesting ways appeal to even the most diehard of meat eaters.
Baking vegetables concentrates their flavor in a way that steaming does not.
Potatoes, beets, carrots, artichokes, broccoli and mushrooms -- whatever looks good from the garden or in the market -- can be seasoned with herbs, wrapped in foil and baked in the oven.
This method works very well for a dinner party, when a variety of vegetables can be used and arranged attractively on a serving platter.


Yankee Grads Make Good
To the Sports Editor:
What do Otis Nixon, Hal Morris and Fred McGriff have in common?
They are all ex-Yankee minor leaguers who are leading their National League teams in batting as of July 10.
For good measure, add Deion Sanders and Willie McGee who are in second place for the Braves and Giants, and three effective starting pitchers: Dough Drabek, Jose Rijo and Bob Tewksbury.
ROBERT SEIDENSTADT
Fort Lee, N.J.


No Place For a Woman?
To the Editor:
I recently visited the Guggenheim Museum to see what all the brouhaha was about and to check out the situation concerning women artists  [ "The Liberation of the Guggenheim," June 21 ] .
Upon entering, I had a sneaking suspicion about the answer.
There, in the middle of the rotunda, was Dan Flavin's installation: a huge phallic symbol of light penetrating the undulating, feminine forms for which the building is known.


Rocket Attack in Central Athens


BEST SELLERS: July 19, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman chained to a bedpost after her husband suffers a heart attack.
2
1
19
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
3
3
8
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
4
2
4
SCRUPLES TWO, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $22.) Continuing the story of the crowd that frequents an ultrachic Beverly Hills store. (LP)
5
4
7
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) An insane Jedi threatens Luke Skywalker in the second volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
6
6
5
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
7
5
10
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones. (LP)
8
2
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Random House, $21.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
9
7
9
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) On a mission to Africa, Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
10
10
5
DOUBLE DEUCE, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) Spenser joins his old friend Hawk to investigate murders in a Boston housing project.
11 *
9
117
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
12 *
8
13
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
13
1
EYE OF THE STORM, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) An American is hired by the British to thwart an Iraqi agent's attempt to kill Margaret Thatcher during the gulf war.
14 *
1
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $20.) A 90-year-old South Carolina woman recalls what she saw while becoming the doyenne of a Maine summer retreat.
15
13
6
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
2
2
8
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
3
3
5
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
4
4
SAM WALTON: MADE IN AMERICA, by Sam Walton with John Huey. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who became the richest American by creating the Wal-Mart store chain.
5
6
8
DIANA IN PRIVATE, by Lady Colin Campbell. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
6
8
3
A BRILLIANT MADNESS, by Patty Duke and Gloria Hochman. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress tells how she learned to live with manic-depressive illness.
7
7
11
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
8
5
7
PEROT, by Todd Mason. (Business One Irwin, $16.95.) An unauthorized biography of Ross Perot.
9
10
5
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $20.) Essays on the pleasures of living extravagantly during the high-flying 1980's.
10
1
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The address delivered on Nov. 19, 1863, and how it has affected American life.
11
14
11
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How powerful monied interests dominate the Government.
12 *
1
THE HAPPY ISLES OF OCEANIA, by Paul Theroux. (Putnam, $24.95.) An 18-month exploration of the South Pacific in a one-man kayak.
13
11
25
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
14
9
13
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.95.) Satirical essays.
15
13
9
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) The first 49 years of a pre-eminent First Lady.
16 *
1
DIANA: A PRINCESS AND HER TROUBLED MARRIAGE, by Nicholas Davies. (Birch Lane/ Carol, $21.95.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
22
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
4
33
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
3
2
5
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
1
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf by a legendary teacher.
5
3
13
THE JUICEMAN'S POWER OF JUICING, by Jay Kordich. (Morrow, $15.) A program for staying healthy and trim by consuming fresh fruit and vegetable juices.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE END OF EQUALITY, by Mickey Kaus. (Basic Books, $25.) Mr.
Kaus, an editor of The New Republic, argues boldly and radically that the present welfare system, corrupt and corrupting, should be eliminated and replaced by a guaranteed jobs program.
DESTINY'S JOURNEY, by Alfred Doblin.
Edited by Edgar Passler. (Paragon House, $24.95.) This important, nourishing memoir by the author of "Berlin Alexanderplatz" looks at human nature under stress and its recuperative powers in two major episodes: Doblin's flight from Germany to America and his return in 1945.
MEETING EVIL, by Thomas Berger. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) In Mr.
Berger's 18th novel, a good-enough man's life is taken over by a bad-as-possible man who suddenly shows up on the doorstep.
IMPOSSIBLE VACATION, by Spalding Gray. (Knopf, $22.) An exercise in the neurotic picaresque, this glum, hilarious first-person novel, with its self-absorbed protagonist, has the rambling, confessional feel of Mr.
Gray's customary performance pieces.
THE STOLEN HOUSE, by Bernard L. Herman. (University Press of Virginia, cloth, $35; paper, $16.95.) An account of an 1812 lawsuit leads to a historian's fascinating examination of economic life when most Americans were poor and the few rich knew no shame.
TROMBONE, by Craig Nova. (Grove Weidenfeld, $20.95.) Mr.
Nova's restrained, skillful novel exposes a young man who only wants life to be ordinary to the perils of trying to save his father, his friends and himself from an array of extraordinary menaces.
BASTARD OUT OF CAROLINA, by Dorothy Allison. (Dutton, $20.) This first novel, precise and terrible in the details of poverty and meanness, follows its title character to the age of 13, when a dreadful trauma persuades her that her life is finished.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Germany Defeats U.S. in Federation Cup


Rare Air And New Rules for Olympics
AS the 25th Summer Olympics since the event's rebirth in 1896, the Barcelona Games that open Saturday triumph a new era in global sports, one virtually bereft of the quaint philosophies that once defined the Games and set them apart from almost all other forms of athletic endeavor.
Somewhere between vanishing and vanished, the notions of purity, integrity and amateurism -- sport for sport's sake -- have been muted by a new universal.


Postema Cleared to Proceed With Suits
A judge ruled Friday that the suit by PAM POSTEMA against the National League, the Triple-A Alliance and the Baseball Office of Umpire Development can go to trial.
United States District Judge ROBERT PATTERSON dismissed one charge by Postema against the American League, ruling that she had waited too long to file her initial complaint against the league with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.


Burmese Opposition Gets Oslo Radio Service
Saying that its diplomatic ties are with the Burmese military Government but that its heart "definitely" lies with the Nobel laureate Aung San Suu Kyi, the Government of Norway has decided to allow a Burmese opposition radio program to be broadcast over its shortwave broadcasting service for an hour a day beginning next week.
The program will be broadcast into Myanmar, formerly Burma, in prime time.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: Demonstration Sports; ROLLER HOCKEY
HOW IT'S DONE: This game is one of Spain's most popular sports and the country chose it as a demonstration sport at these Games.
Although its roots are ice hockey, roller hockey is surprising played best by countries with virtually no ice any place but the freezer.
The game looks like ice hockey, but the playing area is smaller, about 120 feet long by 60 feet wide (compared with 200 by 85).
And instead of six on a side, there are five: a goalie, two forwards and two defensemen.
They skate, wearing roller skates, on wood or composition floors.
Hitting, per se, is not permitted.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Rhythmic Gymnastics
HOW IT'S DONE: This is a women's only sport, added to the Olympics in 1984.
Athletes compete by performing various routines with hoops, balls, clubs and ribbons.
All 50 entrants, no more than two a country, compete with each prop; then the top 12 advance to a final round from which the all-around medals are awarded.


Kathy Wang, Michael Hennessy
Kathy Zhi-Hong Wang, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Cheng Wang of Beijing, was married yesterday to Michael E. Hennessy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward L. Hennessy Jr. of Palm Beach, Fla.
Msgr.
John F. Corr officiated at Christ the King Church in New Vernon, N.J.
Mrs.
Wang-Hennessy, 35 years old, is a financial analyst at Allied-Signal Inc. in Morristown, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Houston.
Her father, who is retired, was a general in the Chinese Army.


Making Plans to Move the Redskins? Over Their Political Powers, 2 Mayors Say.
This is a football tale without the pigskin, but with just as many end runs, interferences, interceptions and fouls.
In a coed scrimmage for the 1990's, a governor and a billionaire pitted themselves against two female mayors to move the Washington Redskins from the nation's capital to Alexandria, Va.
To date, the men are ahead, but no one is taking bets that they will stay out front.


The Calls for an Industrial Policy Grow Louder
Industrial policy, the notion that government should help the industries and technologies of the future, is moving out of the doghouse and into the limelight.
The idea -- derided by some Reagan and Bush Administration officials as a violation of laissez-faire -- has picked up steam because many Americans yearn for Washington to do more to strengthen the economy.
It has also been fueled by concerns that more and more American industries are falling behind their Japanese counterparts.


Resolving Rights in A Co-op Succession
WHO has the right to inherit a co-op apartment after the owner dies?
The issue of residential succession rights is one that has bedeviled owners of rent-regulated apartments, tenants, New York State courts and housing agencies for years.
Now a case before the New York City Human Rights Commission puts the spotlight on the potentially prickly question of co-op occupancy and ownership rights and how they apply to heirs.


Republicans Choose Burnham to Oppose Dodd for the Senate
Connecticut Republicans set the stage today for what could be a bitter summer battle between two largely unknown Fairfield County politicians seeking their party's nomination to run against Christopher J. Dodd, a Democrat, in the race for United States Senate in November.
But some party members said that sparks raised by the fight, between Christopher B. Burnham of Stamford and Brook Johnson of Greenwich, could also be the only hope of raising name recognition of either man to put him within striking distance of Mr.
Dodd, a popular Senator seeking a third term.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Scene; Designing the Sites With a City's Best Interests at Heart
WHEN Barcelona was picked six years ago to host the 1992 Summer Olympics, it was above all a tribute to Spain's transition from dictatorship to democracy.
Indeed, what better reward than to assign this country an Olympiad on the quincentenary of its discovery of the Americas?
Now, days before the Games, the logic of holding the event in Barcelona has come into sharper focus.
Probably no other city in Spain could handle such a challenge.
Certainly, no other city in Spain was so eager to turn itself upside down in order to show a bright new face to the world.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Judo
HOW IT'S DONE: For the first time since it was only added to the permanent Olympic program in 1972, judo will offer women the opportunity to compete in seven full medal events.


Are American Jails Becoming Shelters From the Storm?
WITH a doubling of the prison population in the last decade, America has quietly created a new class of prisoners, paradoxically providing them with services that might have helped to prevent them from turning to crime.
"We are building for ourselves a society of prisoners, and it will come back to haunt us," said Dennis E. Curtis, professor of law at the University of Southern California, who has worked with prisoners for 20 years.


Reining In Tina Brown
Tina Brown, the new editor in chief of The New Yorker, apparently is not being given carte blanche to remake the venerable magazine.
Ms.
Brown, the former editor in chief of Vanity Fair, has been talking to Dominick Dunne, one of Vanity Fair's most prolific contributors, about moving with her to The New Yorker.
Although Mr.
Dunne has expressed strong interest in the move, S. I. Newhouse Jr., who owns both publications, has so far been unwilling to let him out of his contract, two writers at Vanity Fair say.


Special Today: A Guide to the Olympics
The XXV Olympic Games begin Saturday in Barcelona, Spain.
Today The Times provides a detailed rundown of the favorites, the festivities and the finances.


Kristin N. Armour and Eric Wenslau
Kristin Noelle Armour, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank L. Armour of Short Hills, N.J., was married there yesterday to Eric Henry Wenslau, a son of William Wenslau and Marie Wenslau, both of Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
Mark Pendleton performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Wenslau, 24 years old, is a corporate finance analyst at the New York office of the National Westminister Bank.
She graduated from the University of Richmond.
Her father is the general counsel of the Newark Housing Authority.
Her grandfather the late Frank Armour Jr. was president of the H. J. Heinz Company in Pittsburgh.


Relatively Unhappy


Sophisticated Doping Begets More Testing
Despite all the glorious images of the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, it is a haunting image that remains most deeply burned in memory: Ben Johnson, the Canadian sprinter, testing positive for an anabolic steroid two days after he set a world record in winning the 100-meter final.
The episode led to a clarion call to authorities throughout the world, alerting them to the continued use of performance-enhancing drugs in sports.
As a result, many countries and federations expanded their programs to include what many experts cited as the key to driving cheaters out of the arena: short-notice, out-of-competition testing.


Blunt Reminders That It's Not Over Until Nov. 3
NORMALCY seemed to reassert itself last week in one of the quirkiest election seasons in memory.
Ross Perot abruptly ended his independent campaign for the Presidency, taking with him such wild possibilities as an election thrown to the House of Representatives.
Gov.
Bill Clinton was formally presented with the Democratic nomination, with all the confetti, hoopla and partisan glee of the last 40 Democratic conventions.
Republicans returned to traditional lines of attack, with cries of "tax and spend" and "liberal."


Hidden Stars Emerge From Soviet Eclipse
THE Olympiad success of the former Soviet Republics that have become independent nations is not difficult to explain.
That six -- Russia, Uzbekistan, Armenia, Latvia, Georgia and Ukraine -- made it into the top 10 places among the 102 nations competing in Manila from June 7 to 25 made it plain what a surfeit of talent lay buried in the old Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union did not -- perhaps could not -- send all of its grandmaster potential abroad to win their spurs because the very top players had first call on invitations.
Moreover, Western tournament organizers would request a Kasparov, a Karpov, a Spassky, a Petrosian and so on.
They were bound to neglect the unproven ones.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Financing; Deductible Dollars Flowed Like Wine
They came in full force last week, seizing the decks of the U.S.S.
Intrepid and taking over the Temple of Dendur at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, sometimes shuttling around New York in the stretch limousines that they had brought up from Washington.
Unleashed in a way that made the last tax bill look more like a Tupperware party, Washington's biggest and most powerful lobbyists and corporate interests took their craft to new heights, holding receptions for Democratic lawmakers from one end of Manhattan to the other.
And lawyers say that much of it will be paid for by taxpayers because the companies that sponsored the events will be able to write off the events as "ordinary and necessary" business expenses.


Wit, Flair and Very Tall Lilies
THE story goes that on the opening night of "The Importance of Being Earnest," an observer asked Oscar Wilde whether the play would be a success.
The playwright's answer: "My dear fellow, you have got it wrong. The play
is
a success. The only question is whether the first night's audience will be one."
There's no reason to quibble, 97 years later, with the way Wilde got to the real point, or with a critic's subsequent pronouncement of "Earnest" as "the wittiest light comedy in the language."


Relief Workers to Enter Mozambican Rebel Areas
At long-running negotiations in Rome, Government and rebel forces in Mozambique have reached their first known agreement to permit international relief workers to enter rebel-held areas, where the full effect of famine and a region-wide drought have yet to be assessed.
United Nations officials said the agreement meant that relief workers can enter uncharted areas controlled by the Mozambique National Resistance, the rightist rebel movement widely known as Renamo, as early as next week.


Osteopathic College Trains City Doctors
In response to "Long Island Q&amp;A" with Louis L. Levine, president of the New York College of Podiatric Medicine, "How Blue Cross Got Where It Is and What Can Be Done"  [ June 14 ] , I would like to address Mr.
Levine's response to the question, "Do you believe we could have a medical school on Long Island that would train medical students for the inner cities?"
The New York College of Osteopathic Medicine of the New York Institute of Technology in Old Westbury, which was established in 1977, is fully accredited by the State Board of Regents and the Bureau of Professional Education of the American Osteopathic Association.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Croatian Magic Man
Michael Jordan is eager to match the player with the legend.
"I hear he's the real deal," Jordan said of Croatia's 23-year-old, 6-foot-10-inch guard Toni Kukoc.
That the Chicago Bulls happen to own Kukoc's National Basketball Association draft rights in perpetuity also has something to do with Jordan's curiosity.
From the Adriatic port of city of Split, Kukoc is supposed to be the first player from Europe who brings the entire package with him to the court, the player who will make Americans understand that the next Jordan or the next Bird could just as easily come from the Continent as he could from the Continental United States.


Connecticut Driver on Fast Track
One of the benefits of American automakers' participation in racing, besides the infusion of money and technology, has been the decision by those companies to develop promising young drivers just as they would young executives.
Two leading examples are Robby Gordon, currently on an Indy-car tryout for Ford, and Tommy Kendall, a General Motors protege in sports-car racing.


Fiscal Bailout Plan for Suffolk County Is Approved in Albany
Legislative leaders and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said tonight that they had reached an agreement on a fiscal aid package for Suffolk County.
Under the agreement, which the leaders announced about 10 P.M., Albany would authorize Suffolk to issue bonds to close its 1991 budget deficit and would also allow it to raise its sales tax by half a percentage point, to 8.5 percent.


Baby at Killings Is Stable
The 3-month-old baby who was found in the Bronx on Thursday under a bed near the bodies of her slain parents and stepbrother remained hospitalized yesterday in stable condition, the police said.
Police officers found the bodies and the baby, Tiffany, when they responded to complaints of loud music coming from an apartment at 2034 Benedict Avenue in the Parkchester section of the Bronx.
The baby, whose last name is not being released, was taken to the Bronx Municipal Hospital Center, where she was treated for a temperature of 105 degrees and hyperventilation.


The Real Holly Golightly
AMONG THE PORCUPINES
A Memoir.
By Carol Matthau.
Illustrated. 302 pp.
New York: Turtle Bay Books/Random House. $23.


Guidebook Games
HOW did Columbus find his way to America without a guidebook?
Whenever I set foot on foreign soil my life is controlled by authors I've never heard of, who for all I know consider a hot shower to be as superfluous as a silver toothpaste key.
Left to my own devices, I prefer to heed the advice of Suzanne, my travel agent, whose definition of a dump and mine are fairly congruent.
But my husband, Duke, trusts only what he reads for himself.
A guidebook addict, he devours them the way others gobble mail-order catalogues.
Weeks before we left on a recent trip to Ecuador, he'd scrutinized three books and mapped out an itinerary, while I was still working up the nerve to finish the lengthy sections on health warnings and inoculations (the one part he refuses to take seriously).


Sport Betting Is Long Shot In New Jersey
Acknowledging that they have little chance of succeeding, two New Jersey state legislators said they will push for a vote in the Legislature this week on a proposed constitutional amendment to legalize some sports betting at Atlantic City casinos.
"I believe the majority of our state's residents are not hypocrites; they are not going to pretend that sports betting will corrupt our society while secretly wagering on sports illegally, to the tune of $3.75 billion a year in New Jersey alone," said State Senator C. Louis Bassano of Union.
"Our residents recognize that this money, in the right hands, could do a world of good instead of being good only for the underworld, as it is now."


Seville Pavilions
To the Editor: Your coverage of the World's Fair in Seville ("Impressions of Expo '92," May 3) omitted the really splendid exhibit of Australia.
The big building has as a centerpiece a reproduction of a rain forest.
Following a winding walkway upward, the onlooker saw a well-organized tangle of tall trees, bushes and vegetation, rain dripping from the upper reaches, macaws chattering and other aspects of a wilderness.
The exhibit probably was 50 feet or so across, four stories high -- a superlative show.


THE MAN FROM TEXARKANA
Your linking of Perot's efforts with the names of Hitler and Mussolini is an outrage -- if only for the contradiction of fact that precedes it in your own article.
Nowhere in Perot's history is there the slightest hint of racism or prejudice.
DAVID GOLDMAN
New York, N.Y.


Aidan Garrity and Thomas Zoubek
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome E. Garrity of Branford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Aidan Garrity to Thomas A. Zoubek, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert K. Zoubek of Darien, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Garrity, 25 years old, is a music teacher at St.
Cecelia Parochial School in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Rollins College and received a master's degree from the Manhattan School of Music.
Mr.
Zoubek, 27, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received master's degrees in history from Brown University and in archeology from Yale University, where he is a doctoral candidate in archeology.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-12  ON THE EDGE IN SOMALIA


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Old Rules or New Raty Rules Javelin
Seppo Raty of Finland was the world's best javelin thrower in 1991, with rule changes providing some of his toughest challenges.
He twice obliterated the world record, but a subsequent standardization of the javelin itself wiped out both records.
Raty, a solid 6 feet 2 inches and 230 pounds, surprised everybody by winning the 1987 world championships in Rome with a throw of 83.54 meters (274 feet 1 inch) after being rated just 17th in Europe the year before.
He solidified his standing by taking the bronze medal in the 1988 Olympics.


Twofer


No Headline
The Republican Party cannot defend the status quo, which is Latin for 'the mess we're in.' -- JACK KEMP, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.  [ 18:1. ]


Brooklyn's Bigger Lesson
To the Sports Editor:
Charles Tobey advises ("Brooklyn College's Lesson: Turf Isn't Greener in Division I," The Times, July 12) any college considering participation in big-time National Collegiate Athletic Association athletics to learn from Brooklyn College's experience: Winning is too expensive; losing brings negative publicity; so-called student athletes are too liable to be, and to let themselves be, used and abused.


Pushy Peppermint, and Flavorful Friends
SQUARE stems.
Opposite leaves.
Tubular, lipped flowers.
Sound familiar?
These are common characteristics of the mints and these are some of the easy-to-learn clues to their identity.
And if these clues are not enough, just crush the leaves between your fingers and smell the lovely aromatic scents that give them their popularity.
What would many favorite summertime recipes be without them?
Iced teas, iced soups, sherbets, roast lamb and even fresh peas are made delectable with just a few mint leaves.


On No-Frills Car Insurance
Re: "No-Frills Insurance Proposed for Cars" (June 28):
The article about the proposals for modifying New Jersey's automobile insurance requirements does not fully describe all the potential detrimental effects of permitting the option of selecting no liability insurance.


It's My Political Party; I'll Stay Home if I Want To
There was one character conspicuously absent from the festivities surrounding the Democratic National Convention.
The actress Sylvia Miles, an inveterate partygoer, was staying home for a change.
"Actually, I haven't gone to any of the parties," she said on the convention's last day, "and that's unusual because I'm a registered Democrat."


Crazy Eddie's Insane Odyssey
For years, television commercials blared that Crazy Eddie was "insaaaaane," but a recent incident in Switzerland suggests that, if anything, the ads understated the situation.
In late April, Eddie Antar, founder of the electronics chain that collapsed in 1989, went to the police in Bern and demanded help in gaining access to his $32 million bank account.


The Juicer
WHAT IT IS: The latest kitchen must-have: Fruit and vegetable juice extractors are selling at a rate of more than two million a year.
Zabar's carries 10 styles and can't keep them in stock.
The Champion, made in Lodi, Calif., since 1955, is enjoying revisionist popularity among models, the exercise-obsessed and the like.
A heavy-duty, large-capacity masticating juicer, it suggests a futuristic rhinoceros, grinding up raw food and pressing the juice out, leaving pulp for thickening the sauce or compost heap.
Most others spin out the juice and have to be opened to retrieve the pulp.
The Champion also grates and makes baby food, instant sorbets (use frozen fruit) and snow cones -- tasks the competition can't handle.
WHAT IT ISN'T: A cure-all.
Despite publicity that endows vegetable and other juices with magic-bullet properties to enhance weight loss, lower blood pressure or reverse baldness, there is no scientific proof that the juice of a few carrots and apples a day will cure anything.
Still, a Champion Juicer, at $270, is cheaper than a trip to Lourdes.


THE MAN FROM TEXARKANA
Lawrence Wright gives us the facts, and nothing but the facts, about Ross Perot, but still manages to hint that there is a little larceny in Perot's soul and a little Genghis Khan in his character ("The Man From Texarkana," June 28).
Those of us who remember the "mythic" Norman Rockwell America are not quite as easy to persuade.
While we see Perot as neither a saint nor a savior, we do see that America is fast becoming a second-rate nation in many areas.
If we ever are to return to the days when our country stood head and shoulders above all the others, we must begin the rebuilding process immediately.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Diving
HOW IT'S DONE: This is one sport in which you don't want to make a big splash.
If the diver has done the thing right, he or she will slice into the water vertically, spilling hardly a drop.


A Protocol for Shooting At Concerts and Plays
WHEN the rock star Axl Rose of the group Guns 'n' Roses leaped from a Missouri concert stage last July and tore a camera from an audience member's hands, a brawl ensued.
Mr.
Rose, who was arrested last week at Kennedy International Airport and charged with several misdemeanors, is expected to fight the charges.
Trying to take pictures at a performance -- play, musical, concert, one-man show -- means untangling a complicated web of legal restrictions, union rules, performer contracts and questions of taste.


400 Victories for Raybestos Pitcher
BARBARA REINALDA pitched her 283d career shutout and 400th career victory Friday night as the Raybestos Brakettes beat the Long Island Angels, 15-0.
Even with the victory, Reinalda, 35, a 17-year Brakettes veteran, is still 29 victories shy of pitcher JOAN JOYCE's Brakettes' record. (AP)


U.S. Invokes Secrecy in Fight With Rebel Scientist
In a new twist to a long battle between the Energy Department and a rebel scientist, Federal investigators have seized from the physicist several copies of a report that absolves him of mishandling state secrets.
The Federal report, made public eight months ago, has belatedly been deemed secret.
Private experts say the case is one of a growing number in which Federal secrecy rules, meant to protect national security, have been misused for what seem to be political ends.


Rideau Camping
To the Editor: The Rideau Canal article ("Under Sail on the Rideau," June 7)described this lovely area, where I grew up, quite well.
Although the Rideau lakes region often seems like a wilderness, it is actually in the midst of a well-populated area.
In fact, the region's very accessibility makes it quite vulnerable.
The author writes about camping in provincial campgounds, but also in various meadows and clearings along the way.
Nowhere is it mentioned whether permission to use the land was obtained when this was possible, whether care was taken not to leave litter behind, or whether it was ascertained that making a campfire entailed no risk of forest fire.
It matters little if the author actually did these things.
The point is that one could get the impression that such respect and precaution are not important.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Table Tennis
HOW IT'S DONE: A relatively new Olympic sport, added to the program for the Seoul Games in 1988, table tennis -- please, not Ping-Pong -- includes four events: a singles and doubles tournament for men and women.
More than 100 countries participate, with athletes competing through a round-robin format before the leading 16 singles players and eight doubles teams advance to a knockout tournament to determine the medal winners.


Fiona Trevelyan, John Outwater 3d
Fiona Susannah Trevelyan, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Eoin W. Trevelyan of Lincoln, Mass., was married there yesterday to John Ogden Outwater 3d, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Outwater Jr. of Burlington, Vt.
The Rev.
Mark Hollingsworth Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Anne's Church.
Mrs.
Outwater, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and is to attend Albany Law School in the fall.
Her father teaches management at the Harvard School of Public Health.
Her mother, Dr.
Ann Trevelyan, is the assistant head of the Hun School in Princeton, N.J.


Private Train To Saratoga
Travelers who want to spend a day in style at the races in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., can ride upstate in a restored 1923 Pullman railroad car and get clubhouse admission at the race track along with a buffet luncheon served trackside.
The daily excursion is offered by the Royal Northern, a new tour company, from Aug. 21 to 31 during Saratoga's annual races and costs $369 a person.
According to Royal Northern's itinerary, passengers will board the private car at Pennsylvania Station at 8:15 A.M. and have a champagne breakfast served by white-gloved attendants. (The car will be attached to an Amtrak train.)
After the train arrives at Rensselaer (near Albany) station, passengers will be transferred to the track by limousine, arriving at about 11:45.
On the return journey passengers reboard the car at 6:45 P.M., and there will be champagne, hors d'oeuvres and dinner with wine served by candlelight.


Job Agency Turns Disabilities Into Assets
Last year, after at least a dozen unsuccessful job interviews, Kathleen Roche, a self-described "little person" who is 4 feet tall, snapped at an interviewer who had just told her that she was unqualified for a receptionist's position.
"Look at me for what I am," she told him, "Not for the way my feet dangle off the chair."
When Michael Lopez, a college graduate who had been a counselor for an organization of disabled people, was looking for work last year, he made a flurry of phone calls to job-placement agencies.
Many were promising, often reaching discussions of salary.
But after he asked whether his electric wheelchair would be able to get through their doors, no agency invited him for an interview.


As Many Issues as Marchers in Washington Hts.
A march through Washington Heights yesterday that began as a public call for justice in the shooting death of a resident by a police officer soon turned into a ragtag collection of the politically discontented who seemed to be left over from the Democratic National Convention.
There were demonstrators from the Tompkins Square Park area of the Lower East Side, some of whom were arrested Thursday night as they protested outside Madison Square Garden against police brutality.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Wrestling
HOW IT'S DONE: There are two Olympic styles of wrestling: freestyle and Greco-Roman.
The United States has been strongest in freestyle competition, which permits nearly any hold, trip or throw.
In Greco-Roman, the wrestler may not seize the opponent below the hips or use his legs to clutch an opponent.
The same basic rules and scoring are used in both forms of competition.
In each, wrestlers compete on a 9-meter circular competition area, which is set on a raised platform.


Favorites Reaching Their Peaks in Tour
The big boys, the strong men, the Miguel Indurains, Claudio Chiappuccis and Gianni Bugnos, took over the 1992 Tour de France today as the bicycle race spent the first of two destructive days in the high Alps.
Nearly everybody else was swept away, including Greg LeMond, who finished nearly 50 minutes back after fading badly in the early climbing, and Pascal Lino, who had worn the overall leader's yellow jersey since July 7.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Rowing
HOW IT'S DONE: The sport is one of the oldest in the Olympic program, dating back to the 1900 Games.
The rowing events -- eight for men and six for women -- will be staged at Banyoles, 80 miles north of Barcelona.
The competition is simple, sprint racing over straight, buoyed 2,000-meter (one-and-one-quarter mile) courses, in 14 classifications determined by boat sizes and oars.
Scullers use two oars, the sweep rowers one.


Corrections
A report in the A la Carte column last Sunday about openings of new restaurants located one Pomodoro branch incorrectly.
The restaurant is in Port Washington; other branches are in Great Neck and Huntington.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: Television; NBC's Games Show: Live Connection and Cable Jeopardy
When vying for the television rights to the Barcelona Olympics nearly four years ago, Arthur Watson, then the president of NBC Sports, feigned indifference by talking about how NBC had lost money on its broadcast of the Seoul Games a few months before, then swooped in with a winning $401 million offer.
Asked about the tactic, Watson said: "Not a bad strategy, eh, coach?"
Now the wisdom of Watson's action is finally going to be tested.


Caroline Taub and Jeffrey Marcus
Mr. and Mrs.
Maxwell J. Taub of Forest Hills, Queens, have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Caroline Joy Taub and Jeffrey Louis Marcus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay M. Marcus of Dix Hills, L.I.
Miss Taub, 25 years old, is the manager of international publicity and artist relations for Atlantic Records in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is the president of M. J. Taub Associates Inc., a business appraiser in Forest Hills.
Her mother, Phyllis B. Taub, is a sixth-grade teacher at Public School 19 in Brooklyn.


The Musical 'Gypsy' Revived at Candlewood
"GYPSY" is less the story of the metamorphosis of a star ecdysiast than a psychological study of her demonic mother.
But we knew that.
From the looks of the Candlewood Playhouse production, Stephen Schwartz and Scott Schwartz, the directors, must have figured that what the world of musical theater needed was some heavy reminding.
By reinforcing the show's built-in focus, the directors succeed in overstating the obvious, and diminishing a model musical into an all too comprehensible (but unbelievable nonetheless) muddle.


Making the Veggies More Appealing
IT'S hard to get some people to eat enough vegetables, no matter what the health guidelines are.
A plate of steamed spinach is, after all, a plate of steamed spinach.
But different kinds of vegetables cooked together and seasoned in interesting ways appeal to even the most diehard of meat eaters.
Baking vegetables concentrates their flavor in a way that steaming does not.
Potatoes, beets, carrots, artichokes, broccoli and mushrooms -- whatever looks good from the garden or in the market -- can be seasoned with herbs, wrapped in foil and baked in the oven.
This method works very well for a dinner party, when a variety of vegetables can be used and arranged attractively on a serving platter.


Hillary Hirsch, Todd Emmerman
Patricia Hirsch of White Plains has announced the engagement of her daughter, Hillary Hirsch, to Todd Emmerman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Emmerman of Highland Park, Ill.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hirsch, 24 years old, is the Northeast account executive for Michael Kors's clothing line at Compagnia Internazionale Abbigliamento, a licensee and distributor for the fashion industry, in New York.
Her mother is the manager of Coldwell Banker Residential Real Estate in Rye, N.Y.


A Dirge? No. It's a Love Song.
The Adagietto.
For most music lovers, there is but one: the tender and supremely lyrical fourth movement of Mahler's Fifth Symphony.
Scored only for strings and harp and often performed as an independent work, it is surely the composer's best-known piece.
It has inspired more than 20 choreographers, among them Gerald Arpino, Maurice Bejart and John Neumeier, to create ballets and served as the principal theme for several films, including Luchino Visconti's "Death in Venice."
Yet in spite of its popular appeal, the Adagietto is in danger of succumbing to a false tradition, characterized by ultra-slow performances.
Many of the most experienced conductors of Mahler's music seem to believe that the music was intended as a lament, conveying feelings of melancholy, despair or even death, a notion surely reinforced by the Visconti film, in which the principal character, a composer, bears an unmistakable resemblance to Mahler.


The Days Were Hot
Some strutted Fifth Avenue, had picnics on Long Island, cried 'Salut!' in Central Park.
At night, others made plans for the fall.


THE MAN FROM TEXARKANA
Will Rogers once said, "I never met a man I didn't like." In your article, Ross Perot says that he had never actually met a homosexual.
He goes on to say: "I don't know who's gay and who's not. I don't guess I can really tell you."


New Techniques Helping Diabetics Cope
SHERREE SFERRA is upbeat and energetic despite the diabetes that hounds her.
At 32 years old, she manages her own business in Yorktown as well as a disease that could kill her.
Twenty years ago, life was harrowing for insulin-dependent diabetics like Ms.
Sferra, whose blood-sugar levels rise and fall like roller coasters.


Foreign Affairs; A Mere 141 Words
Of the 4,250 words in Bill Clinton's acceptance speech, a grand total of 141 were devoted to international concerns.
Those who nodded off briefly at the 40-minute mark of the 54-minute oratorical stew might have have gotten no taste at all of a potential Commander in Chief.
It is hard to avoid drawing two conclusions from this horrendous slighting of foreign affairs: The Democratic Presidential nominee believes that the subject hardly matters to Americans.
And he seems to be running away from this unfamiliar international arena for fear of blundering.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bellport 109,000
56 Country Greens Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 13-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, .50 acre; taxes $3,100.
Islip 130,000
21 Oak Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 22-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,900.
Jericho 370,000
138 Golf View Drive  2-bedroom, 2-bath, condominium town house, dining room, den, 2-car garage; taxes $8,000, monthly common charges $400.
Levittown 138,000
96 Knoll Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, living room with fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600.
Wading River 221,900
Betsy Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; fireplace, den, basement, skylights, central air-conditioning, 2-car garage; taxes $2,800.
Wantagh 160,000
827 Jay Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 41-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,700.
OTHER AREAS New Canaan, Conn. 860,000
439 Lost District Drive  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; pool with natural rock waterfall, three terraces, 4.1 acres; taxes $8,234.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 332,000
77 High Ridge Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, 2 acres; taxes $8,921.
Metuchen, N.J. 185,000
38 Bounty Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, over-50-year-old colonial; newly painted exterior, deck, close to transportation; taxes $2,572.


POSTINGS: A Well-Kept Secret; Public Lease City Auctions
Looking to lease a cheap parking lot?
One of the better-kept secrets in New York City is its public-lease auction of commercial properties that the city has foreclosed on for back taxes or that it must by law auction off because the property generates more than $5,000 a month in revenue.


Today, a Bach Might Have A Hard Time
There was once a time when the early-music movement sought refuge from the contemporary musical scene in an alternative universe of shawms and sackbuts, forgotten repertory and neglected customs; it wanted little to do with ordinary musical life.
Faced with the widespread absence of musical education, the movement created its own scholarly universe.
Faced with the chasm between art-music listeners and contemporary music, it assembled its own audience.
But last month, at the Berkeley Festival and Exhibition in California -- a biannual gathering of the players, instrument makers and scholars who have created this distinctively 20th-century movement -- the once monkish detachment was not to be found; the pressures of the present were evident in many discussions about the past.
In a symposium on Bach, for example, the subject was not historical performance practice or once common debates over style, but the vexing problems of contemporary life.
The supposedly pastoral world of early music was appealed to for insights into our own more troubled era: Did Bach's career hold any lessons for the contemporary composer?
Did the economic relationship between artist and patron in Bach's time suggest insights into the relationships between the contemporary performer, composer and patron?


Making a Difference; The Suitors Call in Earnest As an 80th Birthday Nears
JOHN MARKS TEMPLETON has been living in the Bahamas for 29 years now, building one of the world's most formidable mutual fund companies and a reputation as one of the great contemporary investors.
But Mr.
Templeton will be 80 years old in November, and speculation is intensifying about what will happen to his company, Templeton, Galbraith &amp; Hansberger Ltd., which has $19 billion under management.


Bowe Stops Coetzer In 7th
Riddick Bowe is next for Evander Holyfield, the undisputed heavyweight champion.
Bowe advanced to a title fight last night the hard way: He earned it.
Bowe pounded a game Pierre Coetzer of South Africa from the opening bell.
Referee Mills Lane finally took mercy on Coetzer and stopped the bout with one second remaining in the seventh round of a scheduled 12-round World Boxing Association heavyweight elimination bout.


Making a Difference; Labor's Agenda for Canada
Widely bruited a few years back as a possible national leader of Canada's left-leaning New Democrats, Robert White, who participated in his first strike at age 16, repeatedly told friends his heart and soul belonged to the labor movement.
Now at 57, the Belfast-born former chief of Canada's auto workers -- the maverick who pulled them out of the United Auto Workers in 1985 to stand on their own against the Big Three -- has just been named head of the Canadian Labor Congress, the country's premier labor organization.


Abigail Weinstein, Richard J. Burns
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Weinstein of Palm Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Abigail Min Weinstein to Richard Jonathan Burns, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Burns of London.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Weinstein is the fashion and jewelry advertising manager for Gourmet magazine in New York.
She graduated from Brandeis University.
Her father is a lawyer in Palm Beach; her mother, Pearl S. Weinstein, is a sculptor there.


Schlichter Enters Plea in Felony Charge
The former National Football League and Ohio State quarterback ART SCHLICHTER pleaded not guilty yesterday to a felony charge that he wrote a bad check for more than $300 in cash.
Schlichter, 32 years old, of Fairfield, Ohio, entered the plea through his lawyer during arraignment in Hamilton County Municipal Court in Cincinnati.
Schlichter did not appear in court.
A preliminary hearing was scheduled for July 30.


On Painting Trim Properly
MANY painting projects have been spoiled by poorly painted trim.
Unlike painting walls and similar broad surfaces, painting trim requires skill with a brush and an overall strategy to avoid smudging adjacent areas, creating unsightly brush marks and getting paint on hardware or glass.
Masking the surfaces to be protected is sometimes an answer, but applying masking tape adds time to large projects and can pull paint from finished surfaces when the tape is removed.


Seles's Silence Isn't Golden
To the Sports Editor:
When Monica Seles decided to suppress her grunting in the Wimbledon final, she obviously doomed herself to defeat.


U.S. Is Shying From Bosnian Conflict
As efforts to stop the Serbian shelling of Sarajevo continue, the pleas of Bosnians for Western military intervention to rescue their besieged capital and dismembered country have fallen on wary ears in the Bush Administration.
President Bush has ruled out sending American ground troops to help end the fighting, but Washington has said it is prepared to lend air and naval support to enforce the embargo against Yugoslavia and safeguard the delivery of humanitarian aid to Sarajevo.


Seville Pavilions
To the Editor: The Japanese pavilion at Expo '92 is being promoted as the world's largest wooden building. ("Impressions of Expo '92," May 3, and "Seville's Extravaganza, Feb. 23).
Expo's press offices told me that the Japanese pavilion has a surface area of 5,660 square meters.
The Seville office also said that the building was 60 meters high and 40 meters wide.


Alissa Berman, Christopher Slattery
Alissa Berman, the daughter of Norman D. Berman of New York and the late Jennefer C. L. Miners, and Christopher John Slattery, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Slattery of Armonk, N.Y., plan to marry in September.
Ms.
Berman, 24 years old, is a senior financial accountant at J.P.
Morgan &amp; Company, where her fiance is also a financial accountant.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the director of the Executive M.B.A.
Program at the Stern School of Business of New York University.
Her mother was a registered nurse.
The prospective bride is also the stepdaughter of Brooke Mahoney.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Soccer
HOW IT'S DONE: The Olympic soccer tournament has changed formats over the years, but it remains an event snubbed by the powerhouse nations of the world.
The Olympics have never competed in any fashion with the spectacle of soccer's quadrennial World Cup.
Top Western European and South American nations, busy with league and continental championships, generally send inferior players to Olympic qualifying tournaments.


The Runner Stumbles
As usual, Carl Lewis is dressed somewhere between preposterous and defiant.
As the other long jumpers in the New York Games limber up in standard-issue gray sweats and baggy singlets, Lewis sports a custom-tailored warm-up suit of his own design that resembles a tuxedo.
His outfit includes a natty cream-colored tunic, billowy black pants with spandex ribbon running down the sides and a vest-length double-breasted jacket.
It is classic Carl Lewis.
Attempting to set himself apart, he winds up looking more than a little ridiculous, like a restaurant captain in track shoes.
Lewis knows this, of course, knows people have always laughed behind his back at his foppish glad rags, but he persists in wearing them anyway.
He says he doesn't care what people say, claims he has never cared.
And after years of stubbornly being himself, he seems to have won over even some of the cynics.
These are the folks who have minutely scrutinized everything about Carl Lewis, from his sexual preference to the spontaneity of his postrace victory celebrations, as well as allegations of drug use.


Anne M. Burke, Stephen Manella
Anne Marion Burke, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas C. Burke of Watch Hill, R.I., was married there yesterday to Stephen Michael Manella, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Manella of Glenview, Ill.
The Rev.
Edward J. Mitty performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Watch Hill Chapel.
Mrs.
Manella, 26 years old, teaches first grade at the Convent of the Sacred Heart in New York.
She graduated from Kenyon College and received a master's degree in education from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father, who is retired, was a partner in the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Pennsylvania; Democratic Ticket Heads Into Fertile Territory
Pennsylvania, where wildly enthusiastic crowds greeted the Clinton-Gore bus caravan today, could prove fertile territory for Democrats this year.
The unemployment rate is in double digits in 20 of 67 counties.
And last November, in a cry for change, Pennsylvanians sent Harris Wofford to the United States Senate, the first time they had elected a Democratic Senator in 30 years.


Claudia Farans, Douglas A. Morse
Mrs.
William M. Lese of New York and London and Alvin G. Farans of Westport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Claudia Farans to Douglas A. Morse, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester S. Morse Jr. of New York and Armonk, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Farans, 24 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford, as did her fiance.
She was until recently an associate with P.M.K.
Public Relations in New York.
Her father is the chairman of the Penn Petroleum Company in Norwalk, Conn., and of Corporate Travel, a travel agency there.
Her stepfather is the president of William M. Lese Realty Services in New York.


The Executive Computer; 'Mother of All Markets' or a 'Pipe Dream Driven by Greed'?
Sometime around the middle of this decade no one is sure exactly when -- executives on the go will begin carrying pocket-sized digital communicating devices.
And although nobody is exactly sure what features these personal information gizmos will have, what they will cost, what they will look like or what they will be called, hundreds of computer industry officials and investors at the Mobile '92 conference here last week agreed that the devices could become the foundation of the next great fortunes to be made in the personal computer business.
"We are writing Chapter 2 of the history of personal computers," said Nobuo Mii, vice president and general manager of the International Business Machines Corporation's entry systems division.


Pushy Peppermint, and Flavorful Friends
SQUARE stems.
Opposite leaves.
Tubular, lipped flowers.
Sound familiar?
These are common characteristics of the mints and these are some of the easy-to-learn clues to their identity.
And if these clues are not enough, just crush the leaves between your fingers and smell the lovely aromatic scents that give them their popularity.
What would many favorite summertime recipes be without them?
Iced teas, iced soups, sherbets, roast lamb and even fresh peas are made delectable with just a few mint leaves.


Taking the Vapors
THEY were nose to nose on Sunday at the Inhalations counter at Origins, on the corner of West Broadway and Spring Street in SoHo.
The three-month-old store sells makeup and bath products from Estee Lauder's Origins line, as well as "earth friendly" gifts like recycled rubber purses ($36 to $170), twig crayons ($3.50) and faux-fruit candles ($3.50 to $38.50).
But it was the bottled essences -- scented oils with names like Slumber Party, Open Mind, Nothing to Sneeze At, Secret Pleasures -- that held the most fascination.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Boxing
HOW IT'S DONE: A draconian scoring system has sparked a rash of riots, reversals and demonstrations in Olympic boxing.
In Rome in 1960, half the judges and referees were dismissed.
In 1964, Spanish featherweight Valentin Loren, angered after being disqualified, punched a Hungarian referee in the face.
In the 1988 Seoul Olympics, two South Korean boxing officials climbed into the ring and attacked the referee after a decision went against a South Korean bantamweight.
So many of the decisions were so blatantly biased in Seoul that the International Olympic Committee asked the international boxing committee to devise an electronic scoring system for Barcelona that would reduce the biased officiating and corrupt judging.


Traffic Alert
Third Avenue between 42d and 57th Streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. today for the Third Avenue street fair.


Sudan's Strife Promises to Outlive Rebellion
THE expulsion of rebel forces from the city of Torit by Sudanese Government units last week marked an end to one of the most important phases in the recurrent rebellions that have plagued the southern part of the country since the British granted independence in 1956.
It may signal the collapse of the nine-year-old conflict between between the Arab-dominated Government in the north and the Sudan People's Liberation Army in the south.
But whether it will bring to a halt the recurring clashes between the south and the north is another question.
The Government is determined to spread Islam to the largely Christian and animist south, and even as the rebellion is being crushed, new protests have begun to plague civil authorities.


Death Penalty: Another Factor
In the letter to the New Jersey editor about the death penalty (July 5), "The Death Penalty: Questions to Weigh," the writer omits the most compelling justification for said penalty:


17-Year-Old Dies After Gang Beating at Convenience Store
A tossed beer can, a few angry words and the return of a car full of youths were the tinder that ignited a vicious beating early yesterday, leaving a Queens teen-ager dead and another barely alive, the police said.
The eruption of violence, by at least a dozen youths armed with bats, sticks and bottles, shook residents of Briarwood -- a normally placid community of well-tended private homes and apartment buildings where tall trees arch over winding streets.


Jolie Grossinger and Daniel Brown
Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome M. Grossinger of Allentown, Pa., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Jolie Lyn Grossinger and Daniel Aaron Brown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin M. Brown of New York and Munich, Germany.
Miss Grossinger, 24 years old, is an assistant product manager at Baxter Diagnostics Inc., a maker of medical equipment in Miami.
She graduated from the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, as did her fiance, and she received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Miami.
Her father is a dentist in Allentown.
Her mother, Leila S. Grossinger, owns the Lamp and Shade Factory Inc. in Trexlertown, Pa.


U.N. Official to Persevere in Talks To End Standoff Over Iraqi Arms
A senior United Nations official said tonight that he would continue talks on Sunday with Iraqi officials in an effort to resolve a 13-day standoff between United Nations arms inspectors and the Iraqi Government.
The official, Rolf Ekeus, head of the commission created by the Security Council to oversee the elimination of President Saddam Hussein's weapons of mass destruction, spent six hours today in largely futile discussions with the State Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Mohammed Saeed al-Sahaf.
He agreed to continue talks on Sunday after Iraqi officials said he would meet Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz and Foreign Minister Ahmed Hussein al Simeraei.


THE MAN FROM TEXARKANA
That the young Ross Perot found the Navy "a fairly godless organization" is, in light of the Tailhook convention, less an indictment and more a vindication.
Wright characterizes Perot's objections to naval drunkenness, moral emptiness and promiscuity as examples of "prudery" and a "stiff-necked moral code."
I suspect that the women who were subjected to traditional Navy "pranks" would have welcomed a boss like Ross Perot who has unequivocally refused to compromise on sexual harassment.
Perhaps the Navy could use more "indignant prigs" in its chain of command.
How about starting with the Commander in Chief?


Reborn to Win, the Democrats Party On
THE big band played "Mood Indigo." The hoi polloi squeezed into a horseshoe balcony high above the swells.
A Southern belle dressed in pink moved through the crowd surrounded by swains in black tie.
And not far away, a younger, blonde debutante giggled with her circle of female admirers.
The soigne party was longer on big hair and sequins than black and Hispanic faces.
Limousines queued outside, ladyfingers were served on silver trays and the preferred drink was champagne in crystal flutes.


Catch-22 for RU486
The Bush Administration keeps doing whatever it can to make safe abortions inaccessible.
The latest example is the Food and Drug Administration's arbitrary exclusion of the French abortion pill RU486 from its policy of allowing travelers to bring small amounts of unapproved drugs with them when they return from abroad.
In defending the seizure of a small dose of pills from a traveler, Leona Benten, the Justice Department makes much of the fact that the drug's French manufacturer has not even applied for F.D.A. approval to market the product in the United States.
It's a Catch-22 argument.
The pharmaceutical company, Roussel Uclaf, would be more than willing to sell the product here if not for fears about boycotts and demonstrations from anti-abortion activists and the hostile climate fostered by the Bush Administration.


In Venice, Viewers Are Becoming Voyeurs
When Flaubert first encountered Antonio Canova's sculpture of Cupid and Psyche, he kissed "the armpit of the swooning woman stretching out her long marble arms to Cupid. And then the foot! The head! Her face! Forgive me, but it was my first sensual kiss for so long; indeed it was something more; I was kissing beauty itself."
There were obviously no museum guards around in those days, as there are now, keeping at bay the crowds swelling the Museo Correr on the Piazza San Marco, where an outstanding exhibition of some 150 of Canova's drawings, clay and plaster models, and marble sculptures can be seen through Sept. 30.
His is hardly a household name today, but Canova (1757-1822) was at one time genuinely regarded as a modern Phidias.
Few artists have been more closely studied or more widely feted while they were alive than he.
Not only Flaubert but also Goethe, Byron, Wordsworth, Keats, Stendhal, Poe, Henry James and many others sang his praises.
In his tiny hometown of Possagno, not far from here, he was proclaimed a demigod and crowned with laurels.


Data Update
INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
June 92
May 92
June 91
Rents
178.8
+0.8
+4.9
Homeowner's costs
177.5
+0.2
+4.0
Fuel and utilities
109.7
+4.2
+2.3
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.36
8.54
9.83
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.65
5.82
7.30
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.20
8.40
9.68
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.42
5.59
7.26
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.20
8.44
9.73
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.36
5.64
7.15
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.45
8.60
10.04
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.09
6.39
7.74
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.64
3.96
5.71
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.20
8.20
9.23
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


The Contagion Of Helping Others
One of the surest ways to achieve success is to make other people happy.
And one nice thing about happiness is it's contagious.
A little spark of it will fall from one person to another.
After reading "Hail to Thee, O King of Women's Shoes"  [ July 5 ]  I have to tell you that I, too, know Clemente King.
In a world of fads and fancies, there is a store where personal service still endures.
When I walk into Selby's with my long and narrow feet, I become an optimist; gone are my doubts and fears.
Clemente King is part magician, part missionary.
There is a generosity of spirit about him, something heroic in his willingness to lavish his energy on someone else's problems.
The strength of this is that it makes the ways we treat each other extremely important.
WILMA ASKINAS Great Neck


Jets' McMillan Says He'd Rather Not Fight the Switch
It's no optical illusion that the double deuces Erik McMillan has been wearing on his jersey seem to be turning into a couple of question marks.
That's especially true this year when the Jets are asking their two-time All-Pro safety to switch to cornerback.
This is the second shock in two years for McMillan.
Last year, after the acquisition of Lonnie Young from the Phoenix Cardinals, McMillan was demoted to a special teams performer and used as a defensive back only in obvious passing situations until Young was hurt in midseason.


British Taste: The Good, the Bad and the Ridiculous
An Englishman's home may or may not be his castle; these days it could also be his (or her) mock-Tudor cottage, his Laura Ashley boudoir, or his Conran's modernist machine for living.
But whatever else it may be, an Englishman's home is above all a perfect opportunity to redecorate.
That, at least, is the conclusion suggested by "Signs of the Times," a five-part BBC series that became a cause celebre in Britain when it was broadcast last winter.
Produced by Nicholas Barker, the series presents interviews with a wide range of Britons about their houses, and how they've chosen to decorate them.


Dina R. Gerber, Marshall Huebner
Jane and Roger Gerber of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dina Rakhel Gerber to Marshall Scott Huebner, a son of Ada and Kurt Huebner of Jamaica Estates, Queens.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Gerber, 25 years old, is a clerk to Judge Richard Owen of the United States District Court, Southern District of New York.
She graduated from Harvard University and received her law degree from Yale University.
Her father is the chief operating officer of Meyers Parking System in New York.
Her mother is an associate professor of Jewish history and the director of the Institute of Sephardic Studies at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York.


When Good News Was No Bad News
The Dallas Morning News ran a front-page photograph of a homeless man sprawled across a subway grating.
The Sunday Oklahoman told how one of its reporters had his wallet stolen.
Dave Barry, a columnist for The Miami Herald, predicted "four days of speeches, social activities and 'Big Apple' excitement that will linger in their memories long after their stab wounds have healed."
And that was all before the Democratic National Convention began.


The 'Girls' Talking, With a Black Perspective
Lekesia, an issue-conscious woman with dreadlocks, reflects on Mike Tyson's rape conviction: "Did he actually think he could violate someone and
not
be punished? Who does he think he is? William Kennedy Smith?"
Lydia, a highly educated single mother, chides Vice President Dan Quayle by telling her baby daughter, Aretha, "There is no such thing as an 'illegitimate' child, only 'illegitimate' vice presidents."


Love, Infidelity And Commitment In Bloomsbury
MENTION THE NAMES Vita Sackville-West and Harold Nicolson, and thoughts turn to the English aristocracy in the early part of this century -- days given over to country houses, literary salons, carefully manicured gardens, all the touchstones of life on the Bloomsbury fringe.
Days given over to discreetly managed relationships, too, as "Portrait of a Marriage," the 1973 biography by their son Nigel Nicolson, makes clear.
Mr.
Nicolson's book, drawn from his mother's posthumously discovered diaries, which chronicled a 48-year marriage that survived both partners' homosexual liaisons, was adapted for British television in 1990 and engendered no end of controversy, particularly because of the lesbian love scenes.
The three-part film receives its first American showing beginning tonight at 9 on "Masterpiece Theater" on PBS; it continues on the next two Sundays.


Deals and Discounts
HOTEL DISCOUNTS Rockresorts has a variety of summer discounts at its properties in Hawaii and the Caribbean.
On the Hawaiian island of Lanai, the special rate on Garden View rooms is $195 a room at the Manele Bay Hotel, $225 at the Lodge at Koele.
The Hawaii specials are good through Sept. 30.
At Caneel Bay on St.
John in the United States Virgin Islands, summer rates start at $200 for a double room through Oct. 31.
At Little Dix Bay on Virgin Gorda in the British Virgin Islands, the summer rate, good through Oct. 31, starts at $195 for a room with garden view.
Both Caneel Bay and Little Dix Bay resorts serve a free Continental breakfast from 7 to 8 A.M. as part of the summer deal, and both offer a 50 percent discount on a second room for children aged 8 to 16.
Call Rockresorts reservations at (800) 223-7637.
ISRAEL PACKAGES El Al Israel Airlines and Dan Hotels offer a seven-night "Dan Special" to Israel from Sept. 1 through Oct. 8.
The package, which includes round trip air fare on El Al, seven nights' accommodation, buffet breakfast daily and a Hertz rental car (Category A, with manual transmission) costs $1,302 from New York or Boston; other cities are available at slightly higher rates.
Prices are for each of two people traveling together, and the package must be bought 14 days in advance.


On Painting Trim Properly
MANY painting projects have been spoiled by poorly painted trim.
Unlike painting walls and similar broad surfaces, painting trim requires skill with a brush and an overall strategy to avoid smudging adjacent areas, creating unsightly brush marks and getting paint on hardware or glass.
Masking the surfaces to be protected is sometimes an answer, but applying masking tape adds time to large projects and can pull paint from finished surfaces when the tape is removed.


Dream Team Nightmare
To the Sports Editor:
I am troubled when I think of the nationalistic gloating that will surely unfold, expecially around the Dream Team, in Barcelona, Spain.


Sports of The Times; For an N.F.L. Treaty, Now Is the Hour
IN pro football, timing usually means the split-second connection between a quarterback and a pass receiver, a cornerback's sudden snatch for an interception, or the precise pattern of a field-goal kicker's steps.
But this week, timing means a twist on the pro football philosophy preached by the late George Allen: the labor future is now.


Public &amp; Private; The Fourth Wall
Late at night, bleached by the street lights, Madison Square Garden looked like the Starship Enterprise, the satellite dishes pale moons at its perimeter.
The doors were barred to all but those with special passes by a phalanx of police officers who stood between the arena and the uninvited -- the protesters, the leafletters and the man who paced the corner repeating: "The answer is Jesus. Jesus is the answer."
The third night of the Democratic Convention a man walked by with his hands in his pockets and muttered bitterly, "Blah blah blah blah." And though it is possible that he was not all there, this being New York City, the Democrats should keep in mind, during this anniversary celebration of the Michael Dukakis Memorial Euphoria, that he may have been an ordinary working Joe, giving vent to the still considerable chasm between working Joes and politicos this country over.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.38
125.15
136.41
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4583
1.4837
1.7470
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1889
1.9464
1.1470
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.9510
1.9235
1.6943
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$357.50
$348.00
$370.40
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Why This Recession Is Different; A Debt Puzzle
To the Editor:
We hear much these days about the Federal debt as a percentage of gross national product.
In 1944, under President Franklin D. Roosevelt, it was 110 percent of G.N.P.
We won World War II, and there was very little inflation.
Today it is only 65.6 percent of G.N.P.
We also hear much about Federal spending as a percentage of G.N.P.
In 1944, under Roosevelt, spending was 42.1 percent of G.N.P.
Today it is only 24.5 percent of G.N.P.


In Politics, There Is Only One Language
Four months ago, when Representative Stephen J. Solarz emerged as one of the worst abusers of check- writing privileges at the House bank, he mailed out a lengthy self-defense to constituents and reminded them that he had been "one of Israel's best friends in Congress."
But on Friday, at two Queens centers for the elderly in the new 12th Congressional District -- which was drawn to maximize Hispanic voting strength -- Israel was as passe as Ross Perot.
"Muchas gracias," Mr.
Solarz, boomed to the applause of about 50 men and women eating hot lunches from plastic plates.
"Yo soy el congresista Solarz."


Wholly Bach


Kelly Irwin and Saro Liotta-Mangio
AT 7 P.M. on Saturday, about an hour before Saro Liotta-Mangio and Kelly Irwin were to be married in Riverside Park, it seemed as if everyone in the 79th Street Boat Basin were preparing for the event.
People walked along the docks carrying pasta dishes and fruit plates for the reception.
One woman stood on the deck of her boat asking passers-by which shoes she should wear.
"Living in the marina is like living in a little village," Mr.
Liotta-Mangio said.
"It's very communal. If you feel lonely, you only have to blast your horn five times -- to signal for an emergency -- and everybody will come. It doesn't matter if it's a real emergency. Fifty people will show up and party with you."


Dream Team Gets Closer to Barcelona


The Vulture Game
Hubert M. Stiles Jr. is a vulture.
As he exits Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan on his way toward Union Square, he scans the surrounding urban landscape from a peculiar point of view.
There is Macy's flagship store up the street; R. H. Macy &amp; Company filed for bankruptcy court protection on Jan. 27, with about $4.9 billion in assets and $5.3 billion in liabilities.
Glancing out the rear window of his southbound taxi, he sees the Pan Am building straddling Park Avenue: the airline filed for bankruptcy in January 1991, leaving investors holding $245 million worth of bonds.
"The Silence of the Lambs" is playing at a movie house; that film was produced by Orion Pictures Corporation, which filed for bankruptcy last December.


POSTINGS: 90 Bronx Affordables; Rentals for the Elderly
For over a decade, the Mid-Bronx Desperados, a neighborhood-improvement group, has made a name for itself redeveloping the housing stock in the Crotona Park East section of the South Bronx using an arsenal of Federal, state and city financial assistance programs.
One of the newest additions to this area's resurgence is the Mid-Bronx Plaza, a 90-unit affordable-housing building for the elderly that is sponsored by the Mid-Bronx Desperados and financed by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development.


Corrections
A "What's Doing" article on July 5 about Manhattan misstated the year the New York Philharmonic last played at Carnegie Hall.
It was 1991, not 1976.


Talking: Solar Energy; New Ways To Get Off The Grid
SALES of solar energy devices for the home are rising after a decade in the doldrums despite the recession and even though the cost may not always make economic sense -- an indication, perhaps, of a desire by more homeowners to help preserve the planet.
In 1990, solar hot water system sales rose 15 percent over 1989, according to the Solar Energy Industries Association, a trade group based in Washington, which predicted another 15 percent rise this year.
And 1991 sales of solar-powered devices for the home, like attic fans and outdoor lighting, rose 27 percent over 1990, with a further 25 percent gain expected this year, the association said.


Exeter Teacher Charged With Pornography
The director of the theater department at Phillips Exeter Academy, the exclusive private high school in Exeter, N.H., has been charged with possession of child pornography after the police found hundreds of pornographic videotapes in his home.
The theater director, Larry L. Bateman, was arrested Thursday and was later released on $10,000 bail, said Chief Stephen MacKinnon of the Exeter Police Department.
He is to be arraigned Aug. 28.


Parodies and the 'Muddah' of Revues
BARRY BOCKMAN, just born, greets his parents from the bassinet: "Hello Muddah, Hello Fadduh!" Three scenes later, in the Catskills, at Camp Granada (rhymes with Fadduh), the infant's acknowledgment turns into an infantile song to the melody of "Dance of the Hours," with a last line that begs for a compliance: "Kindly disregard this letter."
If more samplings are required to help you figure out whether the new musical revue at the Emelin Theater, "Hello Muddah, Hello Fadduh!" is your glass of tea, try these:


Washington Journal; Urging Blacks to Help Themselves by Buying From Each Other
The shopping center sits on a small hill overlooking a struggling black neighborhood, a pocket of stores surrounded by poverty and neglect.
A few shoppers strolling in oppressive afternoon heat stop to puzzle over a sign in one store's window: "Going out for business."
But it is not a mistake, as a tall man in a hat and carrying a thick stack of leaflets makes clear.
It is part of a new campaign by black merchants and a black business group to promote black-owned companies and to convince black consumers that they are responsible for their neighborhood's economy.


Faldo Has More Than 1 Hot Club
Although his putter ceased to be a magic wand, Nick Faldo kept up his unrelenting pounding of the fairways and greens of the Muirfield course today to build a four-shot lead going into the final round of the 121st British Open.
On his 35th birthday, the Englishman expertly manuevered around Muirfield in two-under-par 69 for a three-round total of 14-under 199, tying the 54-hole scoring record for the golf championship, which he set at St.
Andrews in 1990.
That year, Faldo went on to a five-shot victory at the Old Course, and he looks to be in much the same mode now.


London by Dorm
To the Editor: The article about university housing in London ("Taking London by Dorm," May 17) brought back pleasant memories of a stay my husband and I enjoyed atCarr-Saunders Hall, a residential facility of the London School of Economics, in July 1988.
Carr-Saunders is in central London, conveniently situated near the Warren Street-Goodge Street tube stop, with many small shops and groceries nearby.
We found that it worked well for us to take off in the morning for museums and other places of interest, return via tube for lunch, and take off again, always including the Leicester Square half-price theater ticket kiosk for our play of the evening.


THE MAN FROM TEXARKANA
I read with interest your excellent article about Ross Perot.
Many of the people I know who plan to vote for Perot don't care about his biography, record, experience or platform.
They are fed up and want to vote for the next best thing to "none of the above." I know of many who would vote for "none of the above" over Perot, Bush or Clinton.
PAUL FEINER
Elmsford, N.Y.


Mollie Parnis, Designer, Dies in Her 90's
Mollie Parnis, the fashion designer, whose Park Avenue living room was as well known to actors, journalists and Democrats as her Seventh Avenue showroom was to the women who bought her dresses, died yesterday at New York University Hospital.
She was in her early 90's but had long refused to disclose her exact age.
She died of congestive heart failure, said a close friend, the writer Richard Clurman.


JULY 12-18: Rethinking Monopolies; F. C. C. Approves Changes For Telephones, Television
Most people like to avoid head-on collisions, but last week Alfred C. Sikes seemed determined to cause one.
As chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, Mr.
Sikes pushed through two actions aimed at breaking down the barriers between two huge industries: telephones and television.
The commission voted 5 to 0 to let local telephone companies provide video programming, an idea Mr.
Sikes has championed for years.
In part, the commission hopes to erode the monopoly franchises that cable television companies enjoy in most cities.
But it is also also to prod telephone companies into installing fiber-optic cables that can deliver a rich array of information into every home.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 19, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
14
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Iland/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
2
25
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
3
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
4
1
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war, and a floundering President may not be able to cope.
5
4
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $5.99.) Attending a family funeral, a woman lawyer finds new understanding and love.
6
2
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
7
3
THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A woman insurance investigator probes the murder of a millionaire.
8
2
THE DECEIVER, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $5.99.) Sam McCready recalls his years in the British secret service.
9
35
PATRIOT GAMES, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan battles terrorists.
10
25
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
11
5
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
12
3
RAVISHED, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $4.99.) When a British beauty summons a man with a dubious past to stop the looting on her property, the results are romantic.
13
9
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
14
7
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
15
8
THE HOUSE OF THUNDER, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A woman recalls the horrors that brought her to a hospital.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
6
ROSS PEROT: IN HIS OWN WORDS, by Tony Chiu. (Warner, $4.99.) A compilation of statements about himself and his beliefs by the Texas billionaire who seeks the Presidency.
3
4
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France, by a British writer.
4
9
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series, as recollected by the actor who played Greg.
5
24
ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $5.99.) The rescue of two Americans from an Iranian prison.
6
53
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7
61
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
8 *
16
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by an Academy Award-winning producer.
9
9
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
10
454
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
49
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
78
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3 *
97
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
13
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
5
17
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
July 19, 1992, Sunday  The paperback best-seller list on page 32 of The Times Book Review today includes a description of Ross Perot as "the Texas billionaire who seeks the Presidency." Mr.
Perot withdrew from the race on Thurs day, after The Book Review had gone to press.


So Far, No. 1 Pick Doesn't Disappoint
As Hubert Davis kept swishing jumper after jumper during the Knicks' summer league games, Coach Pat Riley watched from the bleachers and thought about the possibilities.
"That's all we want: players who can make open jumpers," Riley said.
"The scouting reports about him were right. It doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure out why we drafted him. He can shoot. But really, I've been impressed with his overall game, his ability to get open and his feel for the game."


Deaths in Somalia Outpace Delivery of Food
In the damp, gray dawn in this remote Somali bush town, 25,000 men, women and children, their rib cages protruding, their eyes listless, shuffled with their last bit of strength today toward outdoor kitchens for a scoop of food.
Hundreds, too feeble to eat, died while they waited.
Their bodies were hastily lowered into fresh graves hacked in the red soil as cooks boiled water inside to make a dollop of corn and sugar gruel for those who were still alive.


Unified Team Faces Splintered Future
The Barcelona Olympics will be the last "ura!," as the Russians say, for the Unified Team, a bad adman's catchword for the 12 independent states, minus the Baltics, that once made up the Soviet Union.
And a lot of people are sorry, especially the athletes themselves.
Even those in the West may miss the sheer spectacle of well-trained men and women, carefully picked (and sometimes, equally carefully doped) from one of the largest populations on earth, performing with a skill and dedication almost entirely lacking from a pseudo-socialist Government happy to claim them, but helpless to prevent its own, farcical disintegration.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Canoe/Kayak
HOW IT'S DONE: The Olympic competition in canoeing and kayaking will be in two disciplines: flatwater and whitewater.
Flatwater racing, the traditional format, has been held since the 1936 Games.
These sprint races take place on calm, (and yes) flat water over buoyed, straightaway courses.
This year's races will be at the Castelldefels Speed Canal near Barcelona.


The Couple Who Just Couldn't Stop Collecting
AT the entrance to the driveway leading to Jack and Pinkie Heintz's 16-room house here is a large black anchor resting on a bed of small white stones.
But this is no ordinary lawn ornament.


Whatever Happened to the Son of Baby Jane?
NAME: Rusty Holzer.
CURRENT ACTIVITY: Preparing for the Summer Olympics in Barcelona as a member of the United States Virgin Islands equestrian team.
AGE: 23.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Synchronized Swimming
HOW IT'S DONE: Synchronized swimming, target of Saturday Night Live skits and the symbol of Olympic esoterica, is modeled after figure-skating competitions of yore.


Q and A
A Turkish Itinerary
Q.
Do you know of any five- to seven-day tours along the western coast of Turkey, including some time in Istanbul?
I plan to travel in late September and early October. -- Anne Zachos, Manchester, N.H.


Eviction
To the Editor:
In your Talking column on May 24 about eviction, the writer suggests a declaration of bankruptcy as a possible solution to a delinquent tenant's problem.
The attorney consulted wrongly implied that a tenant can force a landlord to accept a percentage of the outstanding rental arrears as long as the tenant keeps current on post-petition rent.


On Sunday; Mirabile Dictu And Wonderful Also to Hear
During a break in negotiations on Friday with state legislators, the man who delivered the oratorical jewel of the Democratic convention walked upstairs to the battered third-floor pressroom, shot a little pool on the reporters' table, then settled into a ratty office to discuss his gift.
Like most conventions, last week's was dominated by easy, tub-thumping speeches: politicians who postured for applause after each mundane sentence, who chronicled their personal travails to fill the bathos tub, who led grown men and women in inane chants.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Lineup; Curtain Raiser: A Night at the Opera, Catalan Style
GIVE or take a few hundred million people, 3.5 billion television viewers are expected to watch the opening ceremony of the 25th Summer Olympics on the evening of July 25.
For Barcelona, Catalonia and Spain, it is their big chance to be noticed before the scramble for medals begins.
The ceremony is, of course, built around well-honed rituals.
With a record 172 countries represented this year, the grand parade of athletes and flags will take up over half the program.
Then there are the speeches, the lighting of the Olympic flame and the swearing of the Olympic oath.


New Jersey Powerboat Competition Benefits From Squabbles
A new infusion of money from offshore powerboat organizers has revitalized a New Jersey competition that was bypassed in the last few years by the sport's fastest boats.
The more lucrative purse is part of an internal struggle among management groups fighting to control the sport.
About 80 speedboats are scheduled to compete Saturday in the Ray Catena Mercedes-Benz Offshore Grand Prix at Point Pleasant Beach.
Of the boats entered, three are expected to be Superboats, the powerful 50-footers of offshore racing.
Another seven may be Open Class boats, which are about 40 feet in length and almost as fast as the Superboats.
Registration is open until Friday.


Americana Vies With Beethoven
THE sixth weekend of Caramoor concerts begins Thursday afternoon, when the St.
Luke's Chamber Ensemble gives its string contingent a workout with a Mozart quintet and string sextets by Brahms and Peter Schickele.
The performance is at 4:15 P.M.
The guitarists Eliot Fisk and Frederick Hand join members of St.
Luke's on Friday at 8:30 P.M., for a Vivaldi concerto evening that also gives solo opportunities to the violinists Krista Bennion Feeney and Eriko Sato, and to Louise Schulman, a founding violist of St.
Luke's, who will play the viola d'amore.


Power Plus Patience Equals Great Hitting
One of the high points of Frank Thomas's season came a few weeks ago when the Yankees walked him eight times in a three-game series.
"I haven't walked much the last three, four weeks," Thomas said after the Chicago White Sox concluded the series at Yankee Stadium.
"I've been very aggressive on the second and third pitches. I think the scouts noticed that, so they were trying to keep me off balance. I don't want to get myself out. I'm one of those power hitters who don't force the action. There are a lot of guys who want to force the action with runners on."


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended July 4  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill 500,000
1435 Lexington Avenue (94th St.)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, fireplace; maintenance $1,310, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Nancy R. Sweetser Real Estate)  Chelsea 440,000
161 West 15th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. duplex-penthouse co-op in a prewar loft building; elevator, dining area, fireplace, private 1,000-sq.-ft. roof-deck, south exposure; maintenance $1,150, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Delson-Ginsberg Real Estate)  Flower District 360,000
1200 Broadway (29th St.)  (Gilsey House)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. duplex-co-op in a prewar landmark building; dining room, den; maintenance $1,135, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Joffee-LaSalle)  Greenwich Village 850,000
33 Fifth Avenue (10th St.)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,900-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; manned elevator, maid's room, dining room, 4 exposures; maintenance $1,988, 40% tax-deductible (Brokers: Kanelba &amp; Robilotti/Hunt-Kennedy)  Greenwich Village 735,000
111 Fourth Avenue (11th St.)  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; 24-hr. doorman, 14-ft. ceilings, 10-ft. windows, 500-sq.-ft. studio; maintenance $2,557, 60% tax-deductible (Brokers: William B. May - Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Upper West Side 685,000
115 Central Park West (72d St.)  (Majestic)  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, concierge, library, sunken-living room; maintenance $2,140, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Klara Madlin Real Estate)  BRONX  City Island 240,000
11 Fordham Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, Victorian; dining room, remodeled kitchen, den, garden shed, private beach, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  Williamsbridge 200,000
3211 Seymour Avenue  2-family, detached, brick house; 4 bedrooms in primary unit; 3 bedrooms in other; dining room, 1 bath in each; 2-car-garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,633 (Broker: Albert R. Bryan Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Ditmas Park 292,000
466 Marlborough Road  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; double-parlor, dining room, stained-glass windows, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Stratford Homes)  Midwood 264,000
2123 Avenue O  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, stucco, frame house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,900 (Broker: Maryl Real Estate)  QUEENS  Kew Gardens 265,000
109-60 Park Lane South  2-family, detached, brick and frame house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; jacuzzi and 2 baths in finished basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  Forest Hills 263,000
71-54 Kessel Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house, dining room, rear deck, 1-car garage, 27- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Sarah Jones Realty)  STATEN ISLAND
Sunnyside 147,400
9 Alpine Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, frame house; dining room, new windows, original oak floor, new windows, rear deck, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)  St.
George 57,600
10 Bay Street Landing  (Bay Street Landing)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,048-sq.-ft. co-op in a former prewar warehouse; 24-hr. doorman, 10-ft-ceilings, free parking, harbor view; maintenance $666, 54% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Arms Corp.)


Drawing a Bead On the Brain
Working independently, several groups of scientists have hit upon a new way of using magnetic resonance imaging, or MRI, to watch the human brain in the process of thinking.
The method produces pictures less than a second apart; other methods produce snapshots 5 to 10 minutes apart at best.
And unlike competing methods, "fast MRI," which is 10 times more sensitive, requires no radioactive substances to produce its images, so it can be used repeatedly on the same subject. .


THE MAN FROM TEXARKANA
That the young Ross Perot found the Navy "a fairly godless organization" is, in light of the Tailhook convention, less an indictment and more a vindication.
Wright characterizes Perot's objections to naval drunkenness, moral emptiness and promiscuity as examples of "prudery" and a "stiff-necked moral code."
I suspect that the women who were subjected to traditional Navy "pranks" would have welcomed a boss like Ross Perot who has unequivocally refused to compromise on sexual harassment.
Perhaps the Navy could use more "indignant prigs" in its chain of command.
How about starting with the Commander in Chief?


Making the Veggies More Appealing
IT'S hard to get some people to eat enough vegetables, no matter what the health guidelines are.
A plate of steamed spinach is, after all, a plate of steamed spinach.
But different kinds of vegetables cooked together and seasoned in interesting ways appeal to even the most diehard of meat eaters.
Baking vegetables concentrates their flavor in a way that steaming does not.
Potatoes, beets, carrots, artichokes, broccoli and mushrooms -- whatever looks good from the garden or in the market -- can be seasoned with herbs, wrapped in foil and baked in the oven.
This method works very well for a dinner party, when a variety of vegetables can be used and arranged attractively on a serving platter.


Browns' Perry to Undergo Knee Surgery
Cleveland defensive tackle MICHAEL DEAN PERRY will have surgery next week to repair torn cartilage and remove a small cyst on his knee.
The Browns said he will miss several weeks of the preseason.
Perry, an All-Pro the last two seasons, was injured while working out on his own last week, according to a Browns' spokeswoman. (AP)


Asset Separation as a Matter of Estates
To the Editor:
Mary Rowland's article "Share the Rice, but Not the Assets" (June 14) is excellent, but uses potential divorce as the reason for considering her advice.
Another unmentioned, but much less contentious reason to protect your own property in marriage has to do with estate management.


AIDS Seeks a Forum At Another Convention
Mary D. Fisher, a member of a socially prominent Republican family, has asked to speak about AIDS at the Republican National Convention next month in Houston.
Ms.
Fisher, who has tested positive for the HIV virus, would follow the precedent set by Bob Hattoy and Elizabeth Glaser, who spoke at the Democratic National Convention last week about having AIDS.
"There have been discussions held since Mary gave testimony at the Republican platform hearings" in Salt Lake City in May, said A. James Heynen, a spokesman for Ms.
Fisher.
"These have been informal conversations back and forth with people at the  [ Republican National ]  Committee or with people who have specific responsibilities for the convention."


Making a Difference; A Flashy Team Effort
HIKOTARO MASUNAGA had been managing director of Fujitsu Ltd. in charge of semiconductors for less than three weeks when he took his first bold step.
On Monday, Fujitsu announced that it had entered a joint venture with Advanced Micro Devices Inc., an American semiconductor company, to jointly develop and make an exciting new type of memory chip.
While there has recently been a spate of semiconductor alliances, this one goes further than most.
Fujitsu and Advanced Micro said they would contribute equally to build a $700 million factory in Japan to produce flash memories, a type of chip that has the potential to replace disk drives for permanent information storage in computers.
To cement the relationship, the two companies also said they would buy small equity positions -- less than 5 percent -- in each other.


Data Bank/July 19, 1992


Hans Falkenburg, 89, Advertising Executive
Hans Falkenburg, the retired head of an advertising art studio and a philanthropist, died on Thursday at Mount Vernon Hospital in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
He was 89 years old and lived in Eastchester, N.Y.
He died of pneumonia and cardiac disease, his family said.


Is That a Light at the End of the Tunnel?
Problem areas for the Giants this season
Defensive Line -- No pass rush except from Leonard Marshall and Lawrence Taylor.
Maybe rookie Keith Hamilton at end or Kanavis McGhee at outside linebacker can help.
If either can, Eric Dorsey will become a part-time end.
Linebacker -- Taylor is aging and Carl Banks will not last forever, so youth is needed on the outside.
If McGhee does not show strong improvement this year, Coach Ray Handley indicated the second-year pro might have no future at outside linebacker.


Seles Reflects on Critical Shots
It was only midway through Wimbledon and Monica Seles already stood accused of a myriad of offenses that ranged from grunting like a stuck pig, to having been born on the wrong side of the political tracks regarding strife in her native Yugoslavia, to wearing clothes that were too tight.
Should she laugh it off or start to memorize the dictionary definition of persecution?


Julie Ann Brenton, R. D. Galbraith
Mr. and Mrs.
J.
C.
Brenton of Des Moines have announced the engagement of their daughter Julie Ann Brenton to R. D. Galbraith, a son of Mrs.
E.
J.
Galbraith of Berkeley Heights, N.J., and the late Mr.
Galbraith.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Brenton, 29 years old, is a manager at A.T.&amp; T. Investment Management Company in Berkley Heights, a subsidiary of A.T.&amp; T. She graduated from Carleton College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a member of the Junior League of New York.
Her father is the president of Brenton Banks Inc., a regional bank holding company in Des Moines.
Her mother, Sue R. Brenton, is a special orders assistant at Borders Book Shop in Des Moines.


Corrections
A caption last Sunday with a picture of an exhibition in a landscape show at the Islip Art Museum misidentified the artist and the work.
It was "Earth Mound" by Julie Small-Gamby.


Editors' Note
The paperback best-seller list on page 32 of The Times Book Review today includes a description of Ross Perot as "the Texas billionaire who seeks the Presidency." Mr.
Perot withdrew from the race on Thursday, after The Book Review had gone to press.


Tech Notes; Instant Analysis, by the Breath
Diagnosing certain liver and kidney diseases may soon be much easier for both doctors and patients because of a breath analyzer being developed at Battelle Memorial Institute.
The new device takes advantage of the fact that with certain diseases specific chemicals are found in the breath.
The analyzer being developed to measure these components is the product of more than three years of research at Battelle, a nonprofit research concern in Columbus, Ohio.


Aspen
Somehow, summer is the best season to observe Aspen functioning as a wholesome little town, not just as a resort driven by skiing.
People do simple, free things: residents bike to and from work, they play in the parks and older children safely roam the pedestrian mall on their own.
So much of what happens in summer occurs beneath one tent or another, but the performances and lectures account for only a portion of Aspen's magnetism.


Abortion Foes See Tactics Backfire in New York
One year after sustained and sometimes violent abortion protests froze the city of Wichita, Kan., in a 46-day showdown that ended with more than 2,600 arrests, the militant anti-abortion group Operation Rescue came to New York City last week hoping for a prime showcase.
They left barely a mark.
The group's failure to attract spontaneous support in a city with thousands of abortion opponents and a large Roman Catholic community that has shown itself willing to take to the streets indicated surprisingly little support for Operation Rescue's militancy.


Lisa Aitken, David Desmond
Lisa Renee Aitken, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank E. Aitken of Naples, Fla., was married yesterday in New York to Dr.
David William Desmond, the son of Judge Maryanne Trump Barry and the stepson of John J. Barry.
The Rev.
Gary P. Fertig performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Thomas Church.
Mrs.
Desmond is an executive assistant at Wasserstein Perella &amp; Company, a New York investment firm.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior executive with Exxon.


Toby E. Boshak, Paul D. Eisenberg
Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Boshak of Old Bridge, N.J., have announced the engagement of a daughter, Toby Eileen Boshak, to Paul David Eisenberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Eisenberg of New York.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Boshak, 25 years old, is a consultant to the Research Center for Arts and Culture at Columbia University.
She graduated from Brandeis University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia.
Her father is a certified public accountant practicing in Old Bridge.


Laura Jane Berger, Harry Jay Slatkin
Rosalind Berger of New York and Abraham Berger of Springhill, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Laura Jane Berger to Harry Jay Slatkin, the son of Corinne Slatkin of Montclair, N.J., and the late Sidney Slatkin.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Berger is a vice president of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company and Mr.
Slatkin is a first vice president of Lehman Brothers, both in New York.


THE YALE SCHMIDT LEAVES BEHIND
In his article, Richard Bernstein says that Benno Schmidt appointed a new dean of the School of Organization and Management, Michael E. Levine, "an old friend who had been a senior executive at New York Air."


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Lamptey: The Boy Who Would Be Soccer's King
Seventeen-year-old Nii Lamptey burst upon the scene by leading Ghana to the 1991 under-17 world championship in Italy.
At the club level, Lamptey joined Anderlecht of the Belgian First Division in 1991-92 as a 16-year-old.
He has since signed a five-year contract, and Anderlecht recently placed his transfer value at $20 million.
Nii (the name means "king") grew up playing soccer barefoot in Ghana, kicking rolled-up socks because no one could afford a ball.


Karen Michalski, Andrew Wang
Karen Eileen Michalski, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Michalski of Madison, N.J., was married last night in Philadelphia to Andrew Mark Wang, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Wang of West Chester, Pa.
The Rev.
Christopher Reilly, a member of the Federation of Christian Ministries, performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel.
Mrs.
Wang, 25 years old, is a nursery teacher at the Chestnut Hill School in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
She graduated from Connecticut College, as did her husband.
Her father is the general manager of the transportation department of Exxon International in Florham Park, N.J.


U.N. Official to Persevere in Talks To End Standoff Over Iraqi Arms
A senior United Nations official said tonight that he would continue talks on Sunday with Iraqi officials in an effort to resolve a 13-day standoff between United Nations arms inspectors and the Iraqi Government.
The official, Rolf Ekeus, head of the commission created by the Security Council to oversee the elimination of President Saddam Hussein's weapons of mass destruction, spent six hours today in largely futile discussions with the State Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Mohammed Saeed al-Sahaf.
He agreed to continue talks on Sunday after Iraqi officials said he would meet Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz and Foreign Minister Ahmed Hussein al Simeraei.


Price Fixing in Mutual Funds
To the Editor:
Regarding Carole Gould's column concerning Securities and Exchange Commission proposals to further deregulate the mutual fund industry ("A Letdown for Pricing Reformers," May 31), last February, I came up with the idea of starting a brokerage firm that would market and distribute load mutual funds.
I intended to distinguish my firm from others by refunding my share of the load to the client, regardless of the amount invested.
I planned to make my money exclusively through fees, which are paid by the mutual fund to the broker in subsequent years in the form of an annuity.
I figured that the 0.25 percent to 1.25 percent annual trailer would constitute more than sufficient compensation for my modest pecuniary desires.


Whatever Happened to Heathcliff?
H.
The Story of Heathcliff's Journey Back to Wuthering Heights.
By Lin Haire-Sargeant. 292 pp.
New York: Pocket Books. $20.


IN SHORT: FICTION
MARKING TIME By Elizabeth Jane Howard. Pocket Books, $22.


JULY 12-18: Digital Adrift; A Legend in Computers Suddenly Takes Retirement
The future of the company that created the minicomputer industry during the 1970's looked even more uncertain last week as its founder unexpectedly announced his retirement.
Kenneth H. Olsen, an M.I.T.
Lincoln Labs engineer, had started Digital Equipment Corporation, the nation's second largest computer maker, 35 years ago.


Surveying the Myriad Meanings of Simplicity
Simplicity and Complexity in Games of the Intellect" is the enigmatic title of a new book by Lawrence B. Slobodkin, a Stony Brook biologist, recently published by Harvard University Press. The book jacket features a photograph of a strange and fanciful sculpture in plywood and mylar, "All Terrain Fish," by William Wainwright. It is a vehicle-like art work grounded on three wheels, yet the body is arched upward and its wings are extended, as if poised for imminent takeoff.
Is this a new puzzle book designed to entangle the unwary, though intrepid, reader?
Or is it about yearning-to-fly fantasy art?


London by Dorm
To the Editor: "Taking London by Dorm" brought back memories of stays in University College London residence halls in Camden Town.
On my last trip, in 1988, I was traveling with my father.
We were coming into London to end a monthlong trip around England and Scotland.
I offered my father the option of a bed and breakfast in London or the residence hall, explaining that although the accommodations would not be quite as private, the price would be great, about $36 for a double.
We stayed in the Ifor Evans House residence hall; the first night he came into the room asking which of the two bathrooms on the floor was for men.
He had started out in one when a woman walked in; he moved to the other end of the hall, where there was already a woman at the sink.
I asked if the toilets and showers were private.
He said yes, and decided that the rest didn't really matter.
TOM LEVITAN Claremont, Calif.


Sonic Youth Admits An Outside World, Only to Confront It
Sonic Youth gets riled up as never before on its seventh album, "Dirty." So riled, in fact, that the band knocks down its protective buffers to jangle the world beyond collegiate rock.
The band used to be a paradigm of post-punk cool: independent rockers who worked outside every standard convention, including Western tonality.
In Sonic Youth's songs, the unconventionally tuned and proudly distorted guitars of Thurston Moore and Lee Ranaldo, along with Kim Gordon's bass, create maelstroms of dissonance, surrounding tunes with barbed noise and sending phantom overtones buzzing around listeners' ears.
Meanwhile, Steve Shelley's drumming and the vocals ground the music in rock.


THE MAN FROM TEXARKANA
I'm not sure about your suggestion that Perot has a "Rockwellian illusion he carries around inside him like a religious conviction." Next to Ronald Reagan's misty-eyed nostalgia, Perot looks to me like a healthy 20/20.
ROB GARVER
Pasadena, Calif.


Opulence in Small Packages
The goldsmiths and sculptors of Tuscany were as creative in antiquity as in the Renaissance.
Although their designs and techniques changed dramatically over 2,500 years, they consistently produced some of the world's most exquisite objets d'art.
The smallest items, feather light and superbly proportioned, are the most arresting in "Out of the Opulent Past: Italian Treasures From the Etruscan Age to the Renaissance," a show at the Grey Art Gallery of New York University, through Aug. 1.


Noncandidate Perot, Specialist in Surprises
AT one of the early rallies in his abortive Presidential bid, Ross Perot drove photographers and camera crews crazy.
The Texan finished his speech, bounded across the stage to shake the outstretched hands of some of his fervid admirers and, basking in thunderous cheers, departed, his well-known open-mouthed grin stretching across his face.
Just as cameramen were capping their lenses and sound engineers turning off their boom mikes, the diminutive billionaire suddenly reappeared to grasp more hands, receive more applause and say a few more words.
It seemed Mr.
Perot did not know when, or how, to make his exit.
As was the case at that rally in Orlando, Fla., Mr.
Perot seems determined not to go quietly into the political night.
On Thursday he said he was halting his campaign because a "revitalized" Democratic Party meant that the election was sure to be decided by the House of Representatives, a prospect the Texan said would be "disruptive" to the country.


POSTINGS: Paterson Renovation;
With dozens of approvals and most of the financing in place, renovation is to begin next month at the gutted Cooke Mill in Paterson, N.J.
The $8 million, two-building project in the Great Falls Historic District is under the aegis of George McCloof, who heads Longstreet Development Corporation in West Paterson.
"It will create a foundation for rehabilitation in the district," said Barry Poskanzer, its Ridgewood, N.J., architect.


Allyson Kossow and Alan D. Felix
Irene D. Kossow of Yonkers has announced the engagement of her daughter Allyson Maria Kossow to Dr.
Alan David Felix, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur Felix of North Hills, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.


SURFACING
SPORT --
Urban bungee jumping:
plunging from 150 feet above the Hudson for $65 a leap at Amazon Village. CHILD CARE --
Eastern European nannies:
former East Germans are being placed in record numbers.


Giants Camp a Shaky Job Market
The Giants will open training camp Monday with more questions than answers and more problems than not.
The biggest question of all is whether they will become contenders again or struggle again.
Following the 1990 season, the Giants won Super Bowl XXV.
Last season, with a new coach, a new quarterback and an uncharacteristically insecure defense, they slumped to an 8-8 record.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Team Handball
HOW IT'S DONE: A sport virtually unknown in the United States, team handball is one of the most popular games in many other countries, combining elements of basketball, soccer and hockey.
The idea is to throw a cantaloupe-sized ball past a goalkeeper into a net during two 30-minute halves.
With six players on a side, plus the goalkeeper, the ball is advanced by running with it, dribbling it and passing it among teammates.
There is also lots of pushing and shoving, and two-minute penalties for excessive roughness.


From Ford, the Latest Pretty Face
Steve Odell had to catch a plane at 4 o'clock, but just now we were on our way to lunch, and his question surprised me.
"You know what makes me unhappy about this car?" he asked.
Well, no.
The car was a 1993 Probe GT, out now for about a week, an all-new Ford hatchback whose gestation Odell has lived with for years.
He has been Ford Motor Company's specialty car marketing manager, so unhappiness should not have been part of the fatherly equation.


Braniff Passengers More Stranded Than Most
When Braniff International Airlines shut down this month, thousands of its passengers were stranded along a route system that extended from Dallas and Minneapolis to San Juan and St.
Thomas in the Caribbean.
While any shutdown can be chaos for stranded passengers, Braniff's passengers had far fewer alternatives than usual.
The shutdown occurred July 2, one day before the start of the heavily traveled Fourth of July weekend.
In addition, almost all carriers' planes were filled with passengers on half-price tickets.
An estimated 40 million half-price tickets were sold for travel on domestic flights throughout the summer.


RECORD BRIEF
Martinu: 'Ariane'
Soloists; Czech Philharmonic conducted by Vaclav Neumann. Supraphon 104395-2; CD.
In 1958 the cosmopolitan Czechoslovak Bohuslav Martinu needed a breather from work on "The Greek Passion," his opera of rural peasant life adapted, in English, from Kazantzakis's "Christ Recrucified." So, in a bit over a month, he concocted this beguiling 44-minute opera, in French, from his friend Georges Neveux's play "Le Voyage de Thesee."


Pusuing Art and Angst At Bob's Movie Camp
A Ute Indian banged a drum and chanted, offering prayers to cleanse the earth and connect the newcomers with the spirit of this place, an isolated spot blessed by the beauty of the Rocky Mountains.
She burned sage and, with an eagle feather, smeared it on the faces of those standing in a circle on the grass.
That came as a shock to some.
"Fifty percent were New Yorkers dressed in black," said Greg Mottola, a New Yorker who wore black for much of his month at the Sundance Institute's annual workshop for emerging film makers.
A few days later, the workshop's newsletter announced that River, the part-Indian woman who had coordinated this opening ceremony, was available for "acupuncture, bodywork or shamanic counseling." You could pick up her brochure from Shirley in the administration office.
Sincere, artistic and not quite able to leave business behind -- the purifying ceremony was the perfect rite of passage into what the Sundance Institute calls its June Film Makers Lab.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; Perot Stays on Ballots
Ross Perot told state leaders of his grass-roots movement yesterday in Dallas that he would leave his name on the ballot in states where he had qualified and asked his supporters to keep working to place his name on ballots.
But he said he would not be a candidate for President.
He also urged his supporters to remain politically active.
Article, page 23.


Corrections
A Letter to the Editor on July 5 about movie soundtrack recordings omitted part of a sentence.
It should have read, "Mr. Margulies writes that his father enjoyed 'Broadway musical soundtracks,' but there is no such animal."


I Am 'Womanist.' Buy My Blush.
Georgette Mosbacher is following in the footsteps of infomercial stars Victoria Principal, Jane Fonda and Cher.
The wife of Robert A. Mosbacher, the former Secretary of Commerce who is the general chairman of President Bush's re-election campaign, plans to appear in a 30-minute commercial to market a line of cosmetics.
"The line will be named Exclusives by Georgette Mosbacher," said Mrs.
Mosbacher, who is re-entering the beauty business after selling her company, La Prairie Worldwide Inc., last July.
"It will be sold only over television through direct response." The spots will begin airing in 13 television markets in November.


Lisa Habernickel, Jay Baney
Lisa Seton Habernickel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Duke Habernickel of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday in Bay Head, N.J., to John Edward Baney Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Baney Sr. of Haverford, Pa.
The Rev.
Edward Gammons performed the ceremony at All Saints' Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Baney, 31 years old, is a marketing manager with Coopers &amp; Lybrand in New York.
She graduated from Bucknell University and received a master's in international affairs from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of the Haband Company, a mail order clothing concern in Paterson, N.J.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Equestrian
HOW IT'S DONE: If you're an egalitarian over 40, this is the Olympic event for you.
Age and sex are no barriers to competing; men and women compete equally in all events.
There are three events -- show jumping, the three-day and dressage -- but only jumping has ever caught the fancy of the broader public.


Now Starring In 'As You Like It': Central Park
The production of "as you Like It," currently at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, boasts Elizabeth McGovern, as Rosalind; Jake Weber, as Orlando; Donald Moffat, as Touchstone, and Richard Libertini, as the melancholy Jaques.
But the evening's most noteworthy performance is being given by Central Park, which is playing the Forest of Arden.
And most fetchingly, at that.
In summers past, the park has always been an extra, hovering in the background, more sensed than seen.
Now and again, a set designer might pierce the back wall of the Delacorte with great doors.
But when they swung open, you got only a partial glimpse of what lay beyond.
And then, invariably, they swung shut, bringing you right back to the noble bodies about to die, or rustics gamboling, or whatever bit of Shakespearean business remained to be accomplished.


Did You Read the Book?
To the Editor:
The exaggerated, almost pathological sensitivity of some of the American press to any critical discussion of Japan is exemplified by Vincent Canby's critique of my novel "Rising Sun" and Japanese cinema  [ "Japan Unfolds Through Many Images," June 14 ] .
Mr.
Canby takes an American police thriller, set entirely in America and populated almost entirely by American characters, and compares it to Japanese films about Japanese characters living in Japan.
It's not surprising he finds so little similarity.
The question is why he should make the comparison in the first place.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Porcine Paradise
IT'S not an easy life for a pig growing up in Queens.
"Ziggy's never seen another pig," said his owner, Lisa Walford of Bayside.


Giants' Fans Yearning For a Simpler Time
MAYBE tomorrow, Lawrence Taylor's eyes will turn red and he'll feel like slapping his momma.
As he told us before the 1987 Super Bowl, that's when he knows he's ready to play ball.
But tomorrow, when the Giants report to training camp, Lawrence Taylor will be 33 years old, starting his 12th National Football League season, and the suggestion of domestic violence, even tongue in cheek, is no longer considered cute.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Tennis
HOW IT'S DONE: Team uniforms aside, the Olympic tennis competition is, much like the sport itself, a head-on, single-elimination confrontation between individuals.
Sixty-four men, 64 women and 64 doubles teams representing 32 different nations are entered into the six-round, Grand Slam-style format at Barcelona.
The men will play three-of-five-set matches, the women two--of-three, with tie breakers in effect except for the final set.


BARCELONA - A VIEWERS GUIDE: The Sports; Zmeskal Has Golden Credentials
Kim Zmeskal, a ferocious competitor and legitimate challenger to Svetlana Boginskaya of the Unified Team for the Olympic all-around title in gymnastics, could become the Mary Lou Retton of 1992.
In the boycotted Los Angeles Games of 1984, Retton, then a 16-year-old Houston resident, won the Olympic all-around gold medal, the last American to do it.


Eloise Kern and Jonathan Goldman
Mr. and Mrs.
Joel S. Kern of Chappaqua, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Eloise Josephine Kern, to Jonathan Howard Goldman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth B. Goldman of Maplewood, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kern, 27 years old, is an account executive at Marilyn Evins Ltd., a New York public relations firm.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is the manager of the tennis program at the Westchester Avenue Tennis Club in Rye, N.Y.


Catch the Marlin
BEHIND THE MARLIN HOTEL'S SMOOTH, neon-iced Art Deco facade lurks a subversive sensibility.
There's a jittery palette of paint on the floor, broken tiles on the furniture -- and goat on the restaurant menu.
Set in Miami's South Beach area, the Marlin is a busy beehive, with the right kind of buzz reverberating in gossip columns up North.
Since its renovation last November, the hotel's guests have been notables from the fashion world (some queens, some drones, some worker bees) and the music industry (which is no surprise, since Chris Blackwell, head of Island Records, is the owner of the hotel).


Wine Substitute
To the Editor: Having just returned from a delightful vacation on Cape Ann, Ken Carlton's "What's Doing on Cape Ann" (June 7) was of special interest to us.
He mentions that Rockport is a "dry town" and you must bring your own wine to a restaurant.
When we had dinner at the Blacksmith Shop Restaurant, listed by him, we were offered a "nonalcoholic" wine as a substitute.
When the waitress noticed our skepticism, she asked if we wanted a sample.
One sip was enough.
No self-respecting wine lover would even go near the stuff.
The lobsters were delicious, even without wine.


James Stirling Made an Art Form of Bold Gestures
Neither James Stirling nor his buildings were ever precisely what you expected, and that was forever his glory.
Stirling, who died last month in London at the age of 66, did not look like an architect of international renown: he was overweight, spoke awkwardly, and tended to shuffle about in a uniform of dark suits, blue shirts and Hush Puppies.
Yet his buildings dazzle.
They leap across our field of vision with a consistent freshness and a capacity to inspire wonder.
There is not one of them that does not bespeak a deep passion for the ability of architecture to enrich the human condition, and if many are troublesome, challenging structures, they nonetheless resonate with a sense of belief in human reason.
His death brings to an end one of the remarkable architectural careers of the 20th century.
Stirling, who lived and worked in Great Britain, did not loom as large in this country as he should have, and that is only partly his fault.
His American buildings, at least those that got built, were generally not his best.
The architecture school at Rice University, his first American effort, completed in 1981, is a try at architectural diplomacy, a carefully wrought homage to the eclectic, vaguely Spanish Mission style of the original Rice campus.


The Rich Get Richer, but the Question Is by How Much
Trying to challenge the widespread impression that the rich got a wildly disproportionate share of the gains from the Reagan economic boom, the Treasury has been quietly circulating a "primer" on income distribution to journalists and economists.
The 24-page document, prepared by R. Glenn Hubbard, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Tax Analysis, asserts that the richest 1 percent of American taxpayers reaped only 11.3 percent of the income gains in the 1980's.
The Treasury tracked the same individuals -- those who had extremely high incomes in 1979 -- from 1979 to 1988.


METRO DIGEST
The Economy  Governor Cuomo and state legislative leaders agreed on more than a dozen major bills left over from the legislative session, including fiscal packages for Nassau and Suffolk Counties and an $800 million bond act intended to create jobs.  [ Page A1. ] Federal investigators and state regulators have found evidence of questionable business practices at Blue Cross and Blue Shield.  [ A1. ]


Promoting Cotton as a Piece Of the Nation's Social Fabric
GRITTY, sometimes harsh images that seem lifted from newscasts, documentaries or political advertising will soon begin appearing in an unlikely milieu: television commercials for consumer products.
Cotton Inc., the association representing America's cotton growers, will introduce three unconventional spots on Saturday that weave serious themes into its sales pitches, calling cotton "the fabric of our lives."


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill market, beginning with today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills, followed on Thursday by an auction of one-year bills.
By late in the day Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.15 percent and on the six-month bill 3.20 percent.
The rate on a one-year was 3.34 percent.


INSIDE
Iraq Rebuffs U.N. Envoy
Iraq sent an envoy away empty-handed, citing sovereignty and security in refusing to allow inspectors into its Agriculture Ministry.
Page A3.
Plea for an AIDS Movement
A conference on AIDS opened in Amsterdam with reports of a new virus, and a plea for new political parties focusing on health issues.
Page A2.
Faldo Wins British Open
Nick Faldo of England revived in the late going to win the tournament for the third time, besting John Cook by one shot.
SportsMonday, page C1.


BAKER SAYS ARABS SHOULD YIELD NEXT
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, seeking to revive the stalled Middle East peace talks, said today that now that the Israelis had a new Government that was signaling a willingness to compromise, it was time for the Arabs to do the same.
Hours before Mr.
Baker arrived, the new Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, announced that he was suspending all new building of Jewish settlements in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip pending a review by the Government of exactly what is being built where.


Review/Pop; A Battle of 2 Headliner Bands
Crank up adolescent frustration to the breaking point, and it can come back three ways: as cynicism, as morbid fantasy and as spite laced with insecurity.
Those attitudes, and music to match them, filled Giants Stadium on Saturday when Faith No More, Metallica and Guns 'n' Roses performed at a sold-out concert, the second stop for one of this summer's major tours.
With both Metallica and Guns 'n' Roses playing headliner-length, 140-minute sets, it was a triumphant show that kept much of the audience on its feet until after 2 A.M., when Guns 'n' Roses set off their final flash pots.
Inevitably, it was also a battle of the bands, and it may have been the presence of the dependably galvanizing Metallica that goaded Guns 'n' Roses to tear into its songs and top the competition.


Beating Back the Heat the Old-Fashioned Way


W. Colston Leigh, 90, Organizer Of Biggest Lecture Agency in U.S.
W.
Colston Leigh, who parlayed a moment of fluke publicity into the creation of the world's leading speakers' agency, died on Wednesday at his home in Tampa, Fla.
He was 90 years old.
The cause of death was not given. His family said he had been in declining health.


Review/Theater; Eric Bogosian Parodies Humanity's Dark Side
In the funniest among several new monologues that he performed at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday and Friday evening, Eric Bogosian parodies the popular psychologist John Bradshaw as his philosophy might be merchandized by a caricature of Werner Erhard.
Where Mr.
Bradshaw's earnest evangelical oratory exhorts people to get in touch with the "inner child" in themselves, Mr.
Bogosian's character is a sarcastic, aggressive pitchman who urges people to indulge their "inner babies." The quintessential inner baby experience he describes is the childish happiness of successfully stealing a candy bar while the storekeeper's back is turned.
"Babies don't worry," he declares.
"They are connected to the center, they are in the now." By making our inner babies happy with feedings every two hours, he promises, we can make the world a better place.


Anti-Semitism in 'Batman Returns'? Be Serious; As Freud Said
To the Editor:
Re "Batman and the Jewish Question" (Op-Ed, July 2) by Rebecca Roiphe and Daniel Cooper:
Sorry to break it to you folks but, as Freud said, sometimes a cigar is just a cigar.
NEIL WENGER  Los Angeles, July 3, 1992


The Proof Is in the Punch And Bowe Provides Both
Riddick Bowe, it turns out, is for real.
He can fight.
And he proved it Saturday night against a strong, determined South African named Pierre Coetzer.
Bowe methodically pounded Coetzer until Referee Mills Lane decided to stop the fight with one second remaining in the seventh round and Coetzer's face looking just a bit less misshapen than that of a horror-film character.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Alltel Corp Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Dana Corp Dial Reit Inc Eastern Utils Assoc B F Goodrich Co Eli Lilly &amp; Co Merry Ld &amp; Invt Inc Southern Co TUESDAY


People
*
Jeff Griffith was named a senior art director and Jim Othmer was named a senior copywriter at Ayer Inc., New York, working as a creative team on the A.T.&amp; T. and Procter &amp; Gamble accounts.
Mr.
Griffith was previously a freelancer; Mr.
Othmer was previously a group creative supervisor at Grey Entertainment &amp; Media, New York. *
E.
C. (Mick) Prokopis was named executive vice president at Ziff Communications Co., New York, succeeding Philip Sine, who will work on special projects until his retirement.
Mr.
Prokopis was previously vice president of budgeting at Digital Equipment Corp., Maynard, Mass.


Buildup to the Downfall at Digital
As the directors of the Digital Equipment Corporation awaited a cost-cutting budget prepared this spring for fiscal 1993, Digital's president, Kenneth H. Olsen, drove another wedge into the growing rift with his directors.
Rejecting the pressure to cut costs, Mr.
Olsen ordered the company's financial managers to draft a second budget that counted on increased revenues to straighten out the company.


In Choppy Russian Economy, A Family Jury-Rigs a Budget
The Zverev family is getting by in the new Russia, thank you very much.
It's not easy, and the Zverevs get grumpy about the contradictions of the present, which is full of confusion, and nervous about the future -- about whether Russia's bet on the West, on democracy and a market economy is going to pay off.
But they are managing, finding ways not just to make more money, but to make their lives more rewarding.
And the manner in which they have coped with the radical changes in Russian economic life -- far higher prices, but also more possibilities for the even modestly clever -- is a testament to the survival of initiative and entrepreneurship under Soviet Communism.


World Economies


Mabel R. Thomas, 75, Director of Big Sisters
Mabel Randall Thomas, who led the Big Sisters of New York in the creation of its programs to help troubled children, died on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 75 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of a heart attack after a long illness, her family said.


Anti-Semitism in 'Batman Returns'? Be Serious
To the Editor:
We are bewildered that you gave a major portion of the July 2 Op-Ed page to "Batman and the Jewish Question," a bizarre and ludicrous pseudo-analysis of the allegedly anti-Semitic implications of the blockbuster movie "Batman Returns" -- produced by the lurid and overheated imaginations of two college students.
One suspects that what began as a satire for the campus newspaper took itself too seriously somewhere along the way.
Students are often earnest, but unaware of their own limitations.
Yet for you to publish it is (or ought to be) an embarrassment.


U.N. Aide Quits Iraq After Failing To Gain Access for Arms Inquiry
Iraq sent a senior United Nations envoy away empty-handed today, citing sovereignty and security as reasons for its latest refusal to allow United Nations arms inspectors into its Agriculture Ministry.
"The Iraqi position is fundamentally unchanged," Rolf Ekeus, head of the commission to eliminate Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, said before he left the country.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  TEXAS RANGERS -- Recalled Monty Fariss, outfielder, from Oklahoma City of the American Association.
Released John Cangelosi, outfielder.
National League  NEW YORK METS -- Activated Bret Saberhagen, pitcher, from the disabled list.
Placed Dwight Gooden, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 17.
Football  National Football League  INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Signed Shoun Habersham and Eddie Miller, wide receivers, Tony McCoy, nose tackle, Stephen Grant, linebacker, and Michael Brandon and Derek Steele, defensive ends.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Traded Paul Richardson, wide receiver, to the Green Bay Packers to complete a previous deal.
Agreed to terms with Elvis Patterson, defensive back.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Placed Eddie Blake, defensive lineman, and Bobby Harden, safety, on the physically unable to perform list.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Alan Haller, cornerback.


White's Heavy Steps to Lunch Worry Coslet
It's the second week of training camp for the Jets and already Coach Bruce Coslet is worried about the weight of Dwayne White, the starting right guard.
"No, he's not O.K., but Dwayne is working on it and he's coming down," Coslet said of the 6-foot-2-inch White, who is entering his third pro season out of Alcorn State and is listed in the media guide at 315 pounds, a figure probably arrived upon a couple of months ago.


Fed Chief's Assessment Of Economy Is Awaited
After three years of trying to put the economy on track toward a stable, sustainable recovery, the Federal Reserve Board's chairman, Alan Greenspan, will try to explain to Congress this week why the central bank's efforts have not succeeded.
On Tuesday and Wednesday, Mr.
Greenspan is scheduled to provide his semiannual presentation on monetary policy and the economy.


Dear Rokeby Farms,It's Time to Say . . .
PAUL MELLON, an art collector and racing impresario, put it bluntly last week in a graceful but direct memo to his employees at the 60-year-old Rokeby Farms in Upperville, Va.:
"On June 11, I became 85 years of age, time for me to set a different course for Rokeby Stables," he wrote.


Sheriffs Fight To Keep Power In New Jersey
Their titles predate the Norman conquest and their positions are enshrined in the State Constitution.
But New Jersey's 21 county sheriffs have been anything but revered in recent years.
The holders of what was once one of the most powerful offices in the state have been under attack as political hacks or worse, and they have watched as many of their duties, like operating county jails, have been taken over by other county and state agencies.


Schofield? Six R.B.I.? It's Not a Joke
The afternoon's work was officially entered into major league baseball's statistical record, thereby doomed to a lifetime of being double-checked.
Under Schofield, Dick, the July 19 entry reads: 4 at-bats, 1 run, 2 hits, 6 runs batted in.
The San Francisco Giants will read it and weep.
Anyone else who calls it up will read it and wonder.
How?
How exactly?


Hard Choices for Staten Island
A new financial study has to give pause to Staten Islanders anxious to secede from New York City.
Emphasis on the word pause.
The study is fine as far as it goes.
But because of its narrowly defined scope, it raises more questions than it answers.
The study, by faculty members at N.Y.U.'s Robert F. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service, found that Staten Islanders get up to $180 million more in city services than they pay for.
Thus if Staten Island became independent it would have to close a huge budget gap just to stay even.


Californians Confront Wave of Quake Rumors
In the three weeks since Southern California was shaken by a series of powerful earthquakes and aftershocks, scientists have been rushing to quell a wave of rumors that they now know the long-dreaded Big One is imminent.
The two quakes that struck the mountains and deserts east of here on June 28 did raise seismologists' concerns that new stresses on the southern part of the San Andreas fault could generate a tremendously destructive quake much sooner than previously thought.


Back Talk From 'Murphy Brown' to Dan Quayle
"Murphy Brown" will seek revenge on Vice President Dan Quayle in the opening episode of the hit CBS comedy series next September, Diane English, the show's creator, said in an interview here.
In a special hourlong story, she said, the series will respond to the Vice President's charge that Murphy Brown, the fictional anchor of a television news-magazine show, is symbolic of the denigration of American family values by what he has called a "cultural elite" in Hollywood.


Butts Backs An Educator For President
The Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d, the pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem who came under fire from black leaders for his support of Ross Perot, said yesterday that he now was endorsing another independent candidate, Ron D. Daniels, an educator who Mr.
Butts said could not win the Presidency.
While he continued to attack the Democrats' record with blacks, he said the "practical choice" for President, with Mr.
Perot out of the race, was Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  VOTES ADRIFT IN SEA OF APATHY
Three months ago, the South Bronx election district in which Bertha Wade lives, in Melrose, rendered a unanimous judgment on all of the Democratic Presidential candidates: Not a single enrolled Democrat voted in the primary.
The prognosis for November is that if apathy does not win again, it will not lose by much, either.
"To be honest about it, no, I don't think it matters," Mrs.
Wade said, "because they all just promise everything and wind up doing the same thing once they get in." Metro Matters, B2.
BRIGHTON BEACH COMPROMISE
After saying repeatedly that he could bend "no more" to demands of New York City planners, the developer of a highly contested proposal to replace the historic Brighton Beach Baths with luxury- and middle-income condominiums has apparently bent.
In one of the most tumultuous, drawn-out land disputes in the city's recent history, Stephen Muss has agreed to change the plan for Brighton-by-the-Sea by scaling down the project and adding subsidized housing and more open space.
B3.


It Seems That Simms Is a Giant to Stay
No matter what you hear about a possible trade, no matter how the words of Ray Handley, the Giants' head coach, and George Young, the team's general manager, are interpreted, Phil Simms is highly unlikely to go anywhere.
When the Giants open training camp Monday, Simms will be their backup quarterback, and when they end their season, barring injury to him or his successor as starter, Jeff Hostetler, Simms will still be the backup quarterback.


Honors
*
Richard P. Monley, the Detroit and Mideastern advertising sales manager for Better Homes and Gardens magazine, was named president of the Adcraft Club of Detroit.


NBC's Olympic Hopes Rise on Pay-Per-View
After months of silence about how many people have been signing up for NBC's pay-per-view coverage of the Summer Olympics, executives in charge of the venture now say recent figures indicate the project has a much better chance of success, defying two years of doubts and ridicule.
Jim Dolan, the executive in charge of the Olympics Triplecast, a joint venture between NBC and Cablevision Systems Inc., said that as of the beginning of last week, 50,000 to 60,000 subscribers had agreed to pay up to $125 for the three-channel cable coverage of the Games in Barcelona, Spain.
The Triplecast will begin Sunday and run for 15 days.


Arduous Path to a Difficult Choice; Along the Way, Congregation Learns to Reshape Its Needs
After a year of work, the search committee at the First Church of Christ, Congregational, recommended a candidate for pastor of the small suburban church.
But word quickly leaked out that the committee had a secret.
On Jan. 13 its chairman, Rick Jones, met with church officers.
He described the candidate: a man in his 30's, married, with small children.
Most important for Bethany, which like many congregations is distressed that its teen-agers leave church life, he had experience working with youth.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Mattel Inc., El Segundo, Calif., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $100 million of notes due in 1997. *
Nuevo Energy Co., Houston, is offering $75 million in 12 1/2 percent senior subordinated notes due in 2002 at 98.583 to yield 12 3/4 percent through Paine Webber.
Callable after five years, the notes are rated B-3 by Moody's and B- by S.&amp; P.


Plan Revised For Brighton By Developer
After saying repeatedly that he could bend "no more" to demands of city planners, the developer of a highly contested proposal to replace the historic Brighton Beach Baths with luxury- and middle-income condominiums has apparently bent.
In one of the most tumultuous, drawn-out land disputes in New York City's recent history, Stephen Muss of Alexander Muss &amp; Sons agreed last week to change the plan for Brighton-by-the-Sea by scaling down the project and adding subsidized housing and more open space.


Fathers Find That Child Support Means Owing More Than Money
For Andre Sherman, holidays too often serve as painful reminders that he has failed to become the kind of a father he believes he should be.
At age 32, Mr.
Sherman acknowledges six children whose ages range from 8 to 16 years.
They were born to four different women, none of whom he married or promised long-term assistance.
Each of the mothers receives welfare payments to help her raise the children, whom Mr.
Sherman now says he fathered impulsively and recklessly.


Review/Music; City Opera Tones Down Its Update of 'Traviata'
The New York City Opera's update of "La Traviata" returned on Friday night with many of its egregious exaggerations toned down or eliminated.
Nicholas Muni's conception -- 19th-century Paris deposited in the midst of 20th-century Eurotrash -- has an acceptable logic.
One winces a little at Verdi's Romantic effusiveness expressed in such cynical and sadomasochistic terms, but the metaphor holds up.
In the original performances of this year-old production, however, Mr.
Muni's cleverness as a translator of periods kept getting in the way.
This season the stage director is listed as Albert Sherman.
Perhaps he is responsible for the moderations that have turned this "Traviata' into something worth seeing. Gone is Scene 1's shirt-ripping episode, which sabotaged the effect of "Sempra libera" in mid-stride. Gone too are many of the nasty, hyperactive little bits of stage business practiced by the larger cast.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday


New Bosnia Truce, Like the Others, Fails
Sporadic mortar and machine-gun fire continued here tonight several hours after the deadline established for a cease-fire, maintaining the pattern of previous truce efforts that have come and gone with little or no impact.
An agreement signed Friday in London by the warring factions was to have halted fighting across all of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But the continuing fire in Sarajevo and a number of other centers, reported by amateur radio operators to the Bosnian Government here, suggested that a truce had failed to take hold immediately in places where the fighting has been most intense.


Inkster Holds Off Lopez
Juli Inkster was supposed to have an easy Sunday stroll on the tree-lined fairways of the Wykagyl Country Club course today in the final round of the JAL Big Apple Classic.
She started the day with an eight-shot lead over her closest pursuer, Jane Geddes.
But no lead is secure in a tournament in which Nancy Lopez is playing.
While Geddes faltered and fell out of serious contention in the late stages, Lopez, who started the day nine shots behind, proved a real threat to the 32-year-old Inkster.


Anti-Semitism in 'Batman Returns'? Be Serious; Gratuitous Bigotry
To the Editor:
As a recent graduate of Columbia College myself, I was strongly tempted to dismiss "Batman and the Jewish Question" (Op-Ed, July 2) by Rebecca Roiphe and Daniel Cooper as the product of a pair of intellectually overheated, pretentiously affected and politically correct undergraduates straining to ferret out all the nonexistent sinister motives lurking deep within our decadent popular culture.
Then I saw "Batman Returns" for myself.
Although I acknowledge the pitfalls in reading an overintricate analysis into such things, I cannot in good conscience gainsay the Roiphe-Cooper observations.
Please allow me to add a few of my own:


Ex-Aide Faults Perot Temperment
Edward J. Rollins, the former co-manager of Ross Perot's Presidential campaign, said today that Mr.
Perot was not emotionally suited to be President.
"What I saw in the the last 45 days indicated to me that the temperament was probably not quite right to be the President of the United States," Mr.
Rollins said in an interview on the ABC News program "This Week."


Twins, Trailing by 5, Rally to Beat Red Sox
Twins 7, Red Sox 5
MINNEAPOLIS, July 19 (AP) -- Brian Harper capped a three-run seventh inning with a run-scoring single off Jeff Reardon as the Minnesota Twins came back from a 5-0 deficit today and beat the Boston Red Sox, 7-5.


Gunfire Answers Bosnia Truce
A European-brokered cease-fire failed to take hold in Bosnia.
Instead, artillery, mortar and machine-gun fire thundered in Sarajevo several hours after the deadline.
Page A6.


British-USAir Deal Is Seen
British Airways, which has long signaled its interest in joining forces with an American airline, is close to signing a deal that would give the British carrier a stake of up to a 25 percent in the USAir Group, The Sunday Telegraph of London reported yesterday.
The newspaper said that the deal was imminent and that British Airways executives had traveled to the United States to discuss a deal with USAir officials.


No Headline
For 70 years, people got paid the same no matter how well they worked.
Now we live day by day, with everything changing, so you never know what anything will cost.
Some want to go back, because it was easier. -- NATASHA S. STEPANOV, a Moscow resident.  [ A1:3 ]


Along for the Ride


John Paul, His Voice Halting, Offers His Thanks on Radio
His voice frail and halting, Pope John Paul II offered his thanks in a prerecorded radio broadcast today to those who had prayed for him as he underwent surgery five days ago.
The Pope's first words to the public since the operation Wednesday to remove a colon tumor and his gall bladder were beamed to thousands of pilgrims gathered in broiling heat in St.
Peter's Square.


Allen Newell, 65; Scientist Founded A Computing Field
Allen Newell, a founder of the field of artificial intelligence and a leader in the study of human thinking, died yesterday at Montefiore Hospital in Pittsburgh.
He was 65 years old and lived in Pittsburgh.
He died of cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Market Place; Pension Populism Gets a Critical Lift
MANAGEMENT pain can bring shareholder gain.
There is now some dollars-and-sense evidence that rambunctious, aggrieved shareholders do indeed improve the value of the companies they target.
A study done for the California Public Employees Retirement System has found a $137 million annual payoff on proxy campaigns that cost the fund only $500,000 a year to run.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; Democrats Stay on TV, Even If Not on the News
Heading into last week's convention, it looked as if network cutbacks and a lack of real drama would doom the Democrats to media obscurity.
Instead, the convention turned out to be almost impossible for television viewers to avoid.
For six days running, it was the theme of the morning programs and the top story of the network news programs anchored from Madison Square Garden.
It filled local news programs and took over prime time on CNN and PBS.
It was a running joke on the "Tonight" show and the major topic on "Nightline," and it even occupied the time between music videos on MTV.


Sports of The Times; More Than Big Toe Is Hurting Lasorda
THE LOS ANGELES Dodgers have become a charitable organization, a kind of do-gooder group, like a Welcome Wagon on 50 legs.
When other teams see them showing up on their doorstep, they find it hard to suppress their glee.
Take the Phillies over the weekend.
On Thursday, the Dodgers arrived in Philadelphia for a four-game visit.
The Phillies, in last place in the National League East, lost the opener, their ninth loss in a row.
But then on Friday the Dodgers, last in the National League West, gave the Phillies a gift: a victory.


Victor Louis, Journalist, Is Dead; Interpreter of Kremlin to the West
Victor Louis, a Russian journalist who for many years watched the ins and outs of Kremlin politics for the Western press, died here on Saturday, his family said Sunday.
He was believed to be 64 years old.
Mr. Louis died in a hospital from a heart attack after surgery.


A Lord Returns to His Manor in a Dynastic War
IN 1639, King Charles I of England rewarded a loyal soldier named Lion Gardiner by giving him royal patent to this 3,300-acre island of rolling hills and white oak at the eastern end of Long Island.
Lion Gardiner settled the island, cleared fields for his crops and animals and built an imposing farmhouse atop the highest hill overlooking the waters beyond, which he called Gardiners Bay.


Task in '92: Getting to Barcelona
Just as senior Olympic officials spent the days leading to the last four Summer Games urging countries to abandon threatened boycotts, they are at work attempting to have the largest group possible for the opening ceremonies of the Barcelona Olympics on Saturday.
But this time, the circumstances are somewhat different.
Those whom the International Olympic Committee is trying to get here actually want to participate.
They include two or three teams from what was once Yugoslavia and even an I.O.C. member, Ivan Slavkov of Bulgaria, whose passport was lifted last week by the police in Sofia as he was about to board a plane for Barcelona.


Plan to Stock Salmon in River Is Dropped by Trenton Agency
New Jersey, facing solid opposition from sport-fishing groups who feared an ecological disaster, has dropped plans to introduce Pacific salmon to the Delaware River watershed in the hope of creating a multimillion-dollar sport fishery.
The state Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife had proposed spending $800,000 to release 300,000 young chinook salmon annually for five years in the Musconetcong River, a tributary of the Delaware.
The young fish would presumably have swum out to sea, remained there for about three years while growing to 20 or 30 pounds, then returned to the Musconetcong to spawn.
They would then have been fair game for fishermen who, it was hoped, would have poured millions into the local economy.


Help Russia for the Long Haul
The second Russian revolution is progressing only by fits and starts.
Its leaders, however bold, won't be able to take many steps forward without taking some steps back.
The risk of a relapse in Russia calls for clarity about America's commitment to assist Russian reform.
Yet Congress is slow to vote funds.
And instead of clarity, President Bush has sown confusion.
He told reporters after the seven industrialized powers pledged new aid earlier this month, "I don't know if there's enough money in the world to instantly solve the problems of the Russian economy."


U.N. OBSERVER UNIT TO GO TO SOMALIA
The senior United Nations representative in Somalia said today that 46 unarmed United Nations military observers would be sent to the Somali capital, Mogadishu, this week to monitor the fragile cease-fire there and thus hasten the delivery of relief foods to the starving population.
The representative, Mohammed Sahnoun, said the leader of one of the country's warring factions, Gen.
Mohammed Farrah Aidid, had dropped his objections to the small peacekeeping force.
Four members of the 50-member contingent are already in the city, but the general's objections had barred a further deployment this month, causing more problems in the attempt to deliver relief to the famine-stricken nation.


Troma, the Film Studio That Says Low Is Good And Bad May Be Better
For nearly 20 years, Troma, the New York-based independent film studio and distributor, has aimed low and hit its target every time.
Year in and year out, it has enriched the nation's cinematic diet with R-rated offerings like "A Nymphoid Barbarian in Dinosaur Hell," "The Good, the Bad and the Subhumanoid," "The Toxic Avenger" and "Surf Nazis Must Die."
Somehow, while achieving a moderate level of prosperity, the company has also managed to earn the attention, even the respect, of serious cineastes around the world.
Graduate film students have begun rummaging through the Troma archives, and two Belgian scholars have started work on a serious critical study of the company, whose oeuvre can be divided into the early Troma output of sophomoric teen-age sex comedies with a cheesy look, and the more classic late Troma, which runs to schlocky, tongue-in-cheek horror films.


Dance in Review
Dances for Wave Hill
Wave Hill 249th Street and Independence Avenue Riverdale, Bronx Saturday, Sunday, Aug. 1 and 2


SETTLEMENTS PUT ON HOLD IN ISRAEL
A few hours before Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d arrived here today, the new Israeli Government signaled a break from the past by ordering a review of all previous decisions to build new settlements in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Meeting for the first time, the Cabinet of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin also affirmed a Housing Ministry decision made last Thursday to impose a weeklong freeze on new construction contracts.
According to settlers, this could eventually affect as many as 5,600 housing units, and it has been denounced by the leader of a settlers' group as "a declaration of war."


New-Look Lineup Puts End To Skid
The lineup looked different, not so much out of desperation as necessity.
But it worked.
Roberto Kelly sat today.
So did Charlie Hayes.
Don Mattingly moved up in the batting order, from cleanup to third.
Mel Hall was dropped from second to fifth.
Randy Velarde and Dion James started.


Faldo Regains His Poise And Captures The Prize
Just when it all seemed gone in the wind and sands of Muirfield -- all the preparation and superlative play and bulletproof composure and, most important, a four-shot lead -- Nick Faldo rose from the depths of desperation today to seize his third British Open title by a stroke over a faltering John Cook.
The 35-year-old Englishman gutted out a two-over-par 73 in a final round that revealed him at both his most vulnerable and his most focused, for a total of 12-under 272 on the same venerated linksland where he won his first British Open in 1987.
He also won in 1990 at St.
Andrews.


Dropping Out of the Race Becomes a Family Affair
As they awaited Greg LeMond in a lounge of the hotel housing the Z team, the American rider's wife, mother and father calmly watched a television replay of today's stage of the Tour de France, during which LeMond had dropped out of the event.
"For his sake, I'm glad it's over," said Kathy LeMond, the rider's wife.
"He's just so exhausted."


Japan Lures Auto Workers With 'Dream' Factories
Move over, Disneyland.
Make way for Nissan Human Land, as a company brochure describes the Nissan Motor Company's newest factory.
Here workers toil not in the assembly plant or paint shop, but work happily in the assembly or painting "pavilions." They walk along Palm Street and over Flamingo Bridge.
And they eat in an employee cafeteria called the Harbor View Restaurant, with a panoramic view of the loading docks.


15 Armed Muslims Are Slain By Indian Guards in Kashmir
Indian border guards shot and killed at least 15 armed Muslim infiltrators today on the Kashmir frontier, officials said.
A border patrol opened fire on the infiltrators when they refused to surrender, said the officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, as is customary.
They said that at least 10 AK-47 rifles, 2 submachine guns and several thousand rounds of ammunitions had been recovered from the muslims.


Bridge
A famous personality once described a game with "some of the boys" at the club:
"One day we were playing and two of them forgot their hearing aids and the other one had a cold. I opened my first hand with a bid of one spade, the opponent to my left said a heart, my partner said one diamond and the fourth guy said a club. I said, 'Goodbye, gentlemen, we'll play tomorrow.' And Artie said, 'Thanks, George, and you look good, too.' "


Swiss Plan for the Irish
To the Editor:
Ireland's Nobel Peace Prize winner, Sean McBride, gave a major speech shortly before his death in which he urgently recommended the model of the Swiss Federal Republic as the political compromise to unite Ireland with peace and justice for all, north and south.
The treaty that established modern-day Switzerland ended the political nightmare of 100 years of religious war in Europe.


Public Housing Ills Lead to Questions About H.U.D.
When Federal housing officials took over day-to-day control of the Philadelphia Housing Authority in May after 13 years of documenting its stunning mismanagement, nearly everyone here welcomed the move.
The authority's own chairman, Jonathan A. Saidel, described the agency as "a dumping ground for incompetents and political appointees."
The question on the minds of many people here and in Congress is why the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, which provides almost two-thirds of the agency's annual budget of $150 million, did not take this step years ago.


Stocks Plummet in Tokyo As Nikkei Index Drops 4%
After a monthlong recovery, Japanese stock prices dropped sharply today, with the Nikkei index slipping below the 16,000-point level.
Analysts said they expected further selling.
Declining expectations of lower interest rates, signs of a continuing weak economy and reports of serious loan-loss problems at banks contributed to today's selloff, analysts said.


Slain Officer Was Shot at Very Close Range
An off-duty Housing Authority police officer who was killed outside a Queens nightclub early Saturday was shot once in the head from very close range, possibly within inches, police investigators said yesterday.
The investigators also said witnesses to the shooting had given detectives a description of a suspect.
The police expect to obtain a photograph of the man this week.


With Eye on Reso Case, Witness Rule Is Attacked
New Jersey law-enforcement officials have started a campaign to change a rule of evidence that could undermine the state's prosecution in the fatal kidnapping of an Exxon executive, Sidney J. Reso.
The rule, long criticized by New Jersey judges as archaic and an obstruction in trials, allows a defendant to bar incriminating testimony by a spouse in trials.


In Japan, Militarism Has Little Appeal
To the Editor:
"Japan Had to Join the Peacekeeping Effort" (letters, June 18), responding to "Japan's Healthy Military Allergy" (editorial, June 2), gives me food for thought as a Japanese veteran of World War II.


Capriati Is Off but Seles Just Hums
The noises came from across the net.
Monica Seles couldn't help noticing.
The sounds she heard Jennifer Capriati make during an unsuccessful attempt at a second-set comeback seemed more like forceful gasps.
They did not prevent Seles from achieving a nearly silent 6-1, 6-4 victory for the championship of the Pathmark Tennis Classic.
Her victory in the exhibition event will not help Seles strengthen her No. 1 world ranking.
But her decision to play here, for an appearance fee of more than $250,000, did lead to her acquiring backstage passes at a Guns 'n' Roses concert at Giants Stadium, a championship trophy filled with products of the sponsors and shopping bags of gifts.


Sharpton Arranges for Off-Duty Officers to Guard Him
Saying that the Police Department had not responded to his requests for protection after a threat was reportedly made against him over a police radio frequency, the Rev.
Al Sharpton said yesterday that off-duty black police officers would guard him during his campaign for the United States Senate.
Mr.
Sharpton cited a newspaper report that while he was visiting Washington Heights on July 7 after disturbances in the upper Manhattan neighborhood, a voice transmitted over the police frequency said, "Shoot him."


Dance in Review
Septime Webre La Guardia Concert Hall


Troubled Times Beyond the Lines
Affidavit No.
C92-658 C, filed on May 19 in United States District Court in Seattle, begins: "I am the plaintiff in this action entitled Victoria C. v. Cincinnati Bengals, et. al. 'C' is the initial for my maiden name. I reside in Spokane County, Washington, and am a U.S. citizen. I am 35 years of age.
"Although I have had and continue to have substantial difficulty physically and psychologically dealing with the rape itself and its aftermath, as well as some of the things appearing in the newspaper about the suit, I am competent to truthfully testify. I was gang raped by approximately 15 football players who are or were members of the Cincinnati Bengals football team on or about October 4, 1990, at the Doubletree Suites in Tukwila, Washington."


Bomb Kills Anti-Mafia Official and 5 Others in Sicily
Barely two months after the Mafia assassinated Italy's senior crusader against organized crime, a potential successor was killed today by a powerful car bomb as he arrived for a visit with his mother in Palermo.
Five bodyguards also died.
The victim, Paolo Borsellino, 54 years old, the chief prosecutor in the Sicilian capital, had reportedly just left the car and was walking with his bodyguards to his mother's apartment house when the remote-controlled bomb exploded.
One report said he was ringing his mother's doorbell at the moment of the explosion.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing; Forget Those Legal Briefs: Novels by Lawyers Pay Off
SOMEWHERE in a glass skyscraper in Manhattan, a lawyer in a gray suit is sitting behind his desk, desultorily reading over a contract and dreaming of literary celebrity.
If Scott Turow and John Grisham could turn their knowledge of the law into lucrative, best-selling commercial fiction, he is thinking, why can't I?
He is far from alone.
Lawyers in San Francisco, Chicago and Washington, from big-city firms and small-town prosecutors' offices, have been sending manuscripts of their own legal novels to agents, publishers and, in some cases, directly to bookstores.


Just Swinging Along Strumming a Song
Not only did LARRY RINKER have a surprisingly fine British Open, finishing tied for 12th yesterday at four-under-par 284, but he made the deal of his life in connection with his other passion: music.
Rinker is an accomplished guitarist who has frequently sat in on sessions and performances with pros like the GATLIN BROTHERS and STEPHEN STILLS.
Like many accomplished pickers, he covets and collects vintage guitars.


How to Break the Cable Squeeze
Cable television companies, free of meaningful competition and, since 1984, of regulation, have been socking customers with immense rate increases.
The House votes this week on putting an end to the gouging.
The Senate passed its version of cable re-regulation earlier this year, so a "yes" vote in the House would successfully conclude an uphill, three-year battle.
Even so, viewers will need to beware.
The House bill re-regulates with a heavy hand instead of a light touch, saddling cable companies with burdensome regulations.
The threat is that costly regulations will force local authorities to grant large rate hikes, or force cable companies to cut service and put off investment in new service.


Review/Rock; What Made Husker Du Husker Du
In the years since the breakup of the influential post-punk band Husker Du in 1987, the singer and guitarist Bob Mould has slowly been coming full circle.
His 1989 solo debut album, "Workbook," was a radical departure, trading Husker's sonic fury and frenzied three-chord distortion for somber, elegant acoustic arrangements that rarefied emotion rather than destroying it.
His next album, "Black Sheets of Rain," retained the arch structural convolutions but doused them once again in noise.
With his new band, Sugar, Mr.
Mould has further pared his approach and returned to Husker Du's power-trio lineup.
At Maxwell's here on Friday night, with Mr.
Mould, David Barbe on bass and Malcolm Travis on drums, Sugar recaptured the force and virulence of post-punk's early days while adding the power and know-how of maturity.
The set opened with a grunt of feedback from Mr.
Mould's guitar, leading into the slamming three-chord barrage of "The Act We Act," a song that will appear on Sugar's forthcoming album "Copper Blue," to be released in September on Rykodisc.


Forcing Welfare Fathers to Pay Up Hits a Stumbling Block: Lack of Jobs
The goal is worthy: when a child is born out of wedlock, establish paternity and make sure the father helps support his offspring.
The record is sorry: as of 1989, only one in four unwed mothers had a child-support order in place, compared with three in four divorced mothers, and even fewer actually received payments.
Now, enforcement is tightening up.
If mothers apply for welfare they are pressured to name the father.
Increasingly, for divorced and never-married fathers alike, support payments are deducted from paychecks right along with taxes.


Giving the President Cause for Worry
The Democrats may have been kicking dirt, but it was baseball that threw PRESIDENT BUSH a curve last week: The American League won the 1992 All-Star Game, putting a strong counterspin on the President's re-election expectations.
It seems that since the first All-Star Game in 1933, incumbent presidents have won re-election six times and in each of those years the National League won the All-Star Game.


Boy, 5, Shot Outside His Home During a Robbery in Brooklyn
A 5-year-old boy whom the police described as an innocent bystander was shot twice during a robbery Saturday night outside his Brooklyn home, the police said.
He was listed in fair condition yesterday.
The boy, Andrew Smith, was being treated at Bellevue Hospital for bullet wounds to his right leg and hip, hospital officials said.
The police said they had suspects in the case but had made no arrests yesterday.


Rijo's Elbow Causes Discomfort for Reds
Jose Rijo doesn't know how much longer his sore right elbow can hold out.
The Cincinnati Reds' ace was glad to leave the game after just six innings Saturday night in a 3-2 victory over St.
Louis, a sign that his elbow is becoming a major concern again.
"All I know is it's not getting any better," Rijo said.
"I'm not having any fun, even though we're winning."


Trade Pact Details Are Emerging
William H. Gates, who dropped out of Harvard to found the Microsoft Corporation, which grew into the nation's largest software company, could conceivably have a little difficulty if he wanted to program computers for a living in Mexico after a North American free-trade agreement was signed.
The agreement would ease temporary-visa rules for Canadian, American and Mexican computer operators who cross borders to find a job.
But it requires the operators to have university degrees to qualify for special consideration, so as to prevent hundreds of thousands of Mexicans from flooding north after a few days of vocational training.


Nili Miriam Limoni and James Alan Schnitzer
Nili Miriam Limoni, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Uri Limoni of Oyster Bay, L.I., was married yesterday to James Alan Schnitzer, the son of Hedy Schnitzer of Riverdale, N.Y., and the late Bernard Schnitzer.
Rabbi Stephen Franklin performed the ceremony at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.


From Threatened to Just Threadbare, U.P.I. Adjusts to Buyout
In the three weeks since United Press International was acquired by a Saudi-owned, London-based communications company, life at the beleaguered news agency has changed from grim panic about the future to its normal state of threadbare, wise-guy cynicism.
"It's the typical shoestring U.P.I. setup of getting the job done against all odds," said Frank Sapir, the Chicago bureau chief, who was brought to New York last week to help cover the Democratic Convention.


Review/Dance; Latin American Choreographers With No Thought of Columbus
Latin American choreographers are not new to the American Dance Festival and when modern dance companies from Ecuador and Costa Rica made their debuts at the festival here this week, it was clear that the 500th anniversary of Columbus's voyage to the New World was not seen as a pretext for the series.
"Five hundred years of what?" one dancer said at a panel discussion after a concert on Thursday night in Page Auditorium at the festival's home on the Duke University campus.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Will Baker Rescue the Campaign? In Bush Camp, No One's Saying No
President Bush relaxed at his retreat at Camp David, Md., today, while some of his top lieutenants were busy fending off questions about whether Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d would be needed to help run the White House and the President's re-election campaign.
The lieutenants, including Mr.
Baker himself on his way to the Middle East, were clearly not about to answer such questions, but they declined every opportunity to say "no."


Anti-Semitism in 'Batman Returns'? Be Serious; An Eye for an Eye
To the Editor:
Mention of an "eye for an eye" in the July 2 Batman Op-Ed article is an occasion to make it clear once and for all that the biblical statement (Leviticus 24:20) does not connote vengeance or retaliation.
In earlier times and in other cultures before the Bible's pronouncement it was regarded as standard operating procedure to exact a life for an eye.
The Bible says, in effect, the punishment should fit the crime.
It would have engendered less misunderstanding if it had been phrased "only an eye for an eye, nothing more." That is its import.
It is not vindictive; it is mitigatory. (Rabbi) SAMUEL M. SILVER  Delray Beach, Fla., July 3, 1992


A Self-Improvement Course, With Anthony as Student
Greg Anthony said he came to the Knicks' summer camp because he wanted to, not because anyone from the Knicks' organization twisted his arm.
Anthony wants to improve.
The Knicks want him to improve.
So if playing summer-league ball helps Anthony become a better point guard, both he and the Knicks will be happy.


Gold Campaign Gets New Glitter
The World Gold Council, a trade association that promotes gold jewelry, will introduce a print campaign carrying the theme "The gold shivers," in hopes of instilling in consumers a euphoric feeling about glittering gold jewelry.
In a telephone interview, Michael Barlerin, the association's president and chief executive in New York, said the campaign would build on a previous campaign, which carried the theme "Nothing makes you feel as good as gold." He added that both were aimed at women, the primary buyers of gold jewelry.


Anti-Semitism in 'Batman Returns'? Be Serious; Fondness for Herring
To the Editor:
My father read to me today the article about Batman, "Batman and the Jewish Question" (Op-Ed, July 2).


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING Andretti Triumphs The charge has begun.
Michael Andretti, who came from behind last year to win the Indy-car series championship by winning 8 of the last 12 races, made it three of the last four yesterday in Toronto.
The 29-year-old Andretti again gave himself a big jump by making a spectacular start, driving from third to first in the first three turns of the race.
He went on to lead all 103 laps on the 1.78-mile, 11-turn street circuit at the lakefront Exhibition Place, a layout he has conquered three of the last four years and twice in a row.
Andretti, who averaged 97.898 miles an hour, jumped from fourth to second in the standings, cutting Bobby Rahal's lead to 34 points. (AP) TENNIS Germany Prevails The Wimbledon champion, Steffi Graf, and Anke Huber wrapped things up quickly, winning singles matches in Frankfurt yesterday to beat defending champion Spain for Germany's second Federation Cup title.
Graf beat Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, 6-4, 6-2, in the second singles to deliver the title.
Earlier, Huber outlasted Conchita Martinez, 6-3, 6-7 (0-7), 6-1.
In the meaningless doubles, Sanchez Vicario and Martinez beat Huber and Barbara Rittner, 6-1, 6-2. (AP) Korda Wins in Washington: The aggressive net game and solid serve of Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia ended the improbable glory ride of Henrik Holm of Sweden in the NationsBank Classic in Washington.
Korda breezed to a 6-4, 6-4 victory in the final as Holm, ranked No. 114 in the world, saw his serve betray him.
Korda, ranked No. 5 in the world, won $81,600. (AP) Medvedev Takes Final: The Ukrainian teen-ager Andrei Medvedev capped his best week in tennis with a 6-1, 6-4, 6-7 (5-7), 2-6, 6-1 victory against Wayne Ferreira of South Africa in the final of the $1.04 million Stuttgart Grand Prix tournament in Germany.
Medvedev, 17 years old, upset top-seeded Stefan Edberg of Sweden and Thomas Muster of Austria earlier in the week, and he outlasted the seventh-seeded Ferreira in a 2-hour-47-minute marathon played under a blazing sun. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Lewis Relay Unit Wins Carl Lewis and his three Santa Monica Track Club teammates beat a Ben Johnson-led Canadian foursome in the 400-meter relay at an international meet in Ingolstadt, Germany.
Lewis, Mark Witherspoon, Leroy Burrell and Mike Marsh clocked 38.12 seconds, 1.22 seconds faster than the runner-up Canadians. (AP) GOLF  Douglass Wins by 4 Dale Douglass birdied 5 of the last 10 holes on the way to a final-round 66 and a four-shot victory in the Ameritech Senior Open in Aurora, Ill.
Douglass finished at 15-under 201 to vault past the runner-up, Jim Dent, who shot 71, and George Archer, the 36-hole leader who came apart with a 73. (AP) Carnevale Is First: Mark Carnevale shot an eight-under-par 64 to win the $800,000 Chattanooga Classic by two strokes over Ed Dougherty, who set a course record of 62 on Saturday.
While Dougherty could muster only a 71 yesterday, Carnevale put together eight birdies and an 11th-hole eagle to win a $144,000 payoff.
He finished at 19-under-par 269.
Dougherty, second in the Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic a week ago, shared second place at 271 with Dan Forsman. (AP) PRO FOOTBALL  49ers Sign Top Pick Safety Dana Hall, the San Francisco 49ers' top draft choice, was signed last night to a three-year contract worth $2.7 million.
Hall, who helped shut down Desmond Howard in Washington's Rose Bowl victory over Michigan, is projected as the starter at free safety.
Earlier in the day, the 49ers signed their second-round pick, Amp Lee, a running back, and ninth-round pick, Darian Hagan, a receiver.
The club has 10 unsigned veterans, including the All-Pro receiver Jerry Rice. (AP) Raiders Sign Flagler: The Los Angeles Raiders signed running back Terrence Flagler to a free-agent contract.
Flagler, 27 years old, who is going into his sixth pro season, appeared in six games with the Phoenix Cardinals last season. (AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  URGING ARABS TO COMPROMISE  Secretary of State Baker said now that the Israelis had a new Government that was signaling a willingness to compromise, it was time for the Arabs to do the same.
A1  Israel orders a review of plans for building new settlements.
A5


Bomb Kills 6 in Sicily
Two months ago Giovanni Falcone, a celebrated Mafia fighter, was killed in an explosion attributed to the mob.
A local prosecutor, Paolo Borsellino, was on a list of candidates to succeed him.
Mr.
Borsellino was also said to be on a Mafia hit list.
He never got to take the job.
Mr.
Borsellino died in an explosion as he approached his mother's house in Palermo for a Sunday visit.
Article, page A3.


Toulon Journal; Still Aching for Algeria, 30 Years After the Rage
From her restaurant in the port of Toulon, Genevieve Navarro can see the haze coming off the Mediterranean and the ships arriving from a country of which she can hardly bear to speak.
"I won't go back there, ever," she said of Algeria, the land of her birth.
Her friends have returned there to find their former homes in ruins, their neighborhoods run-down, and, most heart-wrenching, their parents' and grandparents' graves desecrated.


Equity Issues Scheduled for This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Active Noise and Vibration Technologies Inc., 3 million common shares.
Paine Webber Inc.


Shrunken Budget Leaves Many Streets in Dangerous Disrepair
Street conditions throughout New York City have grown considerably worse in the last year, in some cases becoming dangerous to motorists, because of drastic cuts by the Dinkins administration in the budget for street repair and maintenance, and some community leaders charge that the remaining money is unfairly allocated.
The city's Transportation Commissioner, Lucius J. Riccio, acknowledged that the streets were reaching a state of crisis because of deep budget cutbacks by City Hall and that some roads were in such bad shape that they posed safety hazards for pedestrians and motorists.


Hampsten Climbs Up, but LeMond Goes Down
Americans made the big news today, good and bad, in the Tour de France as Andy Hampsten easily won the climbers' crown jewel, the stage to Alpe d'Huez, and Greg LeMond dropped out of the race he has won three times.
"It's such a terrific feeling," Hampsten said after he crossed the line of the race's 14th stage.
"For me, it's the world championship to win a stage like this before half a million people. Whenever people back home ask about Alpe d'Huez, I always tell them that other mountains are more difficult to climb but there's nothing like this place for prestige."


Canadian Steelmakers Aim to Dismantle Trade Barriers
Canada's big steelmakers, backed enthusiastically by the Canadian Government, say they have opened negotiations with American steel companies on a pact similar to one already existing in autos to dismantle remaining trade barriers.
Such an accord would not only remove a major irritant in trade relations but would help revive wavering Canadian industrial support for North American free trade.


CHRONICLE
YOLANDA KING, 36 years old, the eldest of the four children of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., has often been asked to speak about her father, and she has always preferred to do so in unconventional ways.
"I have always felt that I could have more impact on people's attitudes through art than through a traditional podium," she said recently.


Some Know No Vote Will Banish Bleakness
ON the night that Mayor David N. Dinkins was exhorting the Democrats to fulfill the "promise of America" and former Representative Barbara Jordan was insisting that "it
does
make a difference who is President," the voices from Bertha Wade's block in the South Bronx were sending a vastly different message.
"To be honest about it, no, I don't think it matters," Mrs.
Wade said, "because they all just promise everything and wind up doing the same thing once they get in."


It's a Garden Party, So Bring Long Pants
Who was the first 6-foot-5-inch former pro basketball player with playing experience at Madison Square Garden to return to the Garden to give a keynote address at a Democratic National Convention?
Here's a hint: When BILL BRADLEY served as a keynoter at the 1992 convention last week, the former Knick, who called it his first performance at the Garden in long pants, became the second.


Silence of the Seals
What can you say about a creature that waddles like a duck, snuffles when it's excited and has a belly that shakes like Santa's?
That likes to have its teeth brushed and its back scratched, and enjoys the occasional walk?
That
loves
to learn new things?
That has the potential to spy on whales, dolphins and assorted denizens of the deep?
You can say, "Let's talk 'Jaws IV.' "


Books of The Times; When Both Parents Get Their Way
Down From Troy A Doctor Comes of Age By Richard Selzer 300 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $20.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Man Behind Convention Emerges as Major Force
Being chairman of the Democratic Party has traditionally been a faceless, thankless task, one reserved for an eager political insider with a penchant for nitty-gritty organizing, fund-raising, rule-keeping and hand-holding.
So it was a genuine political moment Friday morning when Ronald H. Brown, the chairman of the Democratic Party, received three standing ovations from the party's top leaders as they convened to mark the end of the Democratic National Convention.


CYCLING: Biking in the U.S.A. -- Day 42; Rainy Streaks
"You'd better start building an ark!"
The motorist who shouted that as we splashed through Springfield, Ohio, last week was only half-joking.
Nevertheless, torrential daily thunderstorms in Indiana and Ohio and our efforts to cope with them produced a series of adventures.


A Remarkable Three in a Row. Now What?
Let the record show that the Mets won three of four games over the weekend from the San Francisco Giants.
And let the record show that it is the first time they have managed to win three straight over any team -- or three straight games, period -- since June 21-24.
With their mini-streak fresh in their minds, and with the knowledge that a foundering Los Angeles Dodgers team is coming up the turnpike after three amazingly poor performances in Philadelphia, the Mets now have as bright a prognosis for a good week as they've had in a long time.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Issues; Clinton and Gore Shifted on Abortion
For most of his years as Arkansas Governor, Bill Clinton was a study in reticence on the volatile issue of abortion.
But by the time the Democratic convention ended last week, he had found his voice, and was using it to trumpet his support for abortion rights.
His longtime aide Betsey Wright calls the process "evolution." Nancy Myers, spokeswoman for the National Right to Life Committee, calls it "pretty slippery." Adjectives aside, an examination of their statements and actions over the last 15 years shows Mr.
Clinton and his running mate, Senator Al Gore, have clearly shifted their emphasis on abortion-related issues.


Fleet St. Abuzz as Times of London Editor Plans to Leave
Once more, rumors are flying among Fleet Street journalists, but this time they do not involve the royal family or any of the usual scandals.
Rather, reporters and editors are speculating on who will be the next editor of The Times of London.
And, with the British newspaper market depressed, they wonder whether the prestigious but money-losing British daily is in line for major changes.


Over There: Dream Team Has Landed
"We're just the boys in the 'hood," Charles Barkley declared as the United States Olympic men's basketball team began its final week of training before the 1992 Summer Games begin in Barcelona, Spain, next weekend.
Barkley sure got that one right, as the multimillionaires from the National Basketball Association jetted into the Riviera on a packed charter early this morning and touched off their European invasion in this renowned playground of the privileged.


In Sarajevo, a Ham Operator Captures the Horrors of War
Like ham radio operators the world over, Ramiz Bisic used to muse about the day when he and his shortwave set would become the pivotal point in a great human drama.
Now his musing has turned to reality, but instead of a dream come true he is living a nightmare.
For 15 hours each day Mr.
Bisic hunches over his American-made equipment, reaching out to besieged towns across this mountainous republic that have no other way of communicating.
What he and a handful of other radio operators here learn, and pass on to other Bosnians and the outside world, is a piecemeal account of the misery the war has brought to tens of thousands of people in towns that have been surrounded by Serbian troops for as long as three and a half months.


Man Who Police Say Pulled Gun Is Killed
A police officer fatally shot a 25-year-old man at a Bronx subway station yesterday after the man pulled a gun on him, the police said.
Two uniformed officers responded about 4:40 P.M. to a report of a man standing with a gun on the southbound platform of the No. 2 and No. 5 station at East Gun Hill Road and White Plains Road in Norwood, said Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokeswoman.


Museum Visitors Watch Sculpture Come to Life


Heinz Galinski, 79, Berlin Leader Of Jews and a Foe of Neo-Nazis
Heinz Galinski, the head of Germany's postwar Jewish community, who spoke out sharply against neo-Nazism, died yesterday.
He was 79.
Mr.
Galinski died at the German Heart Center in Berlin, where he had undergone heart surgery last month, but never recovered, said officials of the Berlin Jewish community.


Experts Are Critical of Bush Anti-Drug Program
Operation Weed and Seed, the Bush Administration's new anti-drug initiative that the President often mentions as a centerpiece of his domestic program, moved forward on July 2 when the House adopted it as part of a $5 billion urban aid package and sent it to the Senate for consideration before the end of the month.
But urban experts and criminologists are skeptical about the Administration's anti-drug program, which was developed here in Philadelphia, saying that it will be too small, at that level of financing, to have any significant effect.
"It's a slogan more than a program," said Alfred Blumstein, dean of the John Heinz School of Public Policy and Management at Carnegie Mellon University and president of the American Society of Criminology.


How a Fee for Collecting Nonrecyclable Garbage Would Work
To the Editor:
I have read and watched with great interest the debate on New York City's solid waste management plan.
Regardless of what methods are used to dispose of nonrecyclable garbage, and regardless of the ingenuity that can be applied in recycling and composting, the quickest way (and the one least costly to city and citizen) to reduce total trash generated, to increase participation in recycling and to create markets for recyclable products is to institute a weight-volume-based fee for collecting and disposing of nonrecyclable garbage.


AIDS-Focused New Parties Are Proposed at Conference
The eighth international conference on AIDS opened here today with a plea from the chairman for the creation of political parties devoted to AIDS and other health-care issues that would be patterned after the green parties dedicated to the environment.
At the same time, conference officials said they are considering convening a panel to discuss reports about the possibility of a new virus that causes a disease resembling AIDS.


CHRONICLE
Talk about sweet harmony: two Grammy-award winning singers, WHITNEY HOUSTON and BOBBY BROWN, were married Saturday under a tent at Ms.
Houston's mansion in Mendham, N.J.
About 150 family members and friends were invited to the afternoon ceremony and about 600 to the reception, The Associated Press reported.


Shaky Finances Put Blue Cross Under Scrutiny
For nearly a half-century, Blue Cross and Blue Shield has enjoyed a reputation as a well-run nonprofit network serving as the nation's largest source of private health insurance.
But in recent weeks, Federal investigators and state regulators have uncovered evidence of questionable business practices.
They range from the destruction of unpaid claims and the creation of fictitious prescriptions to the formation of subsidiaries without state approval and the payment of high salaries and pensions to top executives of plans that are nearly insolvent.


Miscellany
*
Two public relations executives have opened agencies in New York.
Joseph Strear, former president of AC &amp; R Public Relations, opened Joseph Strear Public Relations &amp; Marketing Communications.
Andrew P. Plesser, previously a senior vice president at Howard J. Rubenstein Associates, New York, opened Andrew P. Plesser Associates Inc.


Review/Television; Marilyn Monroe's Words In Her 'Last Interview'
There's no getting enough of Marilyn Monroe.
At least Home Box Office thinks so.
Just when viewers might understandably think that there isn't another sliver of new material to be teased out of the actress's life story, along comes "Marilyn: The Last Interview," a half-hour essay on HBO at 9:30 tonight.
The twist: this particular interview was recorded entirely on audiotape.
Richard Meryman, a writer for Life magazine, spent about eight hours with Monroe at her somewhat shabby house in Brentwood, Calif., recording her rambling comments, which were frequently punctuated with what he describes as "a wild laugh, coming out at odd moments." Monroe demanded that questions be submitted in advance and that she have approval of the final story.
The Life article appeared on Aug. 3, 1962, two days before she died at the age of 36.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Notebook; Democrats: Exercising Their Legs And Lips
The green farmland of Pennsylvania gave way to strip mines and steel valleys today as the Clinton-Gore campaign's old-fashioned bus tour turned westward today.
And old-fashioned politics came right along for the ride.
Gov.
Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore went to church and then took another turn jogging together this morning.


Anti-Semitism in 'Batman Returns'? Be Serious; Who's Really Divisive?
To the Editor:
I did the final rewrite (uncredited) for "Batman Returns." As the lone Jew among director, producer and credited writer, and as the architect of the Penguin's scheme to murder Gotham's first born, I feel obliged to answer "Batman and the Jewish Question" (Op-Ed, July 2).


Kathleen McHugh and Carlton Tucker
Kathleen Anne McHugh, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence F. McHugh of Reading, Mass., was married there yesterday to Carlton Hayes Tucker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William D. Tucker Jr. of Pelham, N.Y.
The Rev.
Thomas Berry performed the ceremony at St.
Agnes Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Tucker, 33 years old, is a manager in San Francisco for Senior Net, a nonprofit group that provides computer instruction.
She graduated from Stanford University.
Her father owns Mark Lawrence Photography in Haverhill, Mass.


Braves Get Out the Broom And Win 9th in a Row
Braves 3, Astros 2
HOUSTON, July 19 (AP) -- Rafael Belliard's run-scoring single in the 10th inning gave the Atlanta Braves a 3-2 victory against the Houston Astros today for a four-game sweep and their ninth straight victory.


Koch Draws Dinkins's Fire On Ad for Tires, of All Things
A tire commercial featuring crater-like potholes, a sneak attack by a sponge-wielding windshield washer and narration by former Mayor Edward I. Koch has driven Mayor David N. Dinkins and the Association for a Better New York up the wall.
"I'm disappointed at Ed Koch for lending himself to that effort," Mr.
Dinkins said of the 30-second commercial for GenSeal tires.
"I'm trying to respond without using expletives." Times Square Location
Lewis Rudin, the founder of the association, wrote to General Tire, based in Akron, Ohio, and demanded that the commercial not be shown.
"As you are well aware," Mr.
Rudin said in his letter, "a TV crew could visit any city in America, including Akron, and seek out unpleasant facts about life that afflict urban America."
The commercial was shot in the Times Square area to dramatize the trials and tribulations a tire might face, like potholes, broken bottles and a fruit-filled wooden crate in the middle of a street.
The soundtrack is the song "(I Like New York in June) How About You?"
The commercial is scheduled to be shown in movie theaters in 18 markets around the country including New York at the end of next month.
But local General Tire dealers can run it on television sooner.
John Carr, a vice president of Babbit &amp; Reiman Advertising, the Atlanta agency that made the commercial, said that Mr.
Koch had been chosen as the narrator because "we wanted a real New Yorker with a personality to deliver our message."
The real New Yorker they chose said yesterday, "Anybody that takes this seriously ought to lighten up.
"Nobody took 'Bonfire of the Vanities' seriously," Mr. Koch added. "It's a joke."


LEGISLATIVE CHIEFS AND CUOMO REACH FISCAL AGREEMENT
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and state legislative leaders agreed today on more than a dozen major bills left over from the legislative session, including fiscal packages for Nassau and Suffolk Counties and an $800 million bond act intended to create jobs throughout the state.
The agreement salvages a legislative session that began with great promise, when a state budget was passed virtually on time for the first time in years, but ended disappointingly with many issues still unresolved.


Accounts
*
Giant Carpet, Moonachie, N.J., to Dweck &amp; Campbell, New York, to handle the retail carpet chain's $7 million account, previously at Frankfurt Gips Balkind Advertising, New York. *
Home Insurance Co., New York, to Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York, to handle its $4 million account, previously at Biederman, Kelly &amp; Shaffer, New York.
Kirshenbaum won out over two other New York shops in a review: Albert Frank-Guenther Law Inc. and Grace &amp; Rothschild.


Chemical Group Drops Chiat/Day
The Chemical Manufacturers Association in Washington said on Friday that it had dismissed its agency, Chiat/Day/Mojo Inc. in New York, citing "creative differences."
A spokesman, John Holtzman, said the association, which represents 180 chemical companies including Dow, Du Pont and Exxon, had compiled a short list of agencies to consider in a review.
He declined to identify them.


Cuomo Gets Role in Presidential Campaign
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who has seldom been at a loss for words about Gov.
Bill Clinton -- good or bad -- said yesterday that he had agreed to serve as honorary chairman of the Democratic Presidential nominee's campaign in New York State, and to make speeches and television appearances on his behalf.
"I am flattered to death that anybody thinks that I would have good strategic political advice, but I'll do what I can regarding a whole host of aspects of the campaign," said Mr.
Cuomo, whose nominating speech for Mr.
Clinton riveted the Democratic National Convention last week.


Havel Steps Down as Czechoslovak President


A Candidate Proposes Radical Sacrifice Play
Bob Watson's plan is so bold it sounds like a Presidential candidate's program to erase the national debt.
Watson, the Houston Astros' assistant general manager, has seen baseball decline in popularity among minority groups, especially inner-city children, and believes some radical program has to be implemented to reverse the trend.


Comerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


John Nuveen reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Trustmark Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Social Ills Become Medical Problems
To the Editor:
Many Americans favor a Canadian-style, single-payer health care system.
The real question is how a Government-run system based on the Canadian model would work in a country that has social problems that countries like Canada and Germany don't share to the same extent.


BankAmerica Posts $240 Million Net
The BankAmerica Corporation said today that it earned $240 million, or 63 cents a share, for the second quarter, in what analysts and bank executives called an impressive show of strength after its acquisition of the Security Pacific Corporation last year.
BankAmerica agreed to acquire its California rival last August in a $4 billion deal.
The combination of the two largest banks in the West created the nation's second-largest banking company, after Citicorp.
Because this was the first quarter in which the resulting company reported combined results, financial performance cannot be directly compared with previous quarters.


Besicorp Group reports earnings for Year to March 31


Mafia Throws The Gauntlet In Italy's Face
The people came today in their cars and on their scooters to gaze on the Mafia's handiwork as they had been drawn before in fascination at the familiar signature of the mob: the shattered glass, the torn shutters and the sense that the killing had been simply too quick, slick and ruthless to prevent.
And as they gathered in the sunlight where Paolo Borsellino, Palermo's chief public prosecutor, and five bodyguards were torn apart Sunday by a huge bomb that was likened in ferocity to Beirut and Bosnia, some were silent and some enraged,


Centel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Waking From a Dream
To the Editor:
"Why Not the Best?" (editorial, July 8) misses a great irony of the 1992 United States Olympic basketball team.
Were Spain (like the United States) to deny entry to those known to test positive for the human immunodeficiency virus, the team dream would be but a midsummer night's fantasy.
For, one of its best -- Magic Johnson -- would have to stay home.
NANCY LUNDEBJERG New York, July 9, 1992


Dash Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Has Delaware's Insurance Chief Gone Too Far?
At a time when states are feeling increasingly poor, David N. Levinson might seem a white knight, having brought more than $100 million in investments into the state from companies operating outside its borders.
For seven years Mr.
Levinson, the state's elected insurance commissioner, has put pressure on the insurance companies he regulates to invest in a list of local businesses drawn up by his office.
What's wrong with hitting up these Goliaths for what amounts to small change, Mr.
Levinson argues, to help a tiny state create desperately needed jobs?


SARAJEVO AIRLIFT SUSPENDED BY U.N. AFTER TRUCE FAILS
The first 24 hours of a cease-fire negotiated by the European Community passed today amid such heavy fighting that the United Nations military commander here closed Sarajevo Airport and suspended the airlift of food and medicine that has been sustaining this besieged city.
Because of the airport closing, ordered by Maj.
Gen.
Lewis W. MacKenzie of Canada, no relief aircraft flew in here for the first time in 23 days.


The State of Misgovernment
Representative Eleanor Holmes Norton's speech to the Democratic Convention gave fresh evidence of how the Federal Government treats Washington, D.C.: like a plantation.
The District's elected officials have only token power.
They can't pass a budget or even reschedule garbage collection without groveling before Congress.
The District has 608,000 people, more than Alaska, Wyoming or Vermont.
Yet Representative Norton is denied a vote in the Congress that runs her city.
As she told the Democrats, "It is too late in the century for Americans to accept colonial rule at the very seat of government."


Greater New York Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sharks in Offer to Makarov
The San Jose Sharks made an undisclosed contract offer yesterday to the free-agent right wing SERGEI MAKAROV.
The Calgary Flames, for whom Makarov has played the last three seasons, can retain Makarov's services if they match San Jose's offer within seven days. (AP)


Classical Music in Review
Summergarden  Michael Bach, cellist Michael Torre, pianist Museum of Modern Art
The free Summergarden series has been directed in recent years by the violinist and conductor Paul Zukofsky, who has built each summer's program around one or two 20th-century composers.
This year the subject is John Cage, in anticipation of his 80th birthday on Sept. 5.
The programs (at the Sculpture Garden through Aug. 29) are devoted fully to his music, with an emphasis on works composed since 1984.


Ekco Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Faster and Faster: A Record May Fall As Tour Heats Up
Looking freshly shaved and showered, Luc Leblanc left his hotel atop Alpe d'Huez before breakfast this morning and started to cross the Place Jean Moulin to buy a newspaper.
On his way, he paused to look out across the Alps and simply shook his head slowly from side to side.
Many other riders who started this 79th Tour de France know that feeling.


A Little Kitchen Help For Transplanted Cooks
LIFE in America is puzzling enough if you come from a country like Japan that is a world away in taste and customs.
And just when you think it can't get any more disconcerting, your child comes home demanding a P.B.&amp; J. on white bread.
For a group of Japanese women in Westchester County, one way to figure out the puzzle has been to learn to cook and shop the American way.


Irv Sepkowitz; TV Executive, 56
Irv Sepkowitz, a former Los Angeles prosecutor who became a television executive, died on Saturday at St.
Joseph Medical Center in Burbank, Calif.
He was 56 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of a heart attack, said a spokesman for Universal Studios, Robert Crutchfield.


L.I. Engineer Is Indicted
A Long Island official was charged in a Federal indictment yesterday with misusing his positions as the Town Engineer of Southampton and the Village Engineer of Westhampton Beach to invest secretly in real-estate deals.
John Johnsen, 44 years old, of Hampton Bays, was indicted on fraud and tax charges involving the purchase and sale of several real-estate properties, United States Attorney Andrew J. Maloney announced in Brooklyn.


Schintzius Is Cut by Kings
Center DWAYNE SCHINTZIUS, who was sidelined much of last season by back problems, was cut by the Sacramento Kings yesterday. (AP)


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Signed Derek Wallace, pitcher, and assigned him to Peoria of the Midwest League.


Samaranch Is Fearful Of Oversized Olympics
In a speech highly complimentary to the organization he has served as president for 12 years, Juan Antonio Samaranch opened the 99th session of the International Olympic Committee tonight by warning of the need for greater unity to deal with the expanding size and complexities of future Olympics.
Addressing more than 90 I.O.C. members and their guests in the Palau de la Musica Catalana, Samaranch specifically called on leaders of international sports federations and individual national Olympic committees to work closely with the I.O.C. to avoid problems inherent with change in the world.


At 75, Vance Finds Solving World Crises a 'Tonic'
Henry A. Kissinger runs an international consulting firm in New York.
George P. Shultz is a professor at Stanford University in California.
And Cyrus R. Vance is getting on a plane for South Africa, responding to a call from the United Nations to mediate yet another volatile dispute, where more lives may be lost if a solution is not found swiftly.
Mr.
Vance is using his experience and skill as a mediator on the front lines of violence in several parts of the world.
As the United Nations' special envoy of choice, the former Secretary of State has ventured into the middle of civil wars in Yugoslavia and Nagorno-Karabakh, and on Friday he was named by Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to mediate between parties in South Africa who no longer speak to each other but are willing to speak to him.
He is to arrive in Johannesburg on Tuesday.


Observer; The Perot Lesson
My handlers said the wife had to go.
It would have angered me once, before I learned what it takes to be President.
Now I said, "Got to go, huh?" And they said, "The polls have spoken. America can't stand her."
If you want to be President -- and wow!
Do I ever want to be President! -- you must obey your handlers.
"Changing her name from Flossie to Emily," I asked, "didn't help her polls?"
In fact, said my handler, dropping the Flossie had cost her four points among over-60 voters.
They were old enough to remember when people had mothers named Flossie.
They thought my wife's switch to Emily was an insult to motherhood.
"I hate it, my wife having to go," I told my handlers, who scowled at me, no doubt thinking I didn't have fire in the belly.
So I said to them, I said: "Just kidding, guys. You say the wife's got to go, she goes. As far as I'm concerned it's 'So long, Flossie, it's been good to know you.' Because, wow! Do I ever want to be President!"
You've got to handle handlers with a velvet touch or they'll quit handling you, then what have you got?
Catastrophe unmitigated: ex-handlers telling the media buzzards you don't want it bad enough, don't have any fire in the esophagus, much less the belly, and a guy who won't obey his handlers, what kind of President would he make anyhow?
America's lucky your handlers found out what a wimp you were before they started marketing you.
My good old Mom -- bless her even though she's still lost back there in the Arthur Godfrey age -- she was shocked when I first brought my handlers home to shape her up.
"Did you say they're handlers, Bub? You need handlers?"
"Can't be President nowadays without handlers, Mom."
"You're spoofing good old Mom, aren't you, Bub? Elephants have handlers. Giraffes, camels, zoo creatures, they have handlers. Don't you have any more brains than a poor caged beast, Bub?"
The handlers told me to tell Mom to button her lip and go to makeup, then to ghostwriting where my wordsmiths would fit her out with a new biography which my speech teachers would train her to emit in seven-second but heartbreakingly touching sound bites.
"And tell her to keep it buttoned until we assign her a full-time lip handler."
So I said, "Keep your lip buttoned, Mom, because -- wow! Do I ever want to be President!"
Mom's lip handler has her under control now, so she's quit telling every TV buzzard who rams a camera up her nose that her son hasn't got any more brains than a caged giraffe.
She was so excited about a crack at the First Mother job that she didn't scream when my handlers told her she'd have to change her name from Peaches to Rose Marie.
They're hoping to get a bump in the blue-rinse-and-rheumatism vote by spreading enough payola to bring back Nelson Eddy's recording of "Rose Marie, I Love You."
My wife is not so cooperative, however.
What a big deal she made of changing her name from Flossie.
It was like she didn't have any fire at all in the belly.
Then all that whining about giving up her partnership in Asham, Masham, Sushi &amp; Kaminsky.
My handlers were nice to her, too.
Explained it so clearly.
"Flossie," they said, "the polls show Americans hate to see a wife pulling down multimillion-dollar bonuses from investment banking when she can't even cook macaroni and cheese."
"You mean I've got to quit being Flossie, drop out of this merger deal with Consolidated and Systemics Galore, and sit home cooking macaroni and cheese?" she threatened.
She did what was right, though, after I gave it to her straight from the shoulder.
"Flossie," said I, "in me you see a man who never admired George Bush so much as on the day he said, 'I will do what I have to do to be re-elected.' "
"You want it that much?"
"Wow!" I explained. "Do I ever want to be President!"
Now, though, my handlers were saying it hadn't worked.
Not even the macaroni and cheese.
She had to go.
"Where?" I asked.
My handlers asked if I had ever seen a movie called "The Man in the Iron Mask."
"Wow!" I replied. "Do I ever want to be President!"


Dominion Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vaclav Havel: Still Puckish, Still a Politician, No Longer President
President Vaclav Havel, the playwright who led his country's "Velvet Revolution" against Communism, left office today, yielding to what he said was a historical current pulling Czechoslovakia apart.
In a relaxed meeting with journalists at the castle at Lany, outside Prague, the presidential summer home, Mr.
Havel insisted that he was not saddened by the expected imminent dissolution of the 74-year-old union between Czechs and Slovaks.


Faldo Is Doing Things Naturally
Golf may very well be a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma, but Nick Faldo hasn't yet been convinced.
His indefatigable search for answers and a new level of excellence was the key ingredient in his remarkable victory in the 121st British Open.
Faldo's fifth major championship and third Open triumph came after a careful reassessment and adjustment of the intensely analytical approach that had made him the best player in the world in 1990.
The changes, he said, led to a deeper understanding of himself, which is what the 35-year-old Englishman drew upon late Sunday at Muirfield to win by one shot over John Cook.


Sports of The Times; The Giants' Dangerous Tradition
TO the Giants, tradition has always been important.
Blue jerseys.
Power football, from Steve Owen to Bill Parcells.
Unappreciated quarterbacks, from Charlie Conerly to Phil Simms.
Towering linebackers, from Mel Hein to Lawrence Taylor.
Ownership by the Mara family since the 1925 inception of the franchise.
Six championships.
But as training camp opened here yesterday for what looms as a season of struggle, the Giants were developing a dangerous new tradition: the absence of important players whose contract disputes might not be settled until shortly before the start of the season.


Cells in Pope's Tumor Were Becoming Malignant
Pope John Paul II's doctors indicated today that cells in the early stages of becoming malignant had been discovered in a large tumor removed from his intestines last week.
But, they said, examination of 66 slices of the tumor -- initially described as "100 percent benign" -- showed that the cells becoming malignant were few in number and had not begun invading other parts of the 72-year-old Pope's body.


Yoo-Hoo! Is Anybody Home? It's Mets and Yanks Calling
Not only are fans not watching the Mets at Shea Stadium in mass quantities, they're not watching them in droves on television.
Through Sunday, the Mets' average Nielsen rating on WWOR-TV has tumbled 27 percent, from 7.3 after 47 games last year to 5.3 now.
By comparison, the Yankees' rating on WPIX-TV through 29 games has risen to a 4.8 from 4.6 last season.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Mabel R. Thomas, who led the Big Sisters of New York in helping troubled children, referred incorrectly to the status of the organization.
It is independent, and separate from Big Brothers.


No Headline
Plenty of people not running for office have made these kinds of proposals time and time again.
The problem has been that no one seeking higher office has done so.
If Ross Perot can help get such proposals on the table, that would be a big contribution. -- ISABEL SAWHILL, an economist.  [ A1:1. ]


Smaller, Lighter, Stronger, Cheaper
THE NCR Corporation, which is now a division of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, has created an impressive successor to the A.T.&amp; T. Safari notebook computer.
It is smaller and lighter and more powerful than the original Safari NSX/20, which was itself a highly regarded machine.
The new NCR 3170 has actually been on the market for a couple of months, but its original list price was so heavy ($5,399) that some potential buyers may have balked.
As attractive as it was, there were similar notebook computers available for far less money.
So, NCR changed the list price of the new model to a "net" price of $3,425.


Frequency Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


CHRONICLE
He is probably best known as a men's-wear designer, but JOHN WEITZ is as much at home in the literary world as he is on Seventh Avenue.
His sixth book, and his second to deal with Nazism, will be published next month by Ticknor &amp; Fields.
The book, titled "Hitler's Diplomat: The Life and Times of Joachim von Ribbentrop," is a biography of the German bon vivant who served as Hitler's Ambassador to London and was Foreign Minister from 1938 until the end of the World War II.
He was hanged in 1946 for war crimes.
"This is my second book on the theme of Nazism," Mr.
Weitz said yesterday, adding that his next book will be the story of the Gestapo.


Lumex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Television; A Rights Balancing Act in the Courts
In case you have not heard that the nation's courts are overburdened and underfinanced, you can hear it repeatedly tonight on "And Justice for All?," the latest entry of "Listening to America" on public television.
Bill Moyers's guests -- four judges and the United States Solicitor General, Kenneth W. Starr -- are in general agreement that the courts are not keeping up with crime and that more money is needed, a solution put forward for many of the problems in public broadcasting's main election-year series.
One difficulty, as Mr.
Moyers keeps reminding his guests, is that the political will is lacking to provide services to the indigent that would make the judicial system more equitable.
Sol Wachtler, the Chief Judge of New York State, notes that the courts have no constituency to do political battle on their behalf.
Evidence is presented in two mini-documentaries on the workings of legal aid offices, one in New Orleans and one in Boston.
Both focus on young idealists who are battling the system.


U.S. Soccer Player Gives Attitude a Big Assist for His Scoring Touch
You can call Steve Snow "a cocky twerp." Why not?
His very own coach called him the very same thing.
In sports, being a cocky twerp may not be so terrible.
Steve Snow has merely scored 19 goals in his first 18 international soccer games, which is rare for a player from a nation that teaches soccer as a fun game for suburban boys and girls.


Andover Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Congress Opens Midsummer Session With Bills on Spending and Abortion
Congress today began a four-week session, wedged between the two political conventions, that will be devoted to both scoring campaign points and passing legislation to keep the Government in cash and to settle complex issues like energy and cable television.
Only one bill with clear implications for the Presidential campaign will come up in both houses of Congress this session, the Freedom of Choice Act, which would prohibit most state restrictions on abortion.
The House will also take up a tax bill aimed at increasing the tax on people who earn more than $1 million a year in order to subsidize food and social services for needy children.


Hilton Hotels Plans To Review Account
The Hilton Hotels Corporation said yesterday that it had begun to review its account, with billings estimated to exceed $16 million, after 25 years at McCann-Erickson in Los Angeles.
In an interview, Hunter Phillips, director of advertising at the hotel chain's Beverly Hills, Calif., office, confirmed reports of the review, which appeared in this week's trade publications.
He said that a closed review, in which McCann was invited to participate, was already in progress, and that a decision was expected around Labor Day.


Man Convicted for Sending Booby-Trapped Briefcase to Attorney
A man was convicted yesterday of attempting to murder a Federal prosecutor by sending a booby-trapped briefcase to her office in Brooklyn.
The jury deliberated a little more than two hours before convicting the defendant, David Kwong, of sending the gift-wrapped booby trap to Catherine E. Palmer, a 36-year-old assistant United States attorney specializing in Asian drug cases.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
North America's expected free-trade agreement will add jobs, wealth and economic activity throughout, economists say, but it will also bring hardship to some individuals -- a dichotomy that is clear in West Virginia's glass industry.  [ Page A1. ]
The huge Mexican cement maker Cemex said it would buy Spain's second-largest cement producer, Sanson, S.A., for as much as $600 million.  [ D4. ]


Wilmington Trust Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Consoldiated Products reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; A Changed Gore, With a Firmer Voice
Al Gore is a changed man; he says so himself, and it seems to be true.
In 1988, when he made his first run at the White House, the 39-year-old Senator from Tennessee was, as he admits, a bad candidate.
He was as wooden as a newel post, a man of one joke (and it wasn't even his; he had borrowed it from his father) and a number of identical suits.
He spoke in an earnest monotone, which occasionally turned into an inappropriate shout, as if he had accidentally turned up his own volume.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about Oscar Lewis, a writer and historian of the American West, referred incorrectly to the locations of two towns where he grew up.
Sebastopol is about 40 miles north of San Francisco and Red Bluff is about 160 miles north of the city, both too far away to be described as nearby.


Bengal Fails Medical Test
ALFRED WILLIAMS, the Bengals' No. 1 draft pick last year, has failed to receive medical clearance to practice and may have to undergo surgery to correct an irregular heartbeat.
The report came as a shock to coaches, who been told to expect Williams, a linebacker, to be cleared for immediate duty.
If all goes well, Williams could be back as early as Aug. 4. (AP)


Communications Satellite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Currency Intervention Stems Slide in Markets
World stock markets fell precipitously yesterday and the dollar flirted with its record low against the German mark before the United States and its economic allies moved forcefully to support the dollar and in the process stabilize other financial markets.
At least 13 central banks bought dollars in the foreign exchange market.
The concerted intervention came at a time that the mood of investors was already very bearish about the dollar and becoming negative about stocks as well.


California Financial Holding Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Upjohn Shifts Part of Account to Doner
The Upjohn Company said yesterday that it would shift the creative portion of its Motrin IB pain-killer account to W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Southfield, Mich., from Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in New York.
A spokeswoman for Upjohn at its Kalamazoo, Mich., office confirmed a report in this week's issue of Adweek about the decision.
She cited "long-term business reasons" but declined to elaborate.


Coleman Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The 'Minister for Fun' Is Red-Faced in Britain
David Mellor, the Cabinet minister responsible for deciding whether Britain's press sometimes goes too far in its exposes of private lives, appeared red-faced at his office today after a tabloid published transcripts of his passionate telephone conversations with an actress.
Mr.
Mellor, 43 years old, had offered to resign Sunday night, but Prime Minister John Major, a close friend, refused to accept his resignation.
In a statement, Mr.
Mellor said that he and his wife, Judith, had been "experiencing difficulties" in their marriage, and asked for the right to sort them out in private for the sake of their marriage and their two young children.


Homestake Mining Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Equimark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


To Balance Family Budget in Russia, Work an Extra Job, Take a New Risk
No one family, however extended, can possibly represent the full domestic drama of Russia's experiment in finding a new way to live.
But the Zverev family, who were willing to sit through many hours of interviews about their lives and expectations, give a reasonable picture of the way Russians are getting by in this complicated transition between totalitarian Communism and a democratic market economy, when inflation is surging and the mind struggles with old habits and new possibilities.


I.B.M. Stock Is Victim Of Unmet Expectations
Pity poor I.B.M.
Its shares have taken a pounding, falling nearly 8 percent in the two days since the giant computer company reported a fivefold jump in profits for the second quarter.
To be sure, the profits reported on Friday were a few cents a share short of analysts' expectations: $1.25 a share, compared with a consensus estimate of $1.33.
But the results would scarcely seem to justify the selloff on Friday and yesterday.
I.B.M.'s share price dropped in only two days from $100.25 a share to $92.875.


Books of The Times; Tales That Capture The Slippery Times
The Stories of John Edgar Wideman  By John Edgar Wideman  432 pages.
Pantheon Books. $25.
"One of the earliest lessons I learned as a child," John Edgar Wideman once wrote, "was that if you looked away from something, it might not be there when you looked back. I feared loss, feared turning to speak to someone and finding no one there. Being black and poor reinforced the wisdom of a tentative purchase on experience. Don't get too close, doubt what you see. Need, commitment set you up for a fall, create the conditions for disaster."


'Star Wars' X-Ray Laser Weapon Dies as Its Final Test Is Canceled
A decade after "Star Wars" proponents first sought development of nuclear-powered laser weapons that could destroy enemy missiles as they streaked through space, the X-ray laser program suffered a final debilitating setback last week when the Energy Department quietly canceled its last scheduled test.
Implementing the Bush Administration's new policy that limits nuclear testing to improving the safety and reliability of weapons, Energy Secretary James D. Watkins canceled a classified test of the nuclear-powered X-ray laser.
No public announcement of the cancellation was made.


On My Mind; So Long, Suckers
Ross Perot still has two important things he can do in American political life.
One is to shut up and the other is to get out.
That is not meant simply as a piece of unpleasantness, although that is certainly one intent.
It is an alert to him, to his friends and family and to all who once put their hopes in him.


Harkey's Effort Negated by Reds
Reds 5, Cubs 2
CINCINNATI, July 20 (AP) -- The Cincinnati Reds rallied past the Chicago Cubs, 5-2, tonight and spoiled a sharp comeback performance by Mike Harkey, who was making his first major league start since shoulder surgery in May 1991.
In the seventh inning, Bip Roberts's double tied the score at 2-2 and Barry Larkin's sacrifice fly put Cincinnati ahead as the Reds earned their fourth consecutive victory.
The Reds scored twice more in the eighth to seal the victory.


Maple Leaf Gardens reports earnings for Year to May 31


Citing Fear of City Crime, Nassau Raises Police Salaries
In suburbia, where the police are hailed as heroes -- and given some of the highest salaries in the country -- the onset of fiscal problems can produce particularly wrenching conflicts.
When a retired carpenter, Frank Abrami of Seaford, stood at a meeting of the Nassau County Supervisors and warned that a new police contract approved today could push the county toward fiscal ruin, "down the slippery slope like New York City," county officials were not amused by the comparison.


Rockets Cancel Deal for Kite
The trade of GREG KITE from the Orlando Magic to Houston was called off by the Rockets yesterday after the center failed a team physical.
The Rockets' general manager, STEVE PATTERSON, said Kite, who developed atrial fibrillation early last season, was not cleared by the Rockets' cardiology consultant, Dr.
RAUL SOTO.


Rupert Murdoch, In Hollywood, Learns The Value of 'No'
Rupert Murdoch slouched on the sofa of his surprisingly spare office at the Fox Studios near Century City, saying with a faint smile that his voyage into the movie business still left him just a bit uneasy.
"This is a very creative, ambitious community," said the 61-year-old media mogul, speaking in his lazy Australian drawl.
"Everybody's got their own agenda, their own schemes, their own projects. You've got to pass on 90 percent of them. Making films involves saying 'no' a great part of the day. What worries me are the commercial judgments in Hollywood. Not here, in this studio, but among some of our competitors."


Childhood Trauma: Memory or Invention?
IS it Satan or is it Salem?
A wave of cases in which men and women suddenly remember traumatic events from their childhood has set off a debate among psychologists who study memory and trauma.
Some psychotherapists say that symptoms like depression can result from childhood sexual abuse, even if the memories of it have been repressed.
A few even claim that some of these cases of sexual abuse were part of the rituals of Satanic cults.


Omnicare Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rangers Sign U. of Maine Star
The Rangers signed the free agent right wing JEAN-YVES ROY, a three-time All-American and two-time finalist for the Hobey Baker Award as the nation's top college hockey player.
Roy, 23 years old, scored 108 goals and assisted on 95 others in three seasons at the University of Maine.
The 5-foot-10-inch, 185-pounder had 32 goals and 24 assists this season. (AP)


Classical Music in Review
Mostly Mozart  Garrick Ohlsson, pianist Elmar Oliveira, violinist Avery Fisher Hall
In this hall, they might have been Philharmonic subscribers fleeing Schoenberg.
But no, those people streaming toward the exits on Friday evening were Mozarteans for whom mostly was evidently not enough, departing before the final work on the program, a Haydn symphony.


Eaton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oryx Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Deluxe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Tour Touches Small-Town America
The crowd that streamed into Utica, Ohio, Sunday night doubled the town's population of about 2,000, clogged streets and yards that had to be turned into parking lots and spilled over onto side streets for blocks around.
And when the Clinton-Gore motor tour reached the Clinton County Courthouse here today, this time in the middle of a workday, a similar crowd waited, patiently standing under a broiling sun for a rally that started more than an hour late.


Baxter International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bye-Bye, Ball Game, Right Over Johnson's Head
Howard Johnson was doubled over on the infield before the start of the eighth inning.
Manager Jeff Torborg, aware that his center fielder's shoulder and wrist were hurting badly, consulted long and hard with Johnson.
He then let Johnson head for center.
It was a decision of the heart. An instant later, it was a decision with a price.


Hibernia Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Mideast Boost for Mr. Bush
In a fallow political season for the Bush Administration, unexpected succor beckons from the Holy Land.
Secretary of State James Baker is back on the Mideast shuttle trying to restart the stalled Arab-Israeli peace talks.
Israel's new Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, is in Cairo today for the first such meeting in six years with President Hosni Mubarak.
All this underscores a promising shift in Israeli diplomacy, from the blame game to let's make a deal.
The new outlook is evident in Sunday's decision by Mr.
Rabin's Cabinet to halt new settlements in the West Bank and Gaza pending review of all construction approved by the previous, hard-line Government.
This moves Israel closer to the freeze demanded by Arabs and sought by President Bush as the precondition for $10 billion in U.S. loan guarantees for resettling Russian immigrants.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Attacks Clinton Economic Plan as 'Big Mistake'
President Bush today delivered his strongest attack to date on the Democratic Presidential candidacy of Bill Clinton, calling the Arkansas Governor's economic proposals "smoke and mirrors" and "a big mistake" that would increase the Federal deficit.
Mr.
Bush said a 27-page economic plan Mr.
Clinton issued in June would damage the economy by raising taxes and the deficit.
He also said Mr.
Clinton's proposals to save money by streamlining programs and reducing "overhead" were illusory.


Pikeville National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Approves Trenton Plan For Welfare
The Federal Government today approved New Jersey's proposal to drastically revise its welfare system, including a plan to deny additional benefits to mothers on welfare who have more children.
The New Jersey plan, which its supporters say is intended to reward work and encourage stable families, will allow welfare mothers to retain more of their benefits if they go to work to support additional children, and allow them to marry without endangering benefits for their children.


New York Legislature Cries Out for Reform
To the Editor:
The time has come for reforms in the New York State Legislature.
It should meet year round, instead of from January to early July.
State lawmakers receive full-time salaries, but pack up and leave before voting on important laws.
This year they failed to vote in session on environmental protection laws and the Medicaid takeover among other important items.
And it is only July!


Bush Plays Politics With Health Research
To the Editor:
How much does President Bush care about victims of breast cancer, osteoporosis and other diseases?
Apparently not as much as he cares about placating opponents of the right to choose.
He has vetoed the National Institutes of Health reauthorization bill (news article, June 24), the most important women's health legislation to emerge from this Congress.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY SCHOOL-SECURITY CHIEF UNDER FIRE
The chief security officer for New York City's public schools and his two top aides were accused of an array of improper activities, including a conflict of interest involving a private real estate deal and the hiring of a dozen relatives.
In an 80 page-report, the school system's top investigator concluded the chief security officer, Bruce A. Irushalmi, was a "silent partner" in a Bronx apartment with one of his top aides, Joseph Capalbo.
The report also said Mr.
Irushalmi's deputy, Henry R. Murphy, had hired a dozen relatives as security guards in violation of nepotism rules.
A1.
BOUNCER ACCUSED OF SHOOTING OFFICER
A 24-year-old bouncer at a Queens bar is suspected in the fatal shooting of an off-duty Housing Authority police officer and another man after a brawl on a Bayside street early Saturday morning, the police said.
B3.
REP. SCHEUER WILL NOT RUN AGAIN
New York's Congressional redistricting claimed another incumbent when Representative James H. Scheuer of Queens said he would not seek a 14th term.
The 72-year-old Queens Democrat had earned the sobriquet "The Flying Dutchman" for frequently switching districts.
B3.
WORKERS CHARGED IN TICKET SCHEME
Two employees of the city's Department of Transportation and one former employee have been arrested and charged with accepting bribes to fix traffic tickets.
Officials said the three were all using different methods to pocket money that was properly owed the city.
B3.
SPARING A COLONIAL-ERA CEMETERY
Mayor Dinkins has asked the Federal Government to "suspend all excavation and construction activities" on part of a 34-story office tower being built on the site of a colonial-era cemetery for black New Yorkers in lower Manhattan.
He also said Congress should designate the area a national historic district.
B3.
HOUSING PLAN CLEARS HURDLE
A much-disputed plan to replace the historic Brighton Beach Baths with a housing development cleared a major hurdle when it won the endorsement of the New York City Planning Commission.
But approval of the Brooklyn project, known as Brighton-by-the-Sea, came only after the developer agreed to several changes, including scaling down the project and adding subsidized housing.
B4.
Neighbors seem to welcome new arraignment court on West 54th Street.
B2.
REGION TRENTON REJECTS LAWMAKING BILL
In a stunning rejection of their party's primary platform and campaign promises, Republican legislators in Trenton have rejected proposals to provide citizen lawmaking through initiative and referendum.
The votes, which left grass-roots backers stunned and angry, were among a blur of activity following a break in which the Republican-controlled Legislature took a brief post-budget vacation and Governor Florio attended the Democratic National Convention.
B5.
NASSAU POLICE OFFICERS GET RAISES
Nassau County approved a contract to give its police officers salaries that are among the highest in the country, saying they were the last bulwark against criminals from New York City.
B5.
Our Towns by Lynda RichardsonB5 ChronicleB18


BMC Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Classical Music in Review
Waterloo Festival  Grant Johannesen, pianist Stanhope, N.J.
In Carlos Chavez's Piano Concerto, allusions to a Mexican's origins are few: perhaps the pentatonic theme in the first movement suggesting primal, pre-Columbian energies, then the syncopated dance rhythm in the finale.
Ethnic considerations have been sublimated into a broader fascination for size, brute force and harsh brilliance.
It is in Chavez's gargantuan appetite that one senses a young, new world.
One thinks back to Busoni's Piano Concerto in which excess assumes an esthetic of its own.


Giants, Preparing for Life Without Taylor, Shift Miller
Just before the Giants opened training camp today, they made a personnel shift they hoped would fill a defensive gap for the next decade.
They moved Corey Miller, a second-year pro, from inside linebacker to outside linebacker, putting Miller in line to succeed the 33-year-old Lawrence Taylor, who will probably retire after this season.
Miller is 23 years old and was a sixth-round draft choice from South Carolina.
At 6 feet 2 inches and 255 pounds, he has the classic build for an inside linebacker in a 3-4 defense.
But last season, when Taylor was slowed by a knee injury, Miller replaced him at right outside linebacker during the next-to-last game and started the final game.
He showed himself to be a strong pass rusher and produced a sack in each game, including one against lineman Joe Jacoby of the Washington Redskins.


Chess
The Georgian team took the gold medals in the Women's Olympiad in Manila, from June 7 to 25, but not without a close struggle.
The Georgians scored 30 1/2 points out of a possible 42 to lead another former Soviet republic, Ukraine, which took the silver with 29 in the three-board, 14-round tournament.
China captured the bronze with 28 1/2.
Before the breakup of the Soviet Union, its premier female players were from Georgia and, as this new result proves, the new Georgian nation carries on the tradition.
But the team did not take over first place until the 13th round, when it wiped out Azerbaijan, 3-0.
In the final round, it defeated Czechoslovakia, 2-1.
Sixty-two teams competed.


Treasury Prices Narrowly Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities went through considerable gyrations yesterday, driven by developments on world equity and currency markets.
But by the end of the day, prices were narrowly mixed.
The sharp drop in stock prices on major foreign stock exchanges, and the expectation that shares would be hammered once trading shifted to the United States, sparked a run into short-term Treasury notes and bills during trading in Asian and European financial markets.


Disputed Military Aircraft Crashes; 7 Aboard Lost
A prototype of the V-22 Osprey, a tilt-rotor aircraft whose future was already the subject of furious debate, crashed today in the Potomac River with seven people on board.
Pentagon officials said no survivors had been found.
The aircraft, which takes off like a helicopter and flies like a plane, was headed for a landing at the Marine air station in Quantico, Va., about 35 miles south of Washington.


Jostens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Executive Changes
GENERAL MOTORS CORP., Detroit, named William E. L. Powell general manager for motors holding, minority dealer and dealer network development.
MCGRAW-HILL INC., New York, the publishing and information services company, named Edward J. Heresniak senior vice president for information management.


Study Ties Schizophrenia to City Upbringing
EARLY in the morning, a young man wandered down empty city streets, afraid to take public transportation because he believed that everyone was talking about him.
He stopped going to his job because he was convinced that his coworkers could hear his thoughts and he would be fired.
As much as possible, he stayed in his apartment, where he had placed boards on the windows because he thought people were watching him.
Finally, voices told him that the only way he would feel better would be if he killed himself.
Instead of listening, he went to a hospital emergency room.
City hospitals receive more schizophrenic patients like this man than hospitals in rural areas.
For the last 25 years, doctors and researchers have believed that schizophrenics drifted to cities as part of the disease in order to create a self-imposed isolation.


BAKER AND RABIN NEAR A LOAN DEAL
A deal seemed to be shaping up today for housing loan guarantees from the United States to Israel, in which Washington would give the Israelis the guarantees they are seeking in exchange for broad limits on settlement-building activity, but not a total freeze.
A senior State Department official briefed reporters after the second day of talks here between Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Israel's new Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin.
The official said he was now hopeful that an arrangement for loan guarantees could be worked out in a way that would "match their needs as well as ours."


American Indian Art Donated to Association
American Indian art from the collection of Clare and Eugene V. Thaw has been donated to the New York State Historical Association in Cooperstown, N.Y.
Mr.
Thaw, a New York dealer in 19th-century European art, modern art and Old Masters, and his wife assembled the 400 prehistoric-to-20th-century works over the last seven years.


Cullen/Frost Bankers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NBB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BankAmerica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Russia's Press Dispute: The Fireworks Fizzle
On Friday, the Russian Parliament voted to take over Izvestia, an independent newspaper with 3.8 million readers that once was an organ of the Soviet Government.
On Saturday, President Boris N. Yeltsin said he would step into the fight as a guarantor of the freedom of the press.
Today, Izvestia appeared with three pages devoted to this latest crisis of nerves.


Corning Has a Change of Heart on Tariffs
Three years ago, Corning was a vociferous protectionist when it came to tariffs on glass imports.
Timothy J. Regan, the company's trade-policy executive, complained in a memo then to an interagency Administration committee that Corning's Mexican rival, Vitro S.A., had presented "fallacious and unfounded" information understating the extent to which its kitchenware competed with Corning's products.


Algeria Has New Government
Algeria announced today that it had formed its third government in 13 months after a weekend of violence left at least three people dead.
The new Government, headed by Belaid Abdessalam, 64 years old, a former Industry Minister and advocate of Government control over the economy, said that 15 people had been wounded in the fighting between Islamic fundamentalists and security forces and that 77 had been arrested.


Bank South Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Keystone Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Enlisting the Copyright Law In Battling the 'Gray Market'
Parfums Givenchy U.S.A. is testing a new weapon in the war the luxury-goods industry is waging against diversion -- the mysterious migration of their products out of authorized channels of distribution and into discount and off-price stores.
In a lawsuit filed last week in Los Angeles, Parfums Givenchy contends that Drug Emporium Inc. has violated copyright laws by importing and selling without permission its Amarige perfume -- or at least the opulent box in which the fragrance is packaged.


Advanta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


G.O.P. in Trenton Rejects Citizen-Lawmaking Plans
In a stunning rejection of their party platform and campaign promises, Republican legislators tonight defeated by lopsided margins two proposals to allow citizens to make their own laws through petition and referendum.
The defeat of the primary bill, which would have allowed voters to put both laws and constitutional amendments on the ballot, left supporters angry and made clear the enormous influence of lobbyists and interests groups, which opposed the measure across the political spectrum.


United Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dolphins' Cross Signs
The Miami Dolphin defensive end JEFF CROSS, a key pass-rusher, reported to training camp yesterday after signing a three-year deal for a reported $3 million. (AP)


Q&amp;A
Mosquito Bite Cure
Q.  Why do mosquito bites itch? What is the best way to relieve the itching?


Georgia Gulf Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Premark International reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


America West Founder Quits
The founder of America West Airlines, Edward R. Beauvais, resigned as chairman last Friday.
He will be succeeded by Michael J. Conway, president and chief executive officer.
Mr.
Beauvais had been trying to pull the airline, based in Tempe, Ariz., out of bankruptcy court.
The company filed under Chapter 11 of Federal bankruptcy law 13 months ago.
A Federal bankruptcy judge has given the airline a Dec.3 deadline to emerge from bankruptcy proceedings.


Restaurant Dispute Ends
A two-month labor dispute at the Rainbow Room, the Art Deco restaurant 65 floors above Rockefeller Center, ended yesterday when about 200 striking waiters, bartenders and hat checkers ratified a tentative agreement that had been reached last week.
Mortimer Matz, a spokesman for the restaurant, said employees should begin returning to work by Thursday.
Neither Mr.
Matz nor officials with Local 6 of the Hotel and Restaurant Employees International Union would discuss details of the three-year agreement.
The workers had walked off their jobs in mid-May to protest stalled negotiations over labor practices, wages and medical benefits, among others issues.


Market Place; Basic Assumption Is Being Doubted
AS share prices tumbled around the world yesterday, there were many explanations offered, ranging from a Mafia bombing in Italy to political polls in the United States.
But at the heart of the slide may be a growing fear that economic growth -- and the profits that it brings for stock owners -- is no longer to be taken for granted in the world.
In the United States, most economists think the recession that began in 1990 ended either in the spring of 1991 or early this year.
But just as growth in the two years preceding the recession was substandard, the recovery has been weak.


Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Liz Claiborne reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bush Opens an Attack
President Bush delivered his strongest attack so far on his Democratic rival, calling Governor Clinton's economic proposals "smoke and mirrors" and "a big mistake" that would increase the Federal deficit.
The remarks appeared to herald a tougher campaign style by Mr.
Bush, who trails Mr.
Clinton in opinion polls.
Article, page A14.


Review/Theater; Anger and Desperation of Black Men
The most insistent refrain that rings through Keith Antar Mason's play "49 Blues Songs for a Jealous Vampire" is the phrase "Catch up with me." During the work's premiere at Alice Tully Hall on Saturday evening, those words were shouted again and again by Mr.
Mason in tones ranging from infuriated challenge to pleading desperation as he addressed the plight of black men in America.
His refrain was counterpointed throughout the evening by another recurrent phrase, "in the boom box of L.A.," which worked as a sort of bass figure in a polemic that had the sprawling form of an extended jazz-blues suite.
The two-hour piece, which Mr.
Mason performed with five other members of the Hittite Empire, a black male theater collective in Santa Monica, Calif., was commissioned by Lincoln Center as part of its annual Serious Fun festival.
The work is an interlocking series of incendiary riffs on racial oppression, primarily directed at young black men but including many scalding asides aimed at white liberals.
The scores of topics it addresses run from big events like the Los Angeles riots to petty gripes about the pop group Simply Red's supposed boast that it invented the Scottish blues to Mr.
Mason's own "sexual harassment" by a white female arts administrator.


CHRONICLE
Attaching a celebrity name to a good cause is standard procedure in the world of charity fund raising.
But when GRIFFIN DUNNE, the actor and producer, goes to a benefit given by the New York City Chapter of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society at the Intrepid museum on Thursday, there will be more than the usual sincerity behind his appearance.
Mr.
Dunne's mother, ELLEN GRIFFIN DUNNE, suffers from multiple sclerosis, a disabling neurological disease that most often strikes young people.


First Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Komag Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


In Stunner, Hillegas Shuts Out The A's
He's been traded twice and released once, all in a span of four years, but Shawn Hillegas might have found a home with the Yankees tonight.
Hillegas, who was signed to a minor league contract after he was released by the Cleveland Indians in March, pitched a five-hit shutout and helped the Yankees to a 1-0 victory over the Oakland Athletics.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about Shirley Greengrass, a partner with her husband in Barney Greengrass, a Manhattan restaurant and delicatessen, misidentified her husband.
He is Moe Greengrass; his father, Barney Greengrass, founded the business.


Review/Music; Maverick On Bach Plays Rags Of Joplin
One thing wrong with the New York music scene of late has been the absence of Joshua Rifkin.
Like Peter Schickele, Mr.
Rifkin is a stimulating presence, applying his versatile gifts with wit and intelligence, and stirring up no little trouble along the way.
Mr.
Rifkin has aroused particular controversy with his theories about Bach performance, some of which he will display with his Bach Ensemble at the Mostly Mozart Festival on Thursday. (His recent recording of Bach solo cantatas with Jan Opalach on L'Oiseau-Lyre was marred by glassy and erratic reproduction.) But Mr.
Rifkin was here this evening, at the Rutgers Summerfest in the Nicholas Music Center, to offer his latest ideas about another longtime specialty of his: the piano rags of Scott Joplin.


Family Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


D.R. Horton Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  U.N.
SUSPENDS SARAJEVO AIRLIFT  Heavy fighting around Sarajevo forced the U.N. military commander to close the airport and suspend the airlift of food and medicine to the besieged Bosnian captial.
A1  ISRAELI LOAN AID TAKES SHAPE  A deal seemed to be shaping up for loan guarantees from the United States to Israel, which would receive them in exchange for limiting settlement-building activity.
A1  FALLOUT FROM FREE TRADE  About 2,000 workers in small handmade-glass factories in West Virginia face financial ruin if the free-trade agreement with Mexico and Canada is reached.
The pact will add jobs and wealth throughout the continent, but at the same time it will bring hardship to some people.
A1  CYRUS R. VANCE, ON CALL  Alone among former Secretaries of State, Cyrus R. Vance is using his experience and skill as a mediator on the front lines of violence in several parts of the world.
A3  BONN EASES CURBS ON REFUGEES  In a shift of policy, the German Government announced that it would ease immigration restrictions to allow the entry of refugees fleeing the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A6  MAFIA ISSUES A CHALLENGE  Just as Italy seemed to be emerging from political crisis to confront economic woes, the Mafia has recast the agenda, throwing down a challenge to the new Prime Minister.
A8  HAVEL YIELDS TO MOMENTUM  President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia, who led the revolution against his country's Communist leadership, left office, yielding to what he said was a historical current pulling Czechoslovakia apart.
A8  SURVIVAL AND FINANCES IN RUSSIA  Many Russians appear to be getting by in this complicated transition between totalitarian Communism and a democratic market economy, when inflation is surging and the mind struggles with old habits and new possibilities.
A10  TUG OF WAR OVER IZVESTIA  The battle for the soul of Izvestia is heading to court after the Russian Minister of Information ruled that he could not change the newspaper's registration without a legal ruling on its current status.
A11  Doctors says cells in the Pope's tumor were becoming malignant.
A3  Alexandra Journal: Preparing for democracy in South Africa.
A4  National A12-16  WHAT PEROT WOULD HAVE DONE  Ross Perot was preparing an economic proposal for the nation that included a balanced budget, higher income taxes for the well-to-do, a increase in the gasoline tax and a slowing of increases in Social Security benefits.
A1  BUSH ASSAILS CLINTON ON ECONOMY  President Bush delivered his strongest attack to date on the Democratic Presidential nominee, calling Governor Clinton's economic proposals "smoke and mirrors" and "a big mistake" that would increase the Federal deficit.
A14  GORE'S NEW PERSONAL TOUCH  Al Gore has changed since 1988, when he himself admits he was a wooden, bad candidate.
Now he is more direct, funnier, and most importantly, more personal.
A15  CLINTON RETURNS TO THE PEOPLE  The Democratic ticket's bus tour has returned Governor Clinton to the small-scale campaigning Mr.
Clinton likes best.
And his crowds have been easily stirred.
A15  CONGRESS TO MEET, BRIEFLY  Congress began a four-week session with the intent of scoring campaign points and considering a variety of legislation, including a bill on abortion rights.
A16  CLOSE RACE FOR GINGRICH  Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia has the baggage of a vulnerable Congressman: many years in Washington, 22 overdrafts at the House bank and extensive use of perks.
But he also has a little-known opponent and a new, virtually all Republican district.
A12  DEATH OF A 'STAR WARS' PROGRAM  The X-ray laser program that was once a central part of the Pentagon's "Star Wars" program suffered a final, debilitating setback when the Energy Department quietly canceled its last scheduled test.
A1  EXPERIMENTAL AIRCRAFT CRASHES  A prototype of the V-22 Osprey tilt-rotor aircraft crashed in the Potomac River with seven people on board.
The crash may increase opposition to the craft, which has become a symbol of the debate over Pentagon efforts to cut its spending.
A1  The U.S. and other countries reduced arms sales to the third world.
A16  PREVENTING A CITY'S INSOLVENCY  Pennsylvania officials released the outlines of a Draconian financial plan intended to halt the City of Scranton's march to certain insolvency this fall.
A12  REVIVING THE CABILDO  New Orleans Journal: The Cabildo, the 18th-century building where the Louisiana Purchase was signed, survived riots, rot and termites only to be damaged by fire in 1988.
Now it is rising from the ashes.
A12  Metro Digest B1  SAFETY CHIEF ACCUSED
The chief security officer for New York City's public schools and his two top aides were accused of an array of improper activities, including a conflict of interest involving a private real-estate deal and the hiring of relatives.
A1  Business Digest D1  Science Times C1-8  Major scientific schism over rights of dinosaur hunters.
C1  Learning about an ancient man from belongings preserved in ice.
C1  Do childhood traumas come back to haunt adults?
C1  Fashion B6  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Murdoch in Hollywood.
C11  Theater: "49 Blues Songs for a Jealous Vampire." C11  Music: "110 in the Shade." C11  Bach maverick plays Joplin.
C11  Sports B7-13  Baseball: Watch for Steinbrenner in March.
B9  Mets fall to Dodgers.
B7  Column: Anderson on a Giant tradition.
B7  Football: Giants move a linebacker.
B7  Olympics: Robinson pleased with pro touch.
B7  Obituaries D20  Victor Louis, Russian journalist.
Lawrence Shubert Lawrence Jr. of the Shubert theater family.
Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  A Mideast boost for Mr.
Bush.
The state of misgovernment.
Creeping democracy in Mexico.
Rethinking ATM safety.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: So long, suckers.
Russell Baker: The Perot lesson.
Bao Pu: My father is no enemy of China.
Alan Brinkley: A whole new political ball game?


Charter Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Merck and Baxter Report Gains in Profits
Merck &amp; Company, the pharmaceutical giant, and Baxter International, a supplier of health-care products, both reported double-digit profit increases yesterday for the second quarter, largely meeting analysts' expectations.
Also, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company reported a slight decline in earnings after a one-time charge of $46 million.
That charge aside, however, sales and earnings rose 5 percent in the quarter.


Liberty Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tagliabue Is Given Free Rein To Deal
After a six-hour meeting in a hotel ballroom here, the owners of the 28 National Football League clubs voted tonight to give the league's commissioner, Paul Tagliabue, and the executive committee of the management council complete authority to negotiate a settlement in the Freeman McNeil free-agency case and to negotiate a labor agreement.
Previously, the executive committee needed to go back to the clubs for approval of such actions.
The vote tonight also applies to any other litigation against the league.


Centerbank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


People
*
Mary R. Trudel, general manager at the Rowland Company , New York, was named president and chief operating officer.
Also, Mark Weiss, chief operating officer at Rowland Company U.S., was named to the additional position of president. *
Joel Einleger, executive vice president of marketing at Pinpoint Marketing Inc., New York, was named president, succeeding Warren Archer, who left.


Commonwealth Edison reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


NationsBank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


From Long Division to Germany's Multiplying Hopes
Like the German Olympic team itself, Marco Rudolph, the world amateur lightweight champion boxer, is brimming with energy and confidence.
"I want to win a medal," Rudolph said recently, during a break in training at an Olympic sport center nestled above the Rhine.
"It doesn't make a difference which medal. I'm the world champion, so why shouldn't I be optimistic?"


More Problems for Schlichter
The Cincinnati Rockers of the Arena Football League said yesterday that quarterback ART SCHLICHTER, arrested last week on a charge of passing a bad check for $3,000, has had a relapse of his compulsive gambling problem.


InterWest Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Union Planters reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Coors Tries to Polish Image With Campaign for Literacy
ACTRESSES like Kathy Bates, Dixie Carter and Joan Van Ark; political figures like Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Representative Pat Schroeder and the speechwriter Peggy Noonan; Elizabeth Dole, president of the American Red Cross, and even the comic-strip character Blondie are appearing in new advertising sponsored by a brewer, the Adolph Coors Company.
But don't look for them to wear bikinis, hold cans of beer and admire bare-chested hunks -- these ads have a different, ostensibly more altruistic, purpose.


A Campaign to Pull Scranton Back From Disaster
At a news conference that drew somber city officials and community leaders, state officials today released the outlines of a Draconian financial plan intended to halt Scranton's march to certain insolvency this fall.
The state developed the plan after city officials, who were unable to agree on a proposal of their own, filed what amounted to a bankruptcy petition last year.
Scranton, the fifth-largest city in Pennsylvania, is by far the largest of 10 municipalities in the state to seek this solution.


Computer Language Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Allegheny Ludlum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Union Carbide reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sanders Leaves Redskin Camp
As the Washington Redskins opened their training camp yesterday, wide receiver RICKY SANDERS walked out.
Several other key players were absent, including the Heisman Trophy winner and first-round draft choice DESMOND HOWARD and quarterback MARK RYPIEN.
Sanders, who will be challenged by the addition of Howard to the "Posse" to go with ART MONK and GARY CLARK, left camp before the first workout because of an unexpected snag in his contract settlement.


Lexington Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Albany's Card Game, Long Island Is Trump
When Ralph J. Marino, the State Senate Majority leader from Nassau County, stalked out of the Capitol in a huff recently, he held up the passage of more than a dozen bills dear to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and to New York City.
But in the partisan world of Albany politics, Mr.
Cuomo and the Democratic leadership in the Assembly, had their own political card to play: a pair of fiscal aid bills for Nassau and Suffolk counties.


Plea in Assault on a Baby
A 17-year-old Brooklyn teen-ager pleaded guilty yesterday to an assault charge for stabbing and abandoning her newborn baby on March 25.
The teen-ager, Leonora Gayle, pleaded guilty with the understanding that she will be placed on probation for five years and required to continue intensive therapy, District Attorney Charles J. Hynes said in announcing the plea in Brooklyn.


Radar System Gives Forecasters More Data on Wind More Often
ACROSS the middle of the country, in an area renowned for tornadoes, blizzards and thunderstorms, a new network of radars is peering skyward to tell the weatherman which way the wind blows.
The radar, firing narrow beams of energy straight up and listening for signal reflections from air molecules, measures wind speed and direction every six minutes at 72 different levels between 1,600 feet and 53,000 feet.


Hendrik Hertzberg Joining The New Yorker
Hendrik Hertzberg, a former editor of The New Republic, will become the executive editor of The New Yorker in the fall, The New Yorker announced yesterday.
The appointment came three weeks after Tina Brown, the editor of Vanity Fair, was named editor of The New Yorker.


Making Your Mac Say Aargh!
FROM the beginning, the Apple Computer Inc.
Macintosh has had built-in sound and graphics abilities that other personal computers could match only with expensive add-ons.
These abilities are getting better, as a new series of book-disk combinations from Hayden makes clear.
"Cool Mac Sounds," by Craig O'Donnell, contains all the information an average user will need to load existing sounds or create new cheeps, beeps and burps.
The accompanying disk includes several utilities for this purpose, some freeware, others shareware, which means you are asked to pay a nominal fee if you continue to use them.
Almost two megabytes of programs and sounds have been compressed onto the 1.4-megabyte disk; you will need a newer Mac equipped with a Superdrive for access to them, and about three megabytes of space on a hard disk.
The book assumes you are using System 6.0.7 or later.


First Hawaiian Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Dinosaur Named Sue Divides Fossil Hunters
THE F.B.I.'s seizure of the best Tyrannosaurus rex skeleton ever excavated has touched off one of the worst rows in a century between paleontologists, lawyers, politicians, business executives, Indian leaders and ordinary dinosaur enthusiasts.
The debate arises from the web of vague and sometimes contradictory Federal, state and local laws regulating the ownership of fossils found on different categories of land.
With tempers at fever pitch, even scientists are attacking each other in court, and the rift has split North America's principal scientific society for the study of dinosaurs and other extinct vertebrates.
If the legal issues are ever settled, their resolution could have far-reaching consequences, not only for scientists and commercial fossil dealers but for amateur fossil collectors and students as well.


Crawford &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Durr-Fillauer reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Western Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Robinson Glad to See the Old College Try Put Aside
David Robinson has cast his vote: He thinks the United States is far better off with the policy of using professionals to play basketball in the Olympics.
He wasn't sure, at first, but he has decided that it really is a simple matter.
When Robinson asks himself if he is better off than he was four years ago, he looks around the gymnasium -- at Michael Jordan, Magic Johnson, Charles Barkley, Patrick Ewing and, most of all, Chuck Daly -- and the graduate of the United States Naval Academy almost wants to salute.


Patterns
The Bride Wore Black?
In the midst of the summer fashion doldrums, finding excitement on Seventh Avenue is like trying to get blood from a rock.


Bemis Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gingrich Faces Spirited Foe and Queries on Ethics
It sounds like the definition of a vulnerable incumbent: a veteran Congressman who barely escaped an upset two years ago and is being battered by his opponent over overdrafts at the House bank, excessive use of Congressional perks, and questions about his political action committee.
Nonetheless, in the bid by Representative Newt Gingrich, the House Republican whip, for an eighth term in Congress, the biggest question about Republican primary on Tuesday in Georgia's new Sixth Congressional District is not whether Mr.
Gingrich is vulnerable but whether a little-known, underfinanced former State Representative named Herman Clark can beat him.


Man in Glacier Offers Rich Trove From the Stone Age
LAST fall the mummified corpse of a late Stone Age man melted out of a glacier high in the Tyrolean Alps.
That spectacular discovery is providing archeologists with a startlingly vivid picture of how Stone Age man was clothed and equipped.
Yet with other archeological material from the area so skimpy, there is almost no context in which to place this amazing individual, who stepped out of the ice nearly intact from the day he died some five millennia ago.
"We look at cultures, and here is an individual," said Dr.
Markus Egg, a prehistorian at the Roman-Germanic Central Museum in Mainz, which is restoring and studying the equipment found with the man.
"That means it's really a forensic case."


National Sanitary reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Victor Louis, 64, Journalist, Dies; Conduit for Kremlin to the West
Victor Louis, a Russian journalist who for decades purveyed information that the Soviet Communist Party and the K.G.B. wanted to appear in the Western press, died on Saturday at Cromwell Hospital here.
He was 64 years old.
Mr.
Louis died of a heart attack, his wife, Jennifer, said, adding that he had successfully undergone an operation for a recurrence of cancer on Thursday and had been recovering well.


Bell Atlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.12
5.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.15
5.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.20
5.75
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.37
6.37
8.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.65
7.68
8.46
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.64
8.65
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.26
6.26
7.14
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Alexandra Journal; Apartheid Foes Take Crash Course in Democracy
"Who can tell me what we mean when we talk about a two-thirds majority?" Carmela Rakgwetha asked hopefully.
Fifty lieutenants of the African National Congress shifted in their chairs and stared back uncertainly.


Rethinking ATM Safety
New York's City Council is scheduled to vote soon on a misguided bill that would set new safety standards for indoor automatic teller machines (ATM's) -- everything from better lighting to new locks.
ATM crime accounts for only a fraction of the city's robberies, less than half of 1 percent.
Any crime is one too many, of course, but the bill's appeal is based more on exaggerated fear than sense.
The Council leadership is supporting the measure and so is the Dinkins administration.
Some of the bill's provisions would be costly, others ineffective or unnecessary.
The measure is more likely to inconvenience customers, halt the construction of new ATM's and speed the closing of many now operating than to reduce crime.


Phils Extend Fregosi's Pact
Although the Phillies are in last place in the National League East, the team extended the contract of Manager JIM FREGOSI through the 1993 season.
Fregosi, 50 years old, replaced NICK LEYVA on April 23, 1991, and led the Phils to a third-place finish that season.
Fregosi and team officials had great hopes for this season, but injuries cut down four-fifths of the season-opening starting rotation.
The club also lost outfielder LENNY DYKSTRA for 31 games because of two injuries.


COMPANY NEWS
CALGENE INC., St.
Davis, Calif., a genetic engineering company, acquired Hodag Chemical Corp., a specialty oleochemical manufacturer.
Terms were not disclosed.
DILLARD DEPARTMENT STORES INC., Little Rock, Ark., will acquire controlling interest in Higbee Co., Cleveland, a retail chain, from the property developer Edward J. DeBartolo Corp.
Terms were not disclosed.


By Design; Into Fall
The other day the designer Donna Karan breezed into her Seventh Avenue showroom to pose for a fall photograph.
She was wearing a sleeveless black shaft of a dress with a mock turtleneck and a slit up the front from the midcalf hemline.
The outfit, accessorized with an important metal-trimmed crocodile belt, opaque tights and a pair of platform-soled high-heeled boots, epitomized the fall look.
An hour later, Ms.
Karan breezed out to keep an uptown luncheon date.
Gone were the tights, revealing suntanned bare legs; espadrilles had replaced the boots.
She looked the way a lot of career women want to look now: sleek, chic, cool and comfortable.


Brighton Beach Development Gains Backing
A much-disputed plan to replace the historic Brighton Beach Baths with a large housing development cleared a major hurdle yesterday when it won the endorsement of the New York City Planning Commission.
However, approval of the Brooklyn project, known as Brighton-by-the-Sea, came only after the developer agreed to several changes, including scaling down the project and adding subsidized housing and more open space.


Germany Easing Curbs on Bosnians
After turning away thousands of refugees fleeing the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina in recent months, Germany took steps today to loosen its immigration restrictions.
The German Government had come under strong criticism for imposing tight visa restrictions for Bosnian refugees.
As a result of the German curbs and those imposed by other European nations, thousands of Bosnian refugees have been able to move no further northward than Austria or Hungary.


Model Cities Work, but Enterprise Zones Won't; Creating Jobs and Hope
To the Editor:
"The Muddled Model Cities Model," your well-intentioned July 3 editorial on enterprise zones, begins with a false premise, from which you then derive a series of false conclusions.


Crestar Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


State Street Boston Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.A.W. Attacks G.M. Plans for Tarrytown Plant


Mexico Cement Maker Strikes Again in Spain
The huge Mexican cement maker Cementos Mexicanos S.A. extended its reach into Spain again today, announcing that it would buy that country's second-largest cement producer, Sanson, S.A., for as much as $600 million.
Cemex, as the Mexican company is known, said it had taken over an option to purchase a controlling stake in Sanson from the Swiss company APAX, a subsidiary of the Unifund Group.
On June 29, APAX signed an option to acquire the entire stake in Sanson owned by Corporacion Industrial y Financiera Banesto, which has had a tender offer on Sanson's publicly held shares since early June.


Cardinal Distribution reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bancorp Hawaii reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Whole New Political Ball Game?
On Thursday, as I was walking into a meeting in midtown Manhattan, I stopped to talk with two volunteers collecting signatures to put Ross Perot on the New York State ballot.
They gave me an amateurish, crudely printed brochure and seemed puzzled and disappointed when I declined to sign their petition.
"Don't you understand that Ross is our only hope?" one said.
Two hours later, when I came back out to the sidewalk, Mr.
Perot's candidacy had vanished.
And so had his volunteers.
Where they are going is a question in which both major parties have a large stake.
The collapse of the Perot movement, even more than its emergence, has the potential to create a genuine political realignment -- a redefinition of party loyalties that could transform the fortunes of the Democrats and Republicans, not just in 1992 but beyond.


Coming, March 1: George Steinbrenner
The most anticlimactic step in the process that will return George Steinbrenner to an active role with the Yankees is scheduled to be taken within the next week.
That step will be the announcement by Commissioner Fay Vincent of the timing and the terms of the owner's return.
Steve Greenberg, the deputy commissioner, and Arnold Burns, Steinbrenner's lawyer, met yesterday to discuss details of the modified agreement under which Steinbrenner will return next March 1.
The fact that Steinbrenner would return next year has been an open secret for months.


New Campaigns
*
Reebok International Ltd. is introducing television commercials to replace a campaign with the theme "To Be Settled in Barcelona," which was rendered obsolete when the decathlete Dan O'Brien failed to make the United States Olympic team.
Mr.
O'Brien appears with his erstwhile rival, Dave Johnson, who did make the team; in a spot by Chiat/Day/ Mojo Inc., New York, Mr.
Johnson is thrilled to learn that Mr.
O'Brien will be in Barcelona, albeit as a network commentator rather than a competitor.
When Mr.
Johnson, referring to a previous spot, asks if they should hug, Mr.
O'Brien replies, "Naahh, we already did that."


Chittenden Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


It's Still the Same Old Story: Borg Defeats Vilas
At the end of a successful night on the way to points unknown, Bjorn Borg mentioned his hope to play in a Grand Slam event in 1993, and his fans cheered.
When Borg spoke of the reality of high-tech tennis -- a game of graphite and size and power -- he sounded more like a link to the days of wood and thought and finesse.
"It's like if someone cut your hands off," Borg said.
"You have to take another hand and put it on your arm. It's very hard."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; To Boost Economy, Perot Planned to Seek Sacrifices
Ross Perot's plan for restoring the nation's economic health, nearly complete when he withdrew from the Presidential race last week, included a far-reaching program of investment in education, transportation and communications, as well as higher income taxes for the well-to-do, increased gasoline taxes and holding down increases in Social Security benefits.
The center of the Perot blueprint, his senior aides said, was balancing the budget in five years, with cuts in spending as well as new taxes to reduce the deficit by an average of $150 billion a year over the five years.
Gasoline Tax Increase
The plan, about 50 pages long, included many steps long regarded by economic experts as necessary and by political experts as untenable.
Among them were slowing increases in Social Security benefits and increasing the gasoline tax by a total of 50 cents a gallon over five years.


The Return of the Missing Flinger
The first official pitch of his comeback hasn't even been thrown yet, and already Bret Saberhagen is behind in the count.
His mind's scoreboard informs him of as much.
Expectations are too great.
Hopes are too high -- in his own clubhouse, as well as throughout Shea Stadium.
He is a pitcher, after all, and thus can make an impact a maximum of maybe three times every two weeks.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sunday about the beating death of a Queens teen-ager misidentified the store shown, where a collection was being taken for the youth.
It was a store near his home in Corona, not the store in Briarwood where the beating occurred.


Littlefield, Adams &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Women Worldwide Nearing Higher Rate For AIDS Than Men
Women throughout the world are becoming infected with the virus that causes AIDS about as often as men, and by the year 2000 most new infections will be in women, the World Health Organization's leading official on the disease told an international meeting here today.
Worldwide since Jan. 1, "close to half of the one million newly infected adults have been women," said Dr.
Michael H. Merson, who heads W.H.O.'s global program on AIDS.
He added that "women's rising infection rates have been accompanied by a corresponding rise in the number of children born to them infected with H.I.V.," the virus that causes AIDS.


Cummins Engine reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Orleans Journal; Citadel of History Rises From the Ashes (Again)
Here in South Louisiana where floods, hurricanes, termites, Byzantine politics and subtropical rot come with the territory, a late-18th-century building is rising from ashes, again.
The Cabildo, a survivor of French and Spanish colonial days that was once City Hall and is now a state museum, sits in the heart of the French Quarter beside the St.
Louis Cathedral, facing Jackson Square and the Mississippi River in one of the world's most graceful landscapes.


Shawmut National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


An Industry's Winners and Losers Once a Free-Trade Pact Is Signed
The West Virginia glass industry has become a kind of prism through which North America's steady march toward a sweeping new free-trade agreement can be seen.
The new pact with Mexico and Canada, which the three Governments now seem likely to reach within weeks, will clearly have widespread economic ramifications.


Becton, Dickinson reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Merck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
Brief Session for Congress
Congress began a four-week session to consider legislation to keep the Government in cash and consider a bill on abortion rights.
Page A16.
Russians Finding Their Way
Many Russians appear to be staying afloat in the complicated transition between a Communist society and a market economy.
Page A10.
Clues to the Stone Age
A vivid picture of how Stone Age man was equipped is emerging from research on a 5,000-year-old body found in a glacier.
Science Times, page C1.
Women's AIDS Rate Climbs
The latest data show that women are now becoming infected with AIDS about as often as men, and the gap is closing.
Page C3.


Metrobank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Impact Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


School Safety Chief Accused Of Improprieties in New York
The chief security officer for New York City's public schools and his two top aides were accused yesterday of an array of improper and illegal activities, including a conflict of interest involving a private real-estate deal and hiring relatives in violation of nepotism rules.
In an 80-page report, the school system's top investigator concluded that the chief security officer, Bruce A. Irushalmi, improperly lent one of his top aides, Joseph Capalbo, $42,000 for the purchase of a Bronx apartment building.
In addition, the report said, Mr.
Irushalmi's deputy, Henry R. Murphy, hired a dozen relatives as security guards.


Goody Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S.-Saudi Links Reported
Government papers show that the United States and Saudi Arabia have cooperated extensively on oil marketing matters for many years, The Washington Post reports in its Tuesday issue.
Such a relationship has been widely assumed to exist, although the countries have long denied it.
Citing internal State Department documents obtained under a Freedom of Information Act proceeding, The Post reported that during the Reagan and Bush Administrations the Saudis sometimes advised the United States in advance of important moves they planned to make at meetings of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
Saudi Arabia is the largest OPEC producer.


Dana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pace Resumed By Legislators After a Break
Returning to Trenton after a break in which the Republican-controlled Legislature took a brief post-budget vacation and Gov.
Jim Florio attended the Democratic National Convention, the two sides today resumed their work -- and warfare -- with a blur of activity.
The State Senate proposed an amendment to make more politically palatable a bill to repeal the law barring assault weapons, dropped plans to revamp the state's method of financing public school education and banned the police from using photo radar to catch speeding motorists.


Review/Music; Bang a Drum, Bind a Mule's Legs And Let the Heavens Pour Forth
The New York City Opera, presenting "110 in the Shade" in a new production on Saturday night, was acting with the same combination of fantasy and swagger with which Starbuck, the musical's con-man protagonist, swept into a dust bowl town stricken by drought.
Rain, he promised the town folk, lightning, thunder.
Just bang the drum, paint an arrow, tie a mule's hind legs together.
And pay a hundred dollars.
Well, there isn't any drought this time around: the 1963 musical is arriving in New York after one of the best Broadway musical seasons in years, led by another revival (of "Guys and Dolls").
And the cavernous New York State Theater is hardly the most hospitable place in which to stage a musical, especially one with this show's "golly, gee whillikers" manner, its sort of Okie twist on the "Music Man" theme.


Viacom Shuffles Executives
In an extensive management realignment at several divisions, Viacom International said yesterday that it had named Neil S. Braun chairman and chief executive of Viacom Entertainment and named Edward D. Horowitz chairman and chief executive of Viacom Broadcasting.
They succeed Henry S. Schleiff, who had been chairman and chief executive of the two divisions, as well as senior vice president of Viacom International Inc., which is based in New York.
Viacom's two other core divisions are Viacom Networks and Viacom Cable.
Mr.
Schleiff will become an in-house television producer.


Diamond Shamrock Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FlightSafety International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


3 Charged With Taking Bribes in Traffic-Ticket Schemes
Two employees of the New York City Department of Transportation and one former employee were arrested yesterday and charged with accepting bribes to fix traffic tickets, the city Department of Investigation said.
The three were all using different methods to pocket money that was properly owed the city, and there was no apparent connection among them, said Peter Benjaminson, a spokesman for the Department of Investigation.


Honors
*
James McQuaid, president and chief executive at the Metromail Corporation, Lombard, Ill., was named List Leader of the Year for 1992 by the Direct Marketing Association, which will present the award at its annual List Day conference on Aug. 26 in New York.


Cornerbacks, Please Take Your Mark
When Erik McMillan was asked a couple of days ago about how he felt about switching from free safety to cornerback, his replies ranged from "It stinks" to "It's a challenge."
Mike Brim thinks the switch is simply part of the game of pro football.


Queens Man Sought in Slaying Of New York Housing Officer
A bouncer at a Queens bar is suspected in the fatal shooting of an off-duty Housing Authority police officer and another man after a brawl on a Bayside street early Saturday morning, the police said yesterday.
The police identified the suspect as Patrick Bannon, 24 years old, an Elmhurst, Queens, resident who they say briefly returned to his home after the slayings, took four of the five handguns he was licensed to own for target practice and fled, "possibly to the Hamptons or New Jersey."


Ashland Coal reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Firstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Maxwell Son Must Pay $778 Million in Damages
A British court today ordered Kevin Maxwell to pay more than $778 million in damages for breaching his fiduciary duties as a director of an investment-management firm that was the trustee of employee pension funds of the Maxwell publishing empire.
Hundreds of millions of dollars of pension-fund assets were taken from the firm, Bishopsgate Investment Management.


Business and Health; Survey Rates H.M.O. Quality
IN a survey that is sure to be picked over, challenged and consulted in sales pitches by buyers of health benefits, Consumer Reports magazine asked 1.5 million of its subscribers what they liked and disliked about health maintenance organizations.
Analyzing 20,000 responses culled from about 300,000 who were enrolled in H.M.O.'s, the nonprofit magazine published ratings for 46 large health maintenance organizations across the country in its August issue.
Experts on measuring quality in health care said the survey provided important information.
A growing number of H.M.O.'s as well as hospitals have been studying patient satisfaction, both as a quality indicator and for use in marketing.
But detailed findings comparing one H.M.O. with another are hard to get.
Regional employer health-care coalitions based in Los Angeles, San Francisco, Minneapolis, Topeka, Kan., and Chelmsford, Mass., have recently done such surveys for their members.
There have also been statewide surveys in Iowa and in California by the California Public Employees Retirement System.


Accounts
*
The Society Corporation, Cleveland, to J. Walter Thompson Detroit for the financial services holding company's estimated $10 million account, previously handled by Liggett-Stashower Inc., Cleveland.
Liggett-Stashower will continue to work for the Society Corporation on a project basis in the Cleveland market.


Divestment Of Insurance Unit Is Seen
The Transamerica Corporation announced plans yesterday to dispose of a subsidiary that is the nation's largest insurer of sports and entertainment events, including the Super Bowl, the N.C.A.A.
Final Four and many movies and plays.
The company said that shedding its property and casualty insurance business, called Transamerica Insurance Group, would allow it to concentrate on more promising operations.


Central Jersey Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; No Summer Doldrums In Going After Clinton
This is a rough season in politics.
Gov.
Bill Clinton rolled out of the Democratic convention with an extraordinary surge in the polls, and the Republicans have to stop it.
From their perspective, they have little choice but to go on the attack.
It is as simple as that.
President Bush generally leaves the job to surrogates at this stage of the campaign, but he took on the job himself today.
He said Mr.
Clinton's economic plan was nothing but "smoke and mirrors." He said Mr.
Clinton had dodged the deficit.
He even complained that Mr.
Clinton had stolen one of his lines when the Democratic nominee told last week's Democratic convention, "Now that we have changed the world, it's time to change America."


Charter One Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CalFed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Adding Kick To Longer Skirts
The fashion pendulum is swinging once again from short to long.
And as usual when any style is revived, there will be differences in the look.
The long skirt of the 90's will not be worn like the long skirt of decades past.
That's what makes the fashion world go round.
Of course, you may not be ready to give up short skirts, and no one says you must.
No one can dictate fashion anymore, but the momentum for change is building.
It may take a few seasons for long skirts to sweep the country, but fashion-conscious women are already snapping up the first fall styles in the stores.
So it is not too soon to consider how to wear them.


Promus Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
In one not uncommon situation, a partnership is in grave danger, and acts on the assumption that all will be well because the opponents will not know.
It happens when an opening bid in a minor suit is followed by a take-out double, a redouble and a pass.
Consider the diagramed deal.
The opening one club bid, the take-out double and the redouble are all standard.
East certainly passes, and South thinks.
His opponents appear to be in trouble, so he passes, the normal action, in the expectation that West will bid and may suffer a substantial penalty.
As it happens, the expectation is wrong: East-West can escape into two clubs, which can be doubled for a one-trick penalty of 200.
North-South do better to bid and make their game in hearts or no-trump.


Corrections
A chart yesterday about prices for foods in Russia converted rubles to dollars incorrectly.
A hundred rubles is worth about 77 cents.
Average monthly income in Russia is 2,500 to 3,500 rubles (about $19 to $27).


My Father Is No Enemy of China
Bao Tong, my father, is to go on trial today in Beijing after nearly three years of detention without charge.
The case has attracted considerable international attention because my father was the top aide to the ousted Communist Party chief, Zhao Ziyang, who sympathized with the students in Tiananmen Square.
His trial may have implications both for Mr.
Zhao and for the fate of economic and social reform.
I want people to see my father for himself, to understand his strength of character and how his hopes and beliefs have been trampled on to serve the ambitions of others.


Fired Up With a Love of the Feared Reading Tests; Koslin's Specialized Exam Wields a Powerful Influence on Millions of Students
One thing that qualifies Dr.
Bertram L. Koslin to design the reading tests dreaded by many of one million New York City students and their teachers is that he likes to read -- almost anything.
The mound of papers scattered across his desk takes the rough shape of a volcano, with dozens of articles about politics, science and history, and a few unpaid bills, spilling down the sides like lava.
He is making his way through a book about winemaking.
And at bedtime, he picks up one of the Seven Deadly Sins mysteries by Lawrence Sanders.
"I'm up to the Fourth Deadly Sin," he says.


Lawrence Shubert Lawrence Jr., Former Theater-Group Head, 76
Lawrence Shubert Lawrence Jr., who headed the Shubert Organization from 1962 to 1972, died on Saturday at the Hospice by the Sea in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 76 years old.
He died of cancer after a long illness, said his daughter-in-law, Suzanne Lawrence.


Creeping Democracy in Mexico
Until very recently, all Mexican elections conformed to a predictable pattern.
The Government always declared that its candidate had scored a resounding victory; opposition parties always protested that they had been victimized by outright fraud.
That pattern put Mexico out of step with the rest of the Western Hemisphere, where honest, democratic elections have increasingly become the rule.
Credit is now due to President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, himself the beneficiary of a tainted election four years ago, for rewriting the old, rigged rules.


At the Seaport, Some Count Ships While Others Count Sheep


Uncertainty for Allison
DAVEY ALLISON, who before the weekend was simultaneously having one of the most successful and most physically painful seasons of his stock-car racing career, took a blow on Sunday that may ruin his chances for the $1 million Winston Cup championship.
Going into the 500-mile Nascar race at Pocono International Raceway on Sunday, Allison was leading the Winston Cup title standing.
He had been in that position since the start of the season, when he won the Daytona 500, the tour's biggest race.
And he was the leader despite having been involved in crashes that left him with a concussion and bruises just about everywhere.


Jacobs Engineering Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Taking Justice to the Scene in Midtown
Normally, when a criminal-justice institution is planned for a neighborhood, the residents howl in protest.
Not so with the Midtown Community Court.
It is an experiment in local justice that will bring to West 54th Street the arraignment of prostitutes, purse-snatchers and other petty criminals.
Perhaps because neighborhood residents have long been close to the seedy side of Times Square, most are not intimidated by the idea and, in fact, generally seem to welcome it.


What Adelaide Meant About Hollanderizing
To the Editor:
As a member of the family that made "Hollanderizing" a household word from the 1940's, I cannot resist setting the record straight for the students of "Adelaide's Lament" in the revival of "Guys and Dolls."


Model Cities Work, but Enterprise Zones Won't
To the Editor:
In an editorial 26 years ago, give or take a few months, you proclaimed the Model Cities program (then called Demonstration Cities) dead.
You predicted that the program -- concentrating billions of dollars in demonstration grants to cities -- was doomed to defeat in Congress and destined to fail as too cautious a response to urban problems.


COKE PLANS BUYBACK OF 100 MILLION SHARES
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that its board had authorized the repurchase of 100 million shares over the next eight years.
The announcement supported Coke's shares on a day of broad declines in the stock market in which the Dow Jones industrial average fell 28.64 points.
Coke stock closed up 12.5 cents a share, ending at $41 in yesterday's New York Stock Exchange trading.
The share repurchase program has a $4.1 billion value at yesterday's closing price.


Home Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kysor Industrial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dinkins Seeks to Halt Work At Site of a Black Cemetery
Mayor David N. Dinkins has asked the Federal Government to "suspend all excavation and construction activities" on part of a 34-story office tower being built on the site of a colonial-era cemetery for black New Yorkers in lower Manhattan.
He also said Congress should designate the area a national historic district and transfer control of the burial ground from the Federal General Services Administration to the National Park Service or the Smithsonian Institution, which he maintained were "more equipped to handle it."


Puget Sound Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Holdout for Oilers' Moon
WARREN MOON, who missed the Houston Oilers' training camp reporting deadline Sunday, surprised teammates and coaches by showing up for an early-morning workout yesterday.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Vice President Quayle
WEDNESDAY: 9 P.M., CNN, "Larry King Live."


Rep. Scheuer of Queens Won't Seek Re-election
New York's Congressional redistricting plan claimed another incumbent today when Representative James H. Scheuer of Queens announced that he would not seek election to a 14th term.
The 72-year-old Queens Democrat had earned the sobriquet "The Flying Dutchman" for frequently switching districts.
But redistricting finally caught up with him, he said, adding that he was too old to pour the necessary energy into serving a new area.


U.S. Sales of Arms to the Third World Declined by 22% Last Year
Arms sales to the third world fell sharply last year as the United States, the Soviet Union, France and China all cut back sales, the Congressional Research Service reported today.
Total sales fell 40 percent, to $24.7 billion, the lowest level in at least seven years, from $41.1 billion in 1990, the research agency said.


CCNB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Creature to Make T. Rex Tremble
DESPITE the growing bitterness of clashes between rival paleontologists and the Federal Government over collecting rights, three important fossil discoveries were reported last week, including that of a dinosaur billed as the deadliest land creature the earth has seen.
Scientists have studied the bones of several specimens of the species, which they have named "utahraptor." The animal, nicknamed "su perslash er," weigh ed about one ton, reached a length of about 20 feet, was a swift runner and was armed with a 15-inch slashing claw that stood upright and apart from the other claws on each hind foot.


Kaneb Pipe Line L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Two Shot to Death In Gang Incidents
Two 27-year-old Asian men were shot to death early yesterday morning in Queens, in what the police said appeared to be separate gang-related incidents.
A man identified by police as a high-ranking member of the Ghost Shadows gang, Vinh Thang Luong of 57 Bayard Street in Manhattan, was slain in front of the Hollywood Lanes bowling alley at 99-23 Queens Boulevard in Rego Park at 3:15 A.M.


Oakwood Homes Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A picture caption last Friday about a New York City effort to regulate livery vans misstated the legal position of Queens Van Plan Inc.
The company, which is licensed, maintains that it breaks no laws even though it occasionally receives tickets for illegal activities, like shadowing city bus routes.
The State Department of Transportation has scheduled a hearing at the company's request to clarify the issues and violations.


Gingrich Claims Victory in a Tight Primary Race
Representative Newt Gingrich claimed a narrow victory over an obscure Republican challenger on Tuesday night, but the extremely close vote could result in a recount.
Mr.
Gingrich, the second-highest-ranking Republican in the House, faced Herman Clark, a former state representative who hammered Mr.
Gingrich with accusations that he had become a symbol of the Congressional abuse of power that he spent much of his career railing against.


Unocal Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Does Bowe's Desire Match His Punch?
Some fighters radiate danger, their transparent intensity mesmerizing crowds.
Other fighters are more inscrutable, their faces masking their emotions.
Take Riddick Bowe, the heavyweight who earned a Nov. 13 title shot against the undisputed champion, Evander Holyfield, by stopping Pierre Coetzer on Saturday.
Even as Bowe was beating up on Coetzer, his expression was that of almost benign detachment.
That sense was heightened during those occasions when the action was halted for one reason or another, and Bowe would wander to the ropes and casually talk to newsmen at ringside.


Books of The Times; Travel Books That Nourish a Vision
It is generally more rewarding to read about someone else's travels than to hear about them (especially when there's a slide show).
Vita Sackville-West had it right: "There is no greater bore than the travel bore. We do not in the least want to hear what he has seen in Hong Kong." But even seasoned travelers carry visions in their mental luggage: romantic encounters, unspoiled locales, recaptured youths, imagined historic times, and a good book can nourish the pursuit of those visions.
Here is a decidedly mixed handful of readable books that take the reader not only across but above the United States, as well as to the towns of Europe and the islands of Oceania.


Phelps Dodge Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article on the Law page on Friday, about a survey by the Chicago-Kent College of Law at the Illinois Institute of Technology ranking law schools by how often their faculty members write in leading law reviews, included an incomplete description of the methodology used by U.S.
News &amp; World Report to produce a similar study.
The magazine bases 20 percent of a school's ranking on a survey of deans and faculty members, 20 percent on appraisals of recent graduates by employers and judges, 20 percent on success in placing students after graduation, 25 percent on the academic performance and other characteristics of incoming students and 15 percent on a school's resources.


Reliance Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ex-Chief of Compaq Starts Firm
Nearly a year after being driven from the chief executive's post at the Compaq Computer Corporation, Joseph R. (Rod) Canion has formed a consulting firm to advise companies on management and computing technologies.
At a news conference, Mr.
Canion asserted that his new firm would break ground in the consulting field by knitting together experts in computer services, business operations and employee management to improve clients' long-term performance.


Toon Thinks It's Time For Some Catching Up
One of the things Bruce Coslet promised to do when he left Cincinnati to take over as head coach of the Jets for the 1990 season was to increase the average yards for a catch for wide receiver Al Toon.
The promise was fulfilled as Toon raised his average from 11 yards a catch to 13.3 and scored 6 touchdowns.
Then came last season.


Pfizer Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


H. Kendell Nash, Broadcaster, 54
H.
Kendell Nash, a Boston broadcaster, died on Sunday at Spaulding Hospital in Boston.
He was 54 years old.
His family said he died after a long illness.
Mr.
Nash, who lived in Weston, Mass., was a native of Brooklyn and earlier worked in New York City as a marketing and management adviser for small-business owners.


Profits Up at Citicorp and 3 Other Big Banks
Citicorp, recovering from loan losses that all but wiped out its profits in the last two years, said yesterday that it earned $171 million in the second quarter, up from $11 million a year earlier.
The improvement at Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company, was similar to recent earnings reports by many other banks.
While increases in loans to individuals and businesses have been meager at most banks, the industry's profits have improved, thanks to reduced losses from bad loans, a widening spread between interest rates paid to depositors and those charged borrowers, and cost cutting.


Doctors Find AIDS-Like Disease Without H.I.V. Virus Is Growing
European and American doctors added new reports today to earlier descriptions of patients with an AIDS-like disease but no detectable evidence of infection with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
The reports raised several possibilities.
The new condition, reported in about 30 patients, may be caused by a third variant of H.I.V.
Or it may be a deficiency of the immune system caused by some other condition or agent.
The new agent might be a microbe or some environmental factor.


American Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Olga Loeb, 97, Dies; Trustee of Hospital Who Ran Gift Shop
Olga Loeb, a trustee of Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center who did volunteer work for more than five decades, died on Sunday in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
She was 97 years old and lived in the Bronx.
Mrs.
Loeb managed her gift shop at the hospital on Friday as usual and died at Northern Dutchess Hospital of complications after an asthma attack, said a hospital spokesman.
She was on a family visit when she became ill.


Greenspan Optimistic but Cautious
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, gave an only faintly upbeat forecast today, saying the economy would gain momentum soon.
But he failed to say how soon and added that the jobless rate -- the most politically sensitive economic indicator in an election year -- would remain above 7 percent for the rest of 1992.
Mr.
Greenspan's testimony before Congress is likely to give the White House little encouragement that the economy will bolster President Bush's faltering re-election campaign.
The Fed chairman characterized current economic activity as dull and gave no firm indication that it would pick up before Election Day.


Public &amp; Private; No More Waiting
From time to time you hear complaints from people of apparent good will about how much national attention is being focused on AIDS.
What about cancer? say cancer survivors.
What about heart disease?
And in these complaints there is usually a touch of envy.
Many of us whose lives were mangled by mortal illnesses suffered privately, confident that doctors and researchers and the purveyors of government grants were doing their level best to eradicate the scourge.
We waited.
And waited.
And waited.
Then the AIDS activists disrupted hearings and marched down city streets and agitated, agitated, agitated for better drugs, for speedier approvals, for more research money.
Some people think they are too militant.
If I could help give someone I loved a second chance, or even an extra year, what people think would not worry me a bit.


Silence Serbia's Big Guns
Serbia's murderous shelling of Bosnian civilians in Sarajevo and Gorazde has intensified despite last Friday's cease-fire accord.
The Serbs had pledged to place their artillery, mortars and other heavy weapons under United Nations supervision.
Instead they have continued blasting away at Bosnia, forcing temporary suspension of food and medical relief to Sarajevo.
Thousands more will die in the heart of Europe unless the Security Council rouses itself to send the Serbs a stern warning: Let the U.N. take over Serbia's big guns or it will bomb and strafe them into submission.


Pepsico Profit Climbs 20.4%
Led by a strong performance at a revitalized Frito-Lay, Pepsico Inc.'s second-quarter profits jumped 20.4 percent, the company said yesterday.
The beverage and restaurant businesses also had solid gains.
Profit for the quarter was $383 million, or 48 cents a share, compared with $318.3 million, or 39 cents a share, for the corresponding quarter last year.
Sale rose 11.6 percent, to $5.21 billion, compared with $4.68 billion.


Settlement in Triplecast Ads
As part of a settlement of charges that they used deceptive advertising in promoting the Olympic Triplecast, NBC and Cablevision will state in any upcoming local newspaper ads that their pay-per-view programming consists of 12 hours of live coverage and 12 hours of a taped replay.
The New York City Department of Consumer Affairs charged last week that television commercials for the Triplecast deceived consumers by stating that it would be presented "live without interruptions." The recording on the 800 number consumers are asked in the commercial to call to order the Triplecast has been changed to state that there will be 12 hours of tape.


Capital Cities Net Up 15.4% In Quarter
Capital Cities/ABC Inc., the giant broadcasting and publishing company, said yesterday that its net income for the second quarter rose 15.4 percent, to $147.5 million, or $8.84 a share, compared with $127.8 million, or $7.60 a share, in the corresponding quarter a year earlier.
Revenues for the quarter increased 2.2 percent, to $1.39 billion, from $1.36 billion in the corresponding quarter of 1991.


Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Doubts Voiced Over Disputed Plane
Reacting to the second crash of a V-22 Osprey in 13 months, Pentagon officials today voiced new doubts about the hybrid helicopter-airplane in an apparent effort to stall Congressional financing for it.
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has criticized the project all along, although early this month he did free money to allow work on it to continue.


Intergra Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Martins, Ballet Master, Held On Charge He Beat His Wife
Peter Martins, the ballet master in chief of the New York City Ballet, has been charged with beating his wife, Darci Kistler, a principal dancer in the company.
Mr.
Martins, who was arrested on Sunday in Saratoga Springs, the summer home of the company, and jailed for five hours while awaiting arraignment, was released without bail later that morning.
He appeared in court yesterday and his case was postponed until next Tuesday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Jersey; 'A President in Person' Leaves Many Thrilled but Some Are Chilled
When President Bush, grinning and waving through his limousine window, passed Janet Duffy on Sixth Street here, she held her heart and squealed like a rock fan.
"Oh my God, oh my God -- I looked right at him!" she shrieked.
But a minute later Ms.
Duffy, a 20-year-old hairdresser, admitted that she was not sure she would vote for Mr.
Bush.
This is her first chance to pick a President, and the possibilities, though limited, have her baffled.


Avon Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


12 Are Named to Receive National Medal of Arts
Singers, musicians, architects, a sculptor, a television producer, a film director and two corporate arts benefactors are among those who will receive the National Medal of Arts this year, the White House announced yesterday.
The medals will be presented at a White House ceremony today followed by a luncheon for the 12 people being honored for outstanding contributions to the cultural life of the country.
The recipients will be Marilyn Horne, the mezzo-soprano; Allan Houser, a sculptor; James Earl Jones, the actor; Minnie Pearl, a country-music performer; Robert Saudek, the television producer, and Earl Scruggs, a banjo player.


Sun Sets on Johnson in Center Field
The concern for the Mets was damage control.
The principal source of that concern was Howard Johnson.
The problem was complex and crucial.
Last night, Johnson tried to solve it when he asked to be moved to left field full time.
Tired of having his play in center field scrutinized, Johnson approached Manager Jeff Torborg before the Mets' 5-2 victory against the Dodgers and said he would accept and even encourage a permanent change in position.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; Bush Camp Plans Pre-Convention Ads to Aid Sagging Image
President Bush's campaign is planning to put on the air as much as $5 million in television advertisements before the Republican National Convention next month to revive the President's image after his battering by the Democrats last week.
Bush campaign officials said they were hoping that the barrage of advertisements would be ready to run during the Summer Olympics, which open this weekend and are usually assured of high ratings.


Coca-Cola Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Panic Attack Link to Suicide Questioned
ARE people who get panic attacks at an especially great risk for suicide?
A widely publicized 1989 study seemed to suggest that they were.
But now a second look by other researchers suggests the answer is, by and large, that they are not.
Panic attack symptoms include a sudden surge of fright, sometimes with a strong premonition that one is about to die, and physical signs of terror like a pounding heartbeat and hyperventilation.
Highly effective treatments are available for panic attacks, most combining congnitive-behavioral treatment with anti-anxiety medication.
But the terror of the attacks, particularly if untreated, can sometimes lead people to the thought of suicide.


Washington Heights Is Also Parks and Young Conservationists
To the Editor:
Your July 13 report on Manhattan's West 162d Street, where a young Dominican, Jose Garcia, was shot to death by a police officer, is an excellent profile of Washington Heights south of 181st Street.
There are two Washington Heights sections: one predominantly Dominican south of 181st Street, the other predominantly elderly Jewish to the north.
They co-exist much as the black and Jewish residents of Crown Heights do, in quiet desperation.


No Headline
"Mr. Rabin invited me, but frankly speaking, I need no invitation. Whenever I find in convenient, I will go to Israel." -- PRESIDENT HOSNI NUMARAK of Egypt.  [ A1:1. ]


With Game on Line, Mets Come Out Swinging
A classic swing, and a half swing.
Together, they resulted in a full night of drama and triumph for the Mets.
The Mets, with a pair of vital eighth-inning at-bats from Dave Magadan and Eddie Murray, manufactured a 5-2 comeback victory last night over the Los Angeles Dodgers.
The decision rescued a night that had begun with the exciting and enterprising return of Bret Saberhagen and insured that the Mets didn't lose any ground in a National League East race that remains up for grabs.


Digital Head Tells of Ouster
In a meeting with several hundred Digital employees on Monday, Kenneth H. Olsen indicated that he was forced to resign from as president of the Digital Equipment Corporation by the company's board.
Mr.
Olsen explained to the employees that he could not make necessary changes within Digital because the company's functional managers, like those who run engineering units, refused to cooperate with Digital's business unit managers who market the products.
"And that's why I was fired," Mr.
Olsen said, according to several employees who were present.
The employees all spoke on condition that their names not be used.


Duracell to Finance 'Great Performances'
WNET-TV in New York said yesterday that Duracell Inc., the battery manufacturer, would replace Texaco Inc. as a corporate underwriter of "Great Performances," a public television series that WNET, Channel 13, presents on PBS.
In a telephone interview, Jonathan Olken, vice president and director of marketing and development at WNET, said that Duracell, based in Bethel, Conn., had agreed to provide $1.5 million for the 1992-93 season of "Great Performances," compared with the $1 million that Texaco spent in the 1991-92 season.


Washington Heights Is Also Parks and Young Conservationists; An Industrious People
To the Editor:
We regret that "It's Not the Rodney King Case" (editorial, July 9), referring to street violence in Washington Heights following the death of our fellow citizen Jose Garcia by the police, makes comments about the city of San Francisco de Macoris in the Dominican Republic and its immigrants that tarnish the good name we have earned as industrious and democracy-loving people, imbued with Christian values and staunch allies of the United States.


Washington Post reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Food Notes
Musical Meals
This summer, Lincoln Center is again holding its "Meet the Artist" concert series, which offers informal buffet dinners with musicians before the performances.
The programs often pair the meal with the music, and two are of particular note.
The trumpeter Wynton Marsalis will be on hand on Aug. 5 to talk about jazz and its New Orleans roots, during a dinner of red beans and rice, jambalaya and shrimp salad.
He will be among those playing at the jazz concert that follows, "Blue Clarinet Stomp," featuring the music of Jelly Roll Morton, at Alice Tully Hall.


Knight-Ridder Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Banc One Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mubarak Accepts Rabin's Invitation to Visit Israel
After the first meeting of Egyptian and Israeli leaders in six years, President Hosni Mubarak said today that he had accepted an invitation to visit Israel -- the first such trip by an Arab leader since Anwar el-Sadat's startling path-breaking visit to Jerusalem nearly 15 years ago.
"Mr. Rabin invited me, but frankly speaking, I need no invitation," President Mubarak said after the 90-minute meeting with the newly-elected Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin.
"Whenever I find it convenient, I will go to Israel. My response is positive to Mr. Rabin."


Warner-Lambert reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about Dr.
Bertram L. Koslin, who designed the reading test for the New York City public schools, incorrectly described Brewster, N.Y., the location of his company.
Brewster is a village in Putnam County.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days: Gov.
Bill Clinton  TODAY: 7:11 A.M., NBC, "Today." (Channel 4 in New York.)  Vice President Quayle TODAY: 9 P.M., CNN, "Larry King Live."


Chemcial Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Djoos Returns to Rangers
The Rangers said yesterday they have re-signed defenseman PER DJOOS.
Terms of the contract were not released.


Schlumberger Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cover-Up Denied in Downing Of Iranian Passenger Jet in '88
Adm.
William J. Crowe, former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, denied allegations today that the Pentagon had tried to cover up operations in the Persian Gulf surrounding the shooting down of a commercial Iranian airliner four years ago.
Testifying before the House Armed Services Committee, Admiral Crowe delivered a 27-page point-by-point response to reports by Newsweek and the ABC News program "Nightline" that the military had precipitated the incident in which the Navy cruiser Vincennes shot down the airliner and then lied about critical details.


Citicorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Royals Send Davis to Braves
MARK DAVIS, the former Cy Young Award winner who flopped after signing a $13 million free-agent contract with Kansas City, was traded to Atlanta yesterday for reliever JUAN BERENGUER.
Since signing a four-year deal with the Royals in December 1989, Davis had a 9-13 record, a 5.31 earned run average and seven saves in 95 games.
By comparison, he had 44 saves with San Diego in 1989.


Debate on Trump's West Side Proposal
Reacting in staunch opposition to the proposal of Donald J. Trump's plan to develop 74.6 acres along the Hudson River, Community Board 7 on the Upper West Side yesterday issued a draft resolution that listed 69 reasons that the project should not go forward.
The resolution, issued last night before the first of three public hearings scheduled for consecutive evenings at Martin Luther King Jr.
High School, set the stage for a noisy and contentious session, the latest round of debates over the proposal by Mr.
Trump's Riverside South Planning Corporation.


BankWorcester Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mellon Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TransCanada PipeLines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sears Posts 15.5% Gain In Earnings
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company yesterday reported a robust 15.5 percent increase in earnings in the second quarter, despite a 50 percent plunge in income from its retail operations.
Overall earnings climbed to $345.8 million, or 90 cents a share, from $299.4 million, or 87 cents a share, during the comparable quarter last year.
Total sales rose slightly to $14.27 billion from $14.09 billion.


Caporale's 66 Sets Pace In Friendly Adirondacks
After tough courses in the Catskills, Long Island and Syracuse, the Michelob New York State Open golf tournament came to the foothills of the Adirondacks today for the first time in its 15-year history, and the Highland Golf Club course proved to be a friendly host as 26 players shot better than par.
That's quite a contrast to last year's tournament, when only two players beat the Concord's Monster course.
The leader is 37-year-old Mike Caporale, the assistant at North Hills Country Club in Manhasset, L.I., who matched his career-best round with a six-under-par 66.


RUSSIANS OFFERING NUCLEAR ARMS FUEL FOR U.S. REACTORS
Desperate for hard currency, Russia offered yesterday to sell the United States tons of uranium from retired nuclear arms, saying the concentrated material could be diluted into fuel for civilian reactors that make electricity.
Any East-West deal that turned nuclear swords into plowshares would be a milestone in dismantling the cold war's machinery.
For the Russians, the main alternative is to store highly enriched uranium in underground bunkers.
Some Western experts say they fear that material put in storage might eventually find its way back into bombs.


The Pop Life
Rhythm-and-Blues
Rhythm-and-blues giants are increasingly belting out their magic on compact disks in the latest boom in the music industry's reissues program.
Record labels are rolling out more and more of the decades-old music of such legends as Aretha Franklin, James Brown, Wilson Pickett, Sam and Dave, Ben E. King, Jackie Wilson, Earth, Wind and Fire, Curtis Mayfield and the Impressions, the Bar-Kays, Howard Tate and Don Covay.
Industry executives give various reasons for the explosion, including that so much of their rock catalogue has already been exploited and that sampling by rap artists has renewed interest in the music.
And then there's the explanation that "it's great music," said Gary Stewart, the vice president for artists and repertory at Rhino Records, which is noted for its soul music retrospectives.
The label released the 20-volume "Billboard R&amp;B Hits" and is reissuing music by Jackie Wilson and the band War.


Milken Denies Bribe Offer To a Former Fund Manager
Through no choice of his own, Michael R. Milken testified against Federal prosecutors yesterday at a time when a Federal judge in Manhattan is deciding whether to reduce his 10-year prison sentence in return for his cooperation and testimony for another Federal prosecution two months ago.
Mr.
Milken testified in behalf of Patricia Ostrander, a prime customer of the junk bonds that Mr.
Milken sold at Drexel Burnham Lambert and a defendant charged with receiving a payoff from him in the form of a windfall investment.
But he denied ever offering her a bribe or anything else in return for her huge investments in his junk bonds.


Allegheny Power System reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Europe Caught in Crosscurrents
Germany's stubborn determination to place its fight against inflation before any concessions to spurring a European economic recovery is causing increasing political tensions across the Continent.
Indeed, a worrying question is now pressing with increasing insistence on Europe's governments: could the high cost of unifying Germany, which is fueling the country's unfamiliar problem with inflation and leading it to impose high interest rates, cause such resentment elsewhere that Europe's drive for unity will stall?


Tribune Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Her Image of His Ideal, in a Faulty Mirror
WOMEN contemplating breast enlargement surgery in the hope of becoming more alluring may want to think again: a new study suggests that women greatly overestimate society's tastes in breast size.
"Women's beliefs regarding men's preferences are wrong," said Dr.
J.
Kevin Thompson, the author of the new study.
"And this incorrect belief may be a reason why women opt for breast implants: trying to achieve a cultural ideal they believe others have."


Banks' Rates On Deposits Drop Again
Banks and savings institutions across the country continued to reduce interest rates on consumer deposits in the last week, though the declines were smaller than earlier in the month.
Even though some bankers have been worried that already-low rates may make it difficult to impose still lower ones on their customers, data compiled by The Bank Rate Monitor show that many banks have for the first time moved below 3 percent for three-month and six-month certificiates of deposit.
Rates of less than 3 percent on money market accounts were already common.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; BAKER IS REPORTED TO TAKE NEW POST GUIDING CAMPAIGN
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d will leave his post next month to return to the White House as President Bush's senior policy adviser and effective head of his re-election campaign, several Administration officials and Republican political strategists said today.
Mr.
Baker, the President's closest friend, his political partner for the last 15 years and his 1988 campaign manager, is expected to resign as Secretary in mid-August, shortly after a scheduled visit to the United States by Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, those officials said.
More Than Fishing
A formal White House announcement of the move, which was apparently decided by the two men last week during a fishing break at Mr.
Baker's Wyoming ranch, has reportedly been withheld to allow Mr.
Baker to make a visit to the Middle East and Asia this week without diminishing his status as Secretary of State.


Harlem Dancers To South Africa
Dance Theater of Harlem will perform in South Africa for the first time in September, the company announced yesterday at simultaneous press conferences in New York at the United Nations and in Johannesburg at the Johannesburg Art Gallery.
Arthur Mitchell, the director of the 49-member, predominantly black ballet troupe, said that the point of the engagement, from Sept. 7 through 27 in Johannesburg, was to suggest to "the world and particularly South Africa that everyone must be given an opportunity to show that they can excel."


Pepsico Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


Morris Duane, Lawyer And Civic Leader, 91
Morris Duane, a Philadelphia lawyer and civic leader, died on Saturday at Brywn Mawr Hospital.
A longtime resident of Brywn Mawr, he was 91 years old and had moved this year to Dunwoody Village, a retirement community in Newtown Square, Pa.
He died after a stroke, said his law firm, Duane, Morris &amp; Heckscher, where he was of counsel.
Until his retirement in 1972, he spent his entire career as a partner in the Philadelphia firm.
He was its chairman for 21 years, and his father was a founding partner in 1904.


U.S. Trade Pact a Spur To Canada
New economic studies indicate that Canada has become more competitive as a result of its trade agreement with the United States and, some analysts believe, is about to outpace all major industrial nations in economic growth.
Yet Prime Minister Brian Mulroney faces a herculean task over the next six months in getting the House of Commons to ratify an expansion of the treaty to include Mexico.
The Prime Minister's Government is expected reach agreement on the treaty with Mexico and the United States in coming weeks.


Corrections
A brief article in Science Times on July 14 about the benefits of dietary supplements of calcium omitted a sponsor of the research.
In addition to funds from the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, the researchers were supported by a grant from the United States Public Health Service.


U.N. Resumes Relief Flights to Sarajevo
Despite continuing ground fire that made the operation more than usually risky, the United Nations command reopened Sarajevo airport to relief flights today after a 24-hour suspension caused by heavy shelling.
The resumption of the airlift of food and medicine was approved by Maj.
Gen.
Lewis W. MacKenzie of Canada, the United Nations military commander in Sarajevo, despite a heavy mortar attack on the airport that began late on Monday night and continued into the early hours today.


New York and Farmers Reach Deal on Pollution
New York City officials said yesterday that they had reached an agreement with farmers in the Catskill Mountains and lower Hudson Valley to reduce agricultural pollution of the city's reservoirs through voluntary measures far less strict than the mandatory controls the city proposed two years ago.
The agreement represents a significant shift in the city's approach to protecting its drinking water, and would be one of the few attempts nationwide to rely on voluntary measures to curb water pollution.


EAB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
The torch has been passed -- at least in the realm of parties given in the name of Vanity Fair -- from TINA BROWN to GRAYDON CARTER.
On Monday evening Ms.
Brown, who is about to become the editor of The New Yorker, gave her last party as the editor in chief of Vanity Fair.
"It makes me feel nostalgic," Ms.
Brown said as she greeted more than 200 guests who piled into the "21" Club.


House Plans 2 Reports On Post Office Scandal
Wrangling to the end, a panel of lawmakers investigating the House post office agreed today to issue a final report on Wednesday, but only after Democrats and Republicans decided to issue separate findings.
Both reports, Congressional officials said today, portray the House post office as a shoddy operation run by managers who paid far closer attention to lawmakers' patronage requirements than to efficiency and financial accountability.


Hindu Protest Against Blocking of Temple Brings Out Troops


Petranoff Is Barred From Javelin Event
After Tom Petranoff was suspended for life by United States track and field authorities for competing in South Africa in 1988, he renounced his American citizenship, stayed in Johannesburg, competed domestically and began waiting for the day South Africa might return to the Olympics and the Americans would remove his suspension.
His plan could not have worked better.
All he hoped for, and more, came to pass.
At the African championships last month in Mauritius, he threw the javelin 286 feet 3 inches, an African record.


AT LUNCH WITH: Bob Costas; Raising the Quip Toss To an Olympic Sport
GET used to this face.
You're going to be seeing it a lot -- for as many as four and half hours every night for 17 days straight -- starting Saturday, when Bob Costas begins his stint as host of NBC's prime-time coverage of the Summer Olympics from Barcelona, Spain.
At lunch just before flying off in quest of Olympic glory and ratings, Mr.
Costas is eating linguine at the Isle of Capri, an Italian restaurant in Manhattan.


Union Electric reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Even Among Royalty, Johnson Holds Court
At a dinner reception with Prince Rainier on Monday night, Magic Johnson was asked to make a speech on behalf of the United States Olympic basketball team.
He began by saying, "The closest I've ever been to royalty before was Michael Jordan."
Tonight, Jordan got even closer, following the United States' 111-71 thrashing of France's national team in front of Prince Rainier and Prince Albert and about 2,500 royal acquaintances who more or less came to worship the basketball floor Johnson dribbled on.


Hillin Will Replace Allison
The team owner, ROBERT YATES, and the crew chief, LARRY McREYNOLDS, have hired BOBBY HILLIN Jr. to substitute for the injured driver DAVEY ALLISON in the DieHard 500 Sunday at Talladega Superspeedway.
The announcement was made from Lehigh Valley Hospital in Allentown, Pa., where Allison's condition was upgraded from stable to satisfactory condition after a crash on Sunday at Pocono International Raceway.


90 HAITIANS DROWN AS BOAT CAPSIZES
About 90 Haitian refugees were reported to have died at sea on Sunday when their small boat capsized and sank about 20 miles to the north of the capital, the authorities here said today.
Haitian officials said the badly overloaded boat carrying about 100 refugees failed shortly after it was launched from the town of Source Matelas.
By Tuesday, 15 of the passengers' bodies had either washed ashore on nearby beaches or were recovered from the sea.


Snack Hierarchy: Small Is Good, Tiny Is Better
AMERICANS are getting bigger and heavier, the Government says, but you would never know it from what they eat: food is getting smaller and smaller.
Every aisle of the supermarket now holds miniature versions of familiar brands: shrunken Oreos, tiny Dove Bars, and Ritz crackers the size of a thumbnail.


Melville Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


METRO DIGEST
A BUSINESSMAN AND HIS DRUG HABIT
He is a 44-year-old executive in a company in New York, lives in a condo on the Upper East Side, drives an expensive car, plays tennis in the Hamptons and vacations with his wife in Europe and the Caribbean.
He is also a longtime heroin user.
Drug experts say that perhaps as many as a third of the estimated 750,000 heroin addicts in America are juggling habitual use of what has long been thought of as the most debilitating and enslaving of drugs, managing jobs and even families with few if any outward signs of addiction.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY WEST SIDE PLAN GETS BEVY OF BOOS
Reacting in staunch opposition to the proposal of Donald Trump to develop 76.4 acres along the Hudson River, Community Board 7 on the Upper West Side issued a draft resolution that came up with 69 reasons that the project should not go forward.
B3.
CONCERNS OVER GANG WARFARE
After months of relative peace in the violent and murky world of Asian-American gangs, the fatal shooting of a high-ranking Chinatown gang leader Monday has sparked renewed concerns about warfare among rival groups.
B3.
STRAINS IN WILLIAMSBURG
The beating of a 13-year-old Hispanic boy by a Hasidic Jewish man who accused him of shoplifting ignited a spontaneous demonstration in Williamsburg, a Brooklyn neighborhood which has long been racked by tensions between its Hispanic and Hasidic residents.
B3.
REGION POLITICS: REALITY . . .
If there were any doubts about the political perils of absolute power, the Republican majority in Trenton drove the lesson home unequivocally Monday by reneging on a promise that has been an article of faith for more than a decade.
In a single evening, the Republicans managed to bury two constitutional amendments that would have allowed New Jerseyans to propose and pass legislation through initiative and referendum.
News analysis, B5.
. . . AND UNCERTAINTY
As President Bush campaigned in Bergen County, N.J., uncertainty was in the air.
His campaign operation weren't sure what James A. Baker 3d would be doing to galvanize Mr.
Bush's re-election bid.
And many in the crowds who came out to see the President weren't sure they would vote for him.
A16.
HELP WANTED: IN MEXICO
The Smith Corona Corporation, the last American maker of consumer typewriters, will move its manufacturing operations to Mexico from Cortland, N.Y.
The decision fanned concerns in Congress and organized labor about the loss of jobs to foreign competition.
Business Day, D11.
ON ABORTION, BEFORE ROE v. WADE
The New Jersey Supreme Court said that a woman who has birth defects cannot sue for damages since she was born before 1973, when Roe v.
Wade made legal abortions more available.
B5.
LOOK, UP IN THE SKY
Brown pelicans are appearing on the South Shore of Long Island, far north of their normal range.
"It's like U.F.O. sightings," said one Montauk resident.
"It's all over the place." B5.
About New York by Douglas Martin B2 Chronicle B4


The Heat of Curry, Without the Powder
THOSE who expect to see curry as an ingredient in a recipe for curry will be disappointed.
The spices that go into curry are many and varied, but curry powder is not one of them in this recipe.
The heat of the dish depends on ingredients like hot-pepper flakes and ginger.
The use of tomato paste in the recipe is to help augment the tomato flavor, which even in field-ripened tomatoes is not always intense.
Canned tomatoes can be used without tomato paste.


Schlichter Admits Gambling Relapse
ART SCHLICHTER, suspended twice by the National Football League for gambling, says he had a relapse because he wasn't serious enough about his recovery.
Schlichter admitted Monday that he started gambling again in April and May, betting unspecified amounts on horse racing.


Sicilians Jeer Italian Leaders at a Funeral Protest
Furious mourners screaming "assassins!" and "resign!" confronted senior Government leaders today at the state funeral here of five bodyguards who died with Paolo Borsellino, Palermo's chief prosecutor and anti-Mafia fighter, in a car bomb attack two days ago.
The vehemence of the protest forced security agents to hustle President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, Prime Minister Giuliano Amato and Police Chief Vincenzo Parisi out of Palermo's ancient cathedral as hostile Sicilians pressed around them in a chaotic mob, pointing fingers, jeering at the leaders and calling them "buffoons."


A Listener Bends The Ear Of Another
It's getting harder for Joseph Mitchell to find a bar in New York that's older than he is, but McSorley's Old Ale House, off Cooper Square in the East Village, fills the bill.
It first opened its doors in 1854, and this day, as Mr.
Mitchell takes a seat in the back room, he settles in with the ease of a man who has been a patron since the early 30's, and with a certain proprietorial air, fully justified, since he put the place on the cultural map in 1940 with a celebrated New Yorker article titled "McSorley's Wonderful Saloon."
For decades Mr.
Mitchell, now 85 years old, roamed the city for The New Yorker, filing a slew of reports, profiles and short stories on odd characters, waterfront life, the Fulton Fish Market and the humbler social institutions of the metropolis, like McSorley's.
Most of his work for The New Yorker has been gathered into a single book, "Up in the Old Hotel," to be published next month by Pantheon Books.
Five minutes with Mr.
Mitchell is all it takes to see why he always managed to extract full value from his subjects.
He is a listener of genius.
When others talk, he hangs on every word, beaming with an anticipation that would be cruel to disappoint.
He doesn't just nod in agreement, he says, "Oh, yes," or "Yes indeed," or "I know it," which he utters either as a short exclamation, or, drawing out the "know" to several syllables, as an expression of wonder.
If he particularly likes what he's hearing, he may even slap his thigh in delight.
When he's excited, his soft North Carolina drawl becomes a kind of stutter.
The title of his first book, a collection of newspaper profiles, was "My Ear Is Bent."
Mr.
Mitchell's sensitive and patient ear yielded perhaps his most famous New Yorker profile, the two-part portrait of Joe Gould, a boozy Greenwich Village bohemian and self-proclaimed genius who claimed to be compiling, in hundreds of dime-store composition books, a work called "An Oral History of Our Times." Mr.
Mitchell submitted to a weeks' worth of nightly monologues from Gould, one of them lasting from 6 P.M. to 4 A.M.
Mr.
Mitchell's ability to record torrents of speech, even allowing for The New Yorker trick of splicing quotes together to produce lengthy set pieces, remains astonishing.
When asked how he did it, he says, "I went to the bathroom all the time."
The Joe Gould articles, which appeared in September 1964, were Mr.
Mitchell's last signed contributions to The New Yorker.
As a literary figure, he has lived through the four books that make up most of "Up in the Old Hotel." Long out of print, they have enjoyed a secret, fairly prosperous life in antiquarian bookshops.
The New Yorker being what it is, or was, he maintains a tiny office at the magazine and, when he is not down in North Carolina on his farm, continues to come to work.
Exactly what he does every day is not clear.
Nor are the reasons for the sudden cessation in his output.
"One thing I can't understand about myself is that on rewrite at The World-Telegram I was very fast," he says.
"But when I got to The New Yorker, it took longer and longer." A Bookish Albatross
In part a personal sorrow that Mr.
Mitchell does not care to discuss took away his zest for the kind of humorous subjects that had been his staple.
And in part, it seems, the luster of his best work became a kind of burden.
The past, which had always exerted a powerful pull on his imagination, exacted a kind of revenge as he grew older.
His books and his reputation, he says, became "an albatross around my neck."
And the city changed on him.
Joseph Cantalupo, a carter who served as his guide to the fish market, died in 1979.
Fish is delivered by truck nowadays, not by boat, severing the market's direct link to the sea.
The fish-market workers don't seem to have the same salt and savor to them.
Mr.
Mitchell likes the old New York humor, "the kind that came out of the law courts and saloons."
He is a small, eager-looking figure, turned out in a coat and tie and suspenders, although the heat is oppressive.
His tie is red with large forest-green dots, and when a trouser leg rises, you can catch a flash of red sock.
Mr.
Mitchell never gave up the hat-wearing habit.
This day he sports a straw hat whose green band is punctuated with a pattern of tiny yellow daisies.
When putting it on, he automatically adjusts it to a perfect 10-degree tilt.
Because of a recent operation for a detached retina in his left eye, he carries three pairs of glasses, sometimes bringing all of them out at at once, which makes him look like a Manhattan street vendor.
As a reporter in New York, Mr.
Mitchell was drawn to the twisted, the obsessed and the near-insane.
"Up in the Old Hotel" is a strange gallery that includes an old mariner who ran a curio shop, Captain Charley's Museum for Intelligent People, in a brownstone basement in mid-Manhattan, and a fundamentalist Southern preacher who shouted the gospel along Broadway near Times Square in the 1940's.
The Gospel According to Daddy
Like all Mr.
Mitchell's subjects, Daddy Hall, the preacher in the profile titled "A Spism and a Spasm," is a talker.
Laconically, Mr.
Mitchell describes him as "profoundly discursive." The speech is priceless.
New York, Daddy Hall proclaimed in a characteristic oration, is "a lost city, hungry for destruction, aching for destruction, the entire population in a fuss and a fret, a twit and a twitter, a squit and a squat, a hip and a hop, a snig and a snaggle, a spism and a spasm, a sweat and a swivet."
Mr.
Mitchell found his way to journalism from Fairmont, N.C., in the 1920's, when, as a student at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill, he began contributing Sunday features to papers around the state.
In 1929 he sent an article on the tobacco business to The New York Herald Tribune, which ran it and then summoned him to New York.
His father, a successful farmer and cotton buyer, did not think much of his son's profession.
"He said to me, 'Son, is that the best that you can do, sticking your nose into other people's business?' " Mr.
Mitchell recalls.
Initially, Mr.
Mitchell was sent down for training to the minor leagues.
His patron at The Herald Tribune found him a job at The New York Morning World, where he worked as a copy boy and a police reporter in Brooklyn and Manhattan.
He then graduated to feature writing and ship reporting for The Herald Tribune and The World-Telegram, the paper that first sent him to the Fulton Fish Market in lower Manhattan.
It was love at first sight.
He had always been interested in commercial fishing, and the atmosphere, he says, reminded him of the tobacco and cotton markets back home.
He returned again and again.
In those days, Mr.
Mitchell's output was prodigious.
Often he cranked out four features a week.
He began contributing freelance articles to The New Yorker in 1933 and joined its staff five years later.
Nearly 50 bylined articles and short stories followed.
A good number of them are among the most famous the magazine has run.
"Mohawks on High Steel," about Indians who worked on steel bridges and skyscrapers, was used by Edmund Wilson as the introduction to his book "With Apologies to the Iroquois." Mr.
Mitchell's short stories on a Fulton Fish Market character named Old Mr.
Flood became minor classics, as did his profiles of Mazie P. Gordon, a ticket seller at a Bowery movie theater, and Commodore Dutch, a notorious freeloader who for 40 years held an annual subscription ball for himself.
Covering the waterfront, Mr.
Mitchell wrote on rats, clams, the bottom of New York Harbor and the rivermen of Edgewater, N.J.
He unearthed the secret history of Sloppy Louie's, a restaurant at the South Street Seaport that began life as the Fulton Hotel and where he is still received as a celebrity by the owners.
"One story I've always been pretty pleased with is 'Mr. Hunter's Grave,' " he says, referring to a 1956 article that turns on the reminiscences of an old minister in a faded Staten Island oyster-fishing town.
"I just stumbled on that story. When someone's willing to talk, you can let it lead wherever."
Recalling the work's central character, Mr.
Mitchell says: "That man was almost Grecian. He knew that everything had fallen apart in his lifetime, the estates had gone to ruin and families had disappeared. He looked at it in a very worldly, sad way. I couldn't have looked for that man and found him."
At the time, only The New Yorker would have carried such a profile.
It was Mr.
Mitchell's good fortune to have found an editor and a magazine to accommodate his private enthusiasms.
"In those days you belonged to the Thurber New Yorker or the E. B. White New Yorker," says Mr.
Mitchell, who belonged to the more raffish, undisciplined Thurber faction.
He calls Thurber the only true genius the magazine has produced, and he reveres Harold Ross, its first editor.
"Often he was depicted as, you know, kind of a rube," Mr.
Mitchell says.
"But that was a pose, I do believe, like those characters in Mark Twain who don't know anything and then get in the poker game and walk off with all the money." 'Duh Goil and duh Polly'
Mr.
Mitchell likes to stop in at the old haunts.
For the last 30 years he has attended meetings of the James Joyce Society above the Gotham Book Mart in the diamond district of Manhattan.
Sometimes, like this day, he will drop in for a drink at McSorley's, where he talks soybeans and wheat with the owner, an Irishman from Kilkenny.
"It's the funniest thing, but sometimes you'll see all these young people here," he says, amazed.
"But sometimes I'll drop in and it looks just like the old place." Over his shoulder hangs a copy of Courbet's "Femme au Perroquet," the same painting that the owner, in "McSorley's Wonderful Saloon," translated as "Duh Goil and duh Polly."
In between ales Mr.
Mitchell steps across the barroom, leans across a table, startling the two young women sitting there, and looks at an old photograph of himself taken with the bar's owner.
"I'm smoking a cigarette," he reports as he returns to his seat.
"That's something. I stopped smoking in ancient times."
The old surroundings, and the cool ale, turn Mr.
Mitchell reflective.
"Up in the Old Hotel" has stirred up a host of memories, and its imminent publication has had a disturbing effect.
"I haven't had a book published in so long, this feels like my first one," he says.
"I decided if I could get those in a book together, I could put it all behind me. Maybe it will free me to find my way to the right door."


Executive's Secret Struggle With Heroin's Powerful Grip
He is an executive in a company in New York, lives in a condo on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, drives an expensive car, plays tennis in the Hamptons and vacations with his wife in Europe and the Caribbean.
But unknown to office colleagues, friends and most of his family, the man is also a longtime heroin user.
He says he finds heroin relaxing and pleasurable and has seen no reason to stop using it until the woman he recently married insisted that he do so.


Ecuador Journal; With Graft Rife, Nation Reins In the Cocaine King
Hacienda San Antonio seems to be a traditional estate of Latin America's landed oligarchy.
An asphalt drive winds past row upon row of palm trees, past people on horseback working cattle, and past a stable with 27 horses in brick-lined stalls.
The main house overlooks a river and is surrounded by a tennis court, a pool and a barbecue pit that can roast a calf whole.


People Who Need Care Find Men Are Giving It
By day, Albert C. Wiltshire is a no-nonsense chief executive running the Brooklyn Navy Yard with a powerful grip -- his staff irreverently calls him Darth Vader.
But at night, he turns into Big Al, a 55-year-old bachelor homemaker who cooks, shops, cleans and supervises school work for his 10- and 12-year-old grandsons who have lived with him since his daughter's marriage foundered a year ago.


Review/Television; Helping Guests With the Answers
Pop sociology rides again.
Barbara Walters is in the saddle tonight, whipping along eight attractive young men and women who have been selected to personify the 40 million or so Americans who were born in the 1970's.
Ms.
Walters concedes at the start of "Twentysomething: What Happened to the American Dream?" that eight people can't speak for
all
those now in their 20's, but she adds that they can tell of "growing up, romance, sex, their hopes and fears and what the American dream means to them." All right.
But she or her producers are evidently unwilling to settle for human interest; they want human interest with a social-science face.
Despite her disavowal, Ms.
Walters indulges in generational generalizing: "This is a generation that pursues the quality of life. They want time for family, friends, themselves. They want to enjoy life on their own terms." Unlike all other generations?


Kennametal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Southwestern Bell Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; Japanese Banks Viewed on Merits
SOMETHING extraordinary happened here last week that could rattle Japanese finance for years: The markets decided for the first time that one bank's securities were worth more than another's.
In the West, that may be commonplace, but not in Japan.
The idea of bank finance being left to something so capricious and volatile as supply and demand has been anathema for most of the postwar years.
Now, however, that may be starting to change in one of the most highly regulated -- and troubled -- banking systems in the world.


Grumman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Small Nations Will Have to Form Blocs
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb is right in "The Curse of Nations" (column, July 5): the Declaration of Independence promised individual rights, not national self-determination.
The American Revolution neither gave particular legitimacy to the nation nor initiated nationalism.
The word "nation" does not appear once in the Declaration or in the Constitution.


Corrections
Lottery numbers listed yesterday gave incorrect results for Sunday's New York Pick 10 drawing.
The correct numbers appear today on page B2.


Sailors Mutiny and Take a Ship to Ukraine
A coast guard frigate of the Black Sea Fleet raised the Ukrainian flag today and set off from a naval base in the Crimea for the Ukrainian port of Odessa, chased by other warships.
Negotiations with the mutinous crew continued tonight.
Russia and Ukraine have been squabbling over how to divide the Black Sea Fleet, which has some 300 ships.
But at a meeting last month, Presidents Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine asked fleet personnel to be patient and not declare allegiance to either country, despite an earlier Ukrainian demand that fleet personnel declare their loyalty to Ukraine.


Root Beer: A Flood Of Memories, A Sip of Foam
GIVEN root-beer drinkers' fierce attachment to their beverage, it's the unwise brew master who dares to tamper with a recipe.
But fortunately, some slight adjustments have been made to accommodate modern palates.


Scott Paper Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Cone Mills Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Psychological Factors Linked to V.D.T. Injuries
Psychological factors, like job insecurity or pressure, are somewhat associated with repetitive motion injuries, from which 50 million to 70 million American workers are believed to suffer, a Government study said on Monday.
But the study failed to determine whether factors like job insecurity were a cause of injury or whether the injuries workers had already suffered made them feel less secure about their jobs.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The State Department; Eagleburger Is Viewed As the Likely Successor
A move by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to the White House would be likely to leave the State Department in the hands of Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger and the outlines of United States policy virtually unchanged, Administration officials said today.
Several officials said that to their knowledge the move, which is expected to occur in August, had not yet been discussed by Mr.
Baker and Mr.
Eagleburger.


American Brands reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yanks Adjusting Nicely On Road
A road trip that began with three losses and a sense of impending doom kept getting better tonight.
The Yankees may have had their problems with the California Angels, but not with the Oakland Athletics.
The Yankees totaled 12 hits and beat the A's for the second time in two nights, 5-1, their third victory in a row.


Metropolitan Diary
TAILS OF MANHATTAN  A woman we know -- dog fancier, potential co-op owner -- was asked by the board of the Upper East Side building in question to submit, among other data, "pet references." The woman -- call her Ms.
X -- sent along two.
The first, from a dog school, read:
"To Whom It May Concern:


USLife Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; On Road as Equal Partners In New Kind of Political Act
Bill Clinton and Al Gore have developed a political act unlike any seen on a Presidential ticket before, a political tag-team show that rests on presenting the two men as equal partners in a joint venture.
At times, watching them in their frequent public appearances -- in suit and tie at a high school, in blue jeans on bales of hay at a farm, in chinos and polo shirts at a community center -- they seem almost like identical candidates.


U.S.B.L. Honor for Tarpley
ROY TARPLEY, banned from the N.B.A. after repeated violations of the league's substance abuse policy, was named the United States Basketball League's player of the year.
Tarpley, formerly with the Dallas Mavericks, played center for Miami and was leading the U.S.B.L. with a 32.2 scoring average and a 17.0 rebounding average when he left the team to play in Greece. (AP)


Continental Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Union Camp Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Riverwood International reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Topics of The Times; Fruit and Veggie Stand
The pork industry already does it.
So do the nation's beef producers.
Now the fruit and vegetable industry is getting serious about promoting greater consumption of its products.
It's a healthy step toward sound nutrition.


The Pelicans Are Coming! To the South Shore!
It happened to Russell S. Stein, an environmental lawyer, who saw 15 birds skimming the waves early Sunday morning near his Montauk home.
"I looked at them and took a few more steps, and then it was like someone hit me with a sledgehammer," Mr.
Stein said.
It happened to Dorothy Friedman in Wainscott as she and some friends were walking on the beach.
"It's one of those things where you know what you saw, but logic tells you it's impossible," she said.


60-Minute Gourmet
I HAVE occasionally discussed the popularity of Mediterranean-style cooking, which combines many of the qualities that cooks and diners want today: lightness, freshness, herbs and versatility.
One more appeal should be noted: ease of preparation.
By definition, much of Mediterranean cooking is a la minute.
Frequently, sauces are made in the same pan as the main ingredient, and cooking is minimal.


China Invents a Criminal
Bao Tong, sentenced to seven years in jail yesterday for "leaking state secrets" and spreading "counterrevolutionary" propaganda, is no criminal.
As chief aide to the former Communist Party General Secretary, Zhao Ziyang, Mr.
Bao gave substance to the reform policies then favored not only by the official hierarchy but by the real leader behind the scenes, Deng Xiaoping.
But when reform unexpectedly gave birth to a mass student democracy movement, Mr.
Deng panicked and reversed course.
Somebody in the reformist leadership had to take the blame, somebody just distant enough from Mr.
Deng.
Bao Tong proved a convenient choice.


Weyerhaeuser Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Eating Well
THE soap opera continues.
The story so far: The Food and Drug Administration must come up with a new format for nutrition labeling, one that will, in the bureaucratese of a Government document, "require the required information to be conveyed to the public in a manner which enables the public to readily observe and comprehend such information and to understand its relative significance in the context of a total daily diet."


McKesson Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bancorp New Jersey Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
A Guarded Economic Outlook
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, gave an only faintly upbeat forecast on the economy in testimony before Congress.
Page D1.
Crosscurrents in Europe
There are signs in Europe that Germany's fight against inflation could cause enough resentment to stall the continent's drive for unity.
Page D1. 90 Haitians Are Lost at Sea
About 90 Haitians may have died when their boat sank about 20 miles from Haiti, officials said.
Page 9.
Overcharges at Trade Center
World Trade Center tenants were overcharged by $1 million for cleaning because of poor Port Authority monitoring, the agency said.
Page B1.
Gingrich in a Squeaker
Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia claimed victory in a Republican primary so close that a recount could be necessary.
Page D19.


COMPANY NEWS: The Last Word in Dictionaries?; Etymologies on Line: O.E.D. on a Single Disk
The British novelist Margaret Drabble became so captivated, she had to be "dragged away." Anthony Burgess dubbed it "one of the major technological achievements of the century."
Authors do tend to get carried away in the presence of 60 million words.
But the feat of cramming the 20 volumes of the Second Edition of the Oxford English Dictionary, which in printed form weighs 137 pounds and takes up four feet of shelf space, onto a single computer disk should impress even those without a mercenary interest in literature or wordplay. 'A Metallic Beer Mat'
Yet when Oxford University Press said yesterday it was starting to sell its CD-ROM version of the dictionary in the United States, the emphasis was on the product's software innovations rather than the feat of storing it all on a silvery, palm-sized disk -- "a metallic beer mat," to use Mr.
Burgess's phrase.
The bespoke software, developed by AND Software of Rotterdam, allows a computer user to cull 616,500 words and terms defined, 2.4 million illustrative quotations and 249,000 etymologies in ways that would be all but impossible in the printed volumes.
Type Mr.
Burgess's name on the keyboard of a computer loaded with the new O.E.D. disk, for example, and in eight seconds it searches the 20 volumes and replies that quotations from the novelist appear 55 times in the O.E.D.
Stumped on a crossword puzzle and need a four-letter word that begins with "z" and ends with "b"?
The dictionary disk spits out several candidates including "zimb," an Abyssinian insect resembling the tsetse fly.
"Crossword fanatics will find browsing addictive," Andrew Rosenheim, Oxford University Press's director of electronic publishing, said.
Still, the core market for the $875 O.E.D. disk -- the printed version costs $2,750 -- will be libraries and research institutes.
In 1987, Oxford University Press put the earlier, 12-volume set on a computer disk and sold about 1,000 copies.
But the new disk contains 40 percent more data, can do more kinds of searches and executes them six times faster.


British Airways Planning to Buy Stake in USAir
British Airways and USAir announced plans yesterday to form the world's largest airline partnership, with the British carrier investing $750 million to buy as much as 44 percent of the USAir Group.
The pact links USAir's domestic system, which has the most flights of any airline in New York and the Northeast, to the global network of British Airways, the world's largest carrier of international passengers.
Industry experts said the deal would mark a turning point in the airline industry's global consolidation.


Ralph Friedman, Ex-Board Chief For Jewish Committee, Dies at 88
Ralph Friedman, chairman of the American Jewish Committee's national executive board from 1964 to 1966 and a retired financial executive, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 88 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The immediate cause of his death was cardiac failure, and he had been suffering from pneumonia and other ailments in recent weeks following neck surgery, said his son, Robert.


Let a U.N. Commission Rule on Airline Bombs
To the Editor:
There is nothing wrong with the suggestion made by Allan Gerson in "Compensate Libya's Victims" (Op-Ed, July 1) that a United Nations commission should be created to hear the claims for compensation for the victims of the Pan Am Flight 103 crash in Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.
There is need for a United Nations commission to be set up, not only to function as a claims forum, but also as a body charged with analyzing the circumstantial evidence against Libya, and to make recommendations to the Security Council.


Saberhagen Returns in Fine Style
The index finger on Bret Saberhagen's right hand, the one that interrupted his season for 66 days and 12 starts, served him well last night in his return to the Mets' disappointing season.
Not only did Saberhagen pitch a strong five innings, in which he allowed Los Angeles only one run, but he also scooted all around the infield, making several fine defensive plays, including four strong, accurate and especially critical throws.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.75
3.32
5.74
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.17
5.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.24
5.74
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.35
6.37
8.16
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.65
7.65
8.48
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.64
8.64
9.46
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.24
6.26
7.14
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 17
July 10
July 19
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.4
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
3.1
Gasoline stocks
220.8
221.7
213.8
Distillate stocks
108.4
107.4
119.0
Crude imports, daily
6.7
7.4
6.9
Product imports, daily
1.7
2.1
2.1
Crude stocks
324.0
330.1
348.6
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
92.0
92.8
88.8
Source: American Petroleum Institute


COMPANY NEWS
BLACKSTONE FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT L.P., a closely held investment advisory firm, changed its name to Black Rock Financial Management L.P.
Blackstone Group, a New York investment bank, is a minority capital partner in Black Rock.
L.M.
ERICSSON, Stockholm, received a $153 million contract from Telekom Malaysia to supply and provide engineering services for digital switching equipment.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
British Airways and USAir agreed to form the world's largest airline partnership, with the British carrier investing $750 million for 44 percent of USAir.  [ Page A1. ]
The chairman of one of Japan's top newspapers was dismissed in a boardroom confrontation that stunned the nation.
Hiroaki Shikanai headed Sankei Shimbun.  [ D1. ]


Capital Cities/ABC reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


James River Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


And Never the Twain Shall Meet? Wrong!


Book Notes
Perot Drops Out, and Off
The only thing more mercurial than Ross Perot's Presidential ambitions, it appears, are the literary loyalties of the American reading public.
No sooner had Mr.
Perot dropped out of the race than books about him starting dropping off best-seller lists.
"It's like the readers are saying, 'Ross who?' " said Judy Heyman, a buyer for Bookazine, a leading book wholesaler.
"Those books about him have just fallen off the edge of the table. Other political books are doing fine, but book buyers have already forgotten Ross whatshisname."


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Cemex SA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wells Fargo &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tecumseh Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pioneer Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Rare Airing of Japan's Corporate Dirty Laundry
In a remarkable board room confrontation that stunned this consensus-driven nation and rocked its largest media conglomerate, Hiroaki Shikanai was dismissed today as chairman of one of Japan's top newspapers, with the company's president publicly characterizing him as incompetent.
"The head of a newspaper company has certain special social responsibilities," Shigeaki Hazama, president of Sankei Shimbun, Japan's fifth-largest newspaper, said at a news conference.
"Mr. Shikanai lacks the qualifications to represent such a company."


Some French Intern Chefs Get a Mouthful
Quelle horreur!
Is it possible that the future of French cuisine may have an American accent?
A group of four apprentices from France working at Le Caprice, a popular restaurant in upper Georgetown, has been experimenting with some bizarre culinary phenomena.
Chocolate milk on corn flakes.
Ketchup sandwiches on toast.


Goulds Pumps reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Neal J. Menachem, Accountant, 50
Neal J. Menachem, a partner in the accounting firm of Ernst &amp; Young, died on Monday at his home in Miami.
He was 50 years old and a former resident of Woodmere, L.I.
He died of cancer, his family said.


The Dream Team Needs Dream Competition
To the Editor:
Speaking as a fan of both Anna Quindlen and the play of the National Basketball Association, I feel compelled to take issue with several of the comparisons she makes in "A Dream Team" (column, July 8).


Mr. Perot's Chance for Courage
Just before Ross Perot quit the Presidential race, his campaign staff put together a courageous plan for rebuilding the nation's economy.
Would that Mr.
Perot had been as courageous.
He has yet to release the plan or endorse it.
Still, judging by published reports, the program is full of excellent ideas that challenge both Bill Clinton and George Bush, as well as the electorate.
Jimmy Carter's budget director, Charles Schultze, calls it "the best plan I've seen in a long time" for balancing the budget and moving the country forward.
The plan draws freely from independent economists, liberal and conservative.
It seeks, in ways both clever and fair, to distribute pain and reward.


McElligott Wright Unravels In Full View of the Industry
AN AGENCY founded with much promise less than two years ago is floundering amid conflicts and unusually public squabbling involving its partners.
McElligott Wright Morrison White, a creatively focused shop in Minneapolis with billings estimated at $30 million, is quickly coming apart in the wake of disagreements among its four principals: Tom McElligott, chairman, chief executive and creative director; Tony Wright, president; John Morrison, associate creative director, and Rob White, director of planning.


A Butcher Who Finds The Times Are Lean
IN the Gospel of Luke, Jesus said life is more than meat.
And as a churchgoing Baptist, David Maurice Adams would have to say amen to that.
But the bloody facts are that his life has pretty much evolved around eviscerating animals to retrieve the edible portions.
It began in a West Virginia hamlet chopping off the heads of chickens.
Then, his family moved to New York, where at the age of 12 he landed a job as a "chicken flicker": making chicken parts out of feathered, but thankfully dead chickens.


Review/City Opera; A 'Boheme' Authentic in Its Drabness
The New York City Opera shows admirable pluck in steadfastly bringing back Cynthia Auerbach's unassuming production of Puccini's "Boheme," from 1966, virtually in the shadow of the Franco Zeffirelli extravaganza next door at the Met.
Cardboard is never far below the surface in Lloyd Evans's sets, yet the small scale and drab atmosphere prove appropriate to the humble circumstances of Puccini's bohemians.
All that needs to be added to bring the opera to life is plausible action and a good, balanced cast of singers.
City Opera generally does well by this work in those respects, too, and at the first performance of the season, on Saturday afternoon at the New York State Theater, the company supplied both in reasonable measure.
Don Yule and William Ledbetter, in their well-traveled portrayals of the comic Benoit and Alcindoro, minced and simpered overmuch, but Beth Greenberg's stage direction was otherwise relatively restrained for this house.


U.S. Students Rank Fourth In Chemistry Competition
Four American high school students learned yesterday that they had earned the United States a respectable fourth-place ranking in the Chemistry Olympiad, an international competition that this year pitted top students from 34 nations against each other.
The competition, conducted in 20 languages in Pittsburgh and Washington from July 13 to 17, subjected participants to a grueling five-hour written examination and a five-hour test of practical laboratory techniques.
The United States, which won one gold medal, two silver medals and a bronze, placed behind China, the top team, Hungary and Poland.


U.S. Was Aware the Iraqis Were Buying Technology
A year before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, American intelligence agencies had amassed evidence of President Saddam Hussein's vast network set up to buy Western military technology, including an Iraqi-owned front company based in Cleveland, according to documents disclosed today by Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, a Texas Democrat.
Representative Gonzalez, chairman of the House Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs, also released documents that illustrate the disarray within the Administration that resulted from President Bush's order on Oct. 2, 1989, to use political and economic incentives to moderate the Iraqi leader's behavior.


Smith Corona Plant Mexico Bound
The Smith Corona Corporation, the last American maker of consumer typewriters, announced today that it would move its manufacturing operations to Mexico from Cortland, N.Y., a decision that fanned concerns in Congress and organized labor about the loss of jobs to foreign competition.
G.
Lee Thompson, Smith Corona's chairman and chief executive, blamed the Administration's trade policies for the company's move.
He cited the Administration's announcement early this month that it would veto a broad House-approved trade bill that includes a provision, sought by Smith Corona, to help American companies obtain punitive Customs duties on foreign competition.


Uncovered Short Sales Rise by 7.6% on Big Board
The number of shares sold short and not covered between mid-June and mid-July on the New York Stock Exchange rose for the fourth straight month, reaching an all-time high, the Big Board reported yesterday.
The short positions, which reflect the growing sense of pessimism about the condition of the market among investors, ended the period at 882.6 million shares.
That was up 7.6 percent from the 820.3 million shares reported in the previous period and meant that short interest has climbed 27.7 percent since mid-March, when the figures began their recent growth.


U.N. Team in Baghdad Said to Retreat to Hotel
United Nations weapons inspectors keeping a vigil outside the Iraqi agriculture ministry in Baghdad have left their position and withdrawn to a hotel, witnesses said today.
The head of the inspectors, Mark Silver, said Tuesday that his team could soon be in jeopardy following demonstrations outside the ministry they have been prevented from entering to search for possible data on Iraqi weapons.


Sports of The Times; Banning Athletes Is Last Resort
IT was only eight years ago when the world was charmed by the sweet and modest Winter Games in Sarajevo, in the country that used to be Yugoslavia.
Now some of the same people who cheered the athletes, who poured coffee, who directed traffic, have been killing one another in the name of nationalism, separate languages, old blood feuds that never went away.


Multimedia Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Ballet School Grant To Help Train Pupils
The New Ballet School, the associate school of the Feld Ballets/NY, has received a $250,000 grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.
The two-year grant will help support a major expansion of the school, which has provided tuition-free professional ballet training to New York City public school students chosen for the program by audition.
The program has provided training for 6,000 children since it was founded in 1978.


Defeat of Citizen-Lawmaking Bills Leaves G.O.P. With Credibility Problem
If there were any doubts about the political perils of absolute power, the Republican legislative majority in Trenton drove the lesson home unequivocally Monday night.
Disregarding their party's platform and reneging on a political promise that has been an article of faith for more than a decade, the Republicans punched a gaping hole in their political credibility.


Praxair Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
Another torch is about to be passed, the one carried for 22 years by ALISTAIR COOKE.
Mr.
Cooke, the only host of "Masterpiece Theater" since its inception, plans to retire at the end of the year, REBECCA EATON, who produces the show for WGBH-TV in Boston, announced yesterday in Los Angeles.
"I have been promising my publisher a book for the past two years, and I must get to it," Mr.
Cooke said in the letter of resignation that he sent to WGBH.
"The rest of my declining energies I want to devote to the thing I most love doing: the weekly BBC 'Letter From America.' "


First Citizens Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Afghan Refugees Trek Home To a Bleak, Uncertain Future
One of this century's largest migrations is under way through the dun-colored mountain peaks of the Khyber Pass.
More than 600,000 of the 3.2 million Afghans who fled the war that ravaged their country over the last 14 years, have abandoned their Pakistan encampments and headed home to shattered villages, mined fields and, inevitably, desperate poverty.
Each week, the flow of refugees across the frontier and into southern Afghanistan toward Kandahar, swells.
Garishly painted Pakistani trucks lumber over the border, swaying under the weight of the refugees' household goods, heading toward their homes.


Rabin Visit Speeds Thaw in Israel-Egypt Ties
Egyptian schoolchildren find Palestine, not Israel, on their maps in geography class.
The destination of the flights to Tel Aviv, which require three hours of security checks, are not announced on information boards in the Cairo airport.
And Egyptians who want to travel to Israel, numbering in the dozens, must spend months waiting for a separate passport and special Government permission.
But the decision by the Egyptian President to accept the invitation of the Israeli Prime Minister to visit Israel appears to have relaxed the strain that has characterized 13 years of distant relations.
And it signals not only a change in the Egyptian attitude to Israel, but the Arab attitude toward Egypt.


DSC Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Traded Juan Berenguer, pitcher, to the Kansas City Royals for Mark Davis, pitcher.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Signed Derek Wallace, pitcher, to a contract with Peoria of the Midwest League.
Basketball National Basketball Association
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Named Jim Kozimor radio play-by-play announcer.
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Signed Lloyd Daniels, guard, to a two-year contract.
Global Basketball Association
GBA -- Announced that the Mississippi entry joining the league for the 1992-93 season will be called the Mississippi Coast Sharks.
Football National Football League
BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed John Fina, offensive lineman, to a four-year contract.
DETROIT LIONS -- Agreed to terms with Jason Hanson, kicker.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived Mark Hill, defensive end.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Darren Anderson, cornerback, and Kevin Turner, running back.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Signed Buford Jordan, fullback, to a one-year contract; and Marcus Dowdell, wide receiver, to a two-year contract.
Agreed to terms with Gill Fenerty and Allen Pinkett, tailbacks; Mike Buck, quarterback; and Antonio Gibson, safety.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Kent Graham, quarterback; Doug Riesenberg, guard; Roger Brown, Phillippi Sparks, Michael Wright, and Anthony Prior, defensive backs; Aaron Pierce, tight end; Keith Hamilton, Corey Widmer, Stacey Dillard and George Rooks, defensive linemen; Nate Singleton and Charles Swann, wide receivers.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Mike Norseth, quarterback. Arena Football League
SACRAMENTO ATTACK -- Signed Tony Rice, quarterback.


China Sentences an Ex-Official to 7 Years Over Tiananmen Leaks
The "people's court" today sentenced a former high official to seven years in prison, an unexpectedly long term, for political crimes he is said to have committed during the Tiananmen democracy movement three years ago.
The length of the sentence given to Bao Tong, the most senior official to be tried in a decade, is a reminder that for all the economic experimentation and recent talk of "reform," China's leaders remain ready to purge and punish those who challenge to their authority.


Her Image of His Ideal, in a Faulty Mirror
WOMEN contemplating breast enlargement surgery in the hope of becoming more alluring may want to think again: a new study suggests that women greatly overestimate society's tastes in breast size.
"Women's beliefs regarding men's preferences are wrong," said Dr.
J.
Kevin Thompson, the author of the new study.
"And this incorrect belief may be a reason why women opt for breast implants: trying to achieve a cultural ideal they believe others have."


Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ceridian Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Southwest Airlines Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BellSouth Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Johnson &amp; Johnson reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Personal Health; How you can cut your risk of a heart attack.
A VERY important but little noticed article on what Americans can do to prevent heart attacks was recently published in The New England Journal of Medicine.
The authors, Dr.
JoAnn E. Manson of Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School and colleagues from other leading medical centers in New England, reviewed nearly 200 major studies to evaluate the roles that known protective measures play.
Their findings, which show that most heart attacks are avoidable, can help you focus your attention on the factor or factors that could most significantly increase your own chance of living a long and healthy life.
Although annual coronary death rates have declined by about 30 percent since 1968, heart disease remains the nation's leading cause of death, claiming the lives of nearly 600,000 men and women a year.
Nearly half these deaths occur before the heart attack victim reaches a hospital.
And of the half million people who are admitted each year to hospitals after heart attacks, 15 percent die there and 7 to 10 percent succumb within a few years.


I See Memos in My Crystal Ball. I See the Boss on Line 1.
Time for another adventure in Conceptland, where all cars are sleekly sculptured and solar-powered, all televisions have immediate access to every movie ever made, and all houses vacuum themselves.
Today: a visit to the executive office to peer at the future phone (or at the "Future:Phone," as the makers would write it, anticipating a New Age punctuation style).
The design, a 21st-century combined telephone and work station, is a joint concoction of the Dictaphone Corporation and Cousins Design Inc.
The designers expect post-millenium executives to need features including a keyboard with built-in telephone headset, a voice-recognition unit, a "communications tower" that houses the computer, a port for downloading information from computer diskettes and a clear display panel.
The panel would become opaque when displaying messages being dictated into the voice-recognition unit, other data and video images, or images of a telephone caller.


GTE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Energy Efficiency Faces Roadblock in Senate; New York Converting
To the Editor:
"Natural Gas Vehicle Fleets? An Offer of Free Conversion" (Business Day, July 10), on the offer of Mesa Inc. to pay for conversion of commercial or government fleets of vehicles to natural gas, notes a similar program in New York City supported by Con Edison and Brooklyn Union Gas.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Two More Seeded Players Fall in Toronto Two Americans, Derrick Rostagno and Jeff Tarango, became the sixth and seventh seeded players to be eliminated when they lost yesterday at the Player's Ltd.
International tournament in Toronto.
No. 7 Rostagno, who had a first-round bye, lost by 7-5, 3-6, 7-5 to Patrik Kuhnen of Germany.
Tarango, seeded 13th, dropped a 7-6 (7-5), 6-4 decision to Simon Youl of Australia.
A Canadian, Grant Connell, almost made it eight seeded players out, but sixth-seeded MaliVai Washington rallied for a 4-6, 7-6 (7-4), 6-1 victory to advance to the third round.
Top-seeded Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia, third-seeded Ivan Lendl, No. 4 Aaron Krickstein, eighth-seeded Amos Mansdorf of Israel, Wally Masur of Australia and 15th-seeded Richey Reneberg all won yesterday. (AP) Sampras Survives Scare: Second-seeded Pete Sampras was carried to a third-set tie breaker before disposing of German Lopez, 4-6, 6-3, 7-6 (8-6), in the second round of the Philips Head Cup clay court tournament in Kitzbuhel, Austria.
"Lopez played very erratically and unpredictably," Sampras said.
"Besides that, I had too little patience." Third-seeded Francisco Clavet of Spain was beaten by Luiz Mattar of Brazil, 4-6, 7-6 (7-2), 6-4. (AP) Two Upsets at Dutch Open: Unseeded Cedric Pioline of France beat top-seeded Carlos Costa by 6-3, 6-3 in the opening round of the Dutch Open in Hilversum, the Netherlands.
In another upset, fifth-seeded Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands was defeated by Marc Goellner of Germany, 7-6 (8-6), 7-5.
Second-seeded Jordi Arrese of Spain overcame Lars Jonsson of Sweden, 6-7 (7-4), 6-1, 6-4. (AP)


Laser Benefits Now Closer to Home
Auric Goldfinger, James Bond's nemesis in the 1964 film, appreciated the business applications of light-wave technology.
"You are looking at an industrial laser, which emits an extraordinary light, not to be found in nature," Mr.
Goldfinger tells Mr.
Bond, as a fearsome device looms over the secret agent, strapped down spread-eagle.
"It can project a spot on the moon or, at closer range, cut through solid metal."
Since "Goldfinger," the most common application of lasers has been not to menace debonair spies, but to transmit millions of telephone calls, and not with contraptions firing crimson-colored death rays, but with lasers the size of a grain of sand.
These micro-lasers generate blindingly fast pulses of light invisible to the eye, transmitting a digital semaphore that only a machine can decipher.


Review/Dance; A 21-Year-Old Group That's Still Devoted To Fighting Gravity
The Pilobolus Dance Theater, 21 years old this year, continues to go on making strange new shapes.
The ways the members of this troupe tie themselves up into knots and defy the laws of gravity can be whimsical or weird, astounding or perplexing.
And the reasons for these mind-boggling feats are remarkably varied, as Pilobolus demonstrated on Monday night when it opened a four-week season through Aug. 15 at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).
Music served as the inspiration for "Sweet Purgatory," which received its New York premiere.
Like most offerings by Pilobolus, it is a collaboratively devised event.
Robby Barnett, Alison Chase, Michael Tracy and Jonathan Wolken created the choreography with the assistance of the six dancers who were the cast of its world premiere last year.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  A NEW PUZZLE ON AIDS  Doctors added reports to earlier descriptions of people with an AIDS-like disease but no evidence of infection with the virus that causes AIDS, raising possibilities that the condition may be caused by a third variant of the virus or by a deficiency of the immune system caused by some other condition or agent.
A1  EGYPTIAN TO VISIT ISRAEL  Egypt's President said he had accepted an invitation to visit Israel -- the first such trip by an Arab leader since Anwar el-Sadat's breakthrough visit to Jerusalem nearly 15 years ago.
A1  An icy relationship begins to thaw in the Middle East.
A10  RUSSIA TO SELL URANIUM TO U.S.
Desperate for money, Russia offered to sell the United States tons of uranium from retired nuclear arms, saying the enriched material could be diluted into fuel for civilian reactors that make electricity.
A1  AFGHAN EXODUS IS GROWING  One of this century's largest migrations is under way through the Khyber Pass as more than 600,000 of the 3.2 million Afghans refugees abandon their Pakistan encampments and head home to a country shattered by 14 years of war.
A1  7 YEARS FOR TIANANMEN FIGURE  China sentenced a former high official to seven years in prison, an unexpectedly long term, for political crimes he is said to have committed during the Tiananmen democracy movement three years ago.
A3  OUTBURST AT PALERMO FUNERAL  The crisis of public confidence faced by the authorities in Italy was underscored as protesters mobbed Government leaders at a funeral in Palermo for five bodyguards who died with the city's chief prosecutor in a car bomb attack.
A3  90 HAITIANS LOST AT SEA  About 90 Haitian refugees were reported to have at died sea when their small boat capsized and sank about 20 miles to the north of Port-au-Prince, the authorities said.
A9  U.N.
RESUMES SARAJEVO AIRLIFT  Despite continuing ground fire that made the operation more than usually risky, the United Nations command reopened Sarajevo airport to relief flights after a 24-hour suspension caused by heavy shelling.
A8  ADMIRAL DENIES GULF COVER-UP  Adm.
William J. Crowe of the Navy denied allegations that the Pentagon had tried to cover up operations in the Persian Gulf surrounding the shooting down of a Iranian airliner four years ago.
A2  National A12-16, D19  BAKER CAMPAIGN ROLE REPORTED  Secretary of State Baker will leave his post next month to return to the White House as President Bush's senior policy adviser and, in effect, the new head of the Bush re-election campaign, Administration officials said.
A1  Eagleburger will likely become Acting Secretary of State.
A15  Baker's Middle East shuttle has become a farewell tour.
A15  The Bush campaign team is eagerly awaiting the new boss.
A16  Bush campaigned in an excited but skeptical Garfield, N.J.
A16  The Bush camp plans an early TV advertising barrage.A14  Their bus caravan presents Clinton and Gore as equal partners.
A14  How the Clinton advance team rounds up those crowds.
A14  MILESTONE AIRLINE ACCORD  In a deal that experts said would mark a turning point in the global consolidation of the airline industry, British Airways plans to buy as much as a 44 percent stake in USAir for $750 million.
The pact links USAir's domestic system, with the most flights of any airline in the Northeast, to the network of British Airways, the world's largest carrier of international passengers.
A1  NEW ATTACK ON THE OSPREY  Reacting to the second crash of a V-22 Osprey in 13 months, Pentagon officials renewed their expressions of doubt about that helicopter-airplane hybrid, apparently in an effort to stall its financing.
A12  KEVORKIAN WINS AGAIN  Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, the retired pathologist who in the last two years has helped four seriously ill women kill themselves, won another round in his battle against suburban Detroit prosecutors when a judge dismissed murder charges in the death of two of those women.
A12  'WE KILLED MY MOM'  In Gulfport, Miss., two teen-age girls are charged with methodically planning, and then carrying out, their mother's murder.
A12  Metro Digest B1  LIFE OF AN EXECUTIVE ADDICT  Drug experts say perhaps as many as a third of the estimated 750,000 heroin addicts in America are juggling habitual use of what has long been thought of as the most debilitating and enslaving of drugs as they manage jobs and even families with few if any outward signs of addiction.
A1  Business Digest D1  The Living Section C1-10  In snacks, small is good, tiny is better.
C1  Making quip tossing an Olympic sport.
C1  Health Page C12  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Dance Theater of Harlem to perform in South Africa.
C13  A New York listener.
C13  Dance: Pilobolus performs.
C13  Sports B7-13  Baseball: Mets beat Dodgers.
B7  Yanks' Hillegas travels bumpy roads.
B9  Saberhagen back in fine style.
B9  Basketball: Johnson gets treated like a king.
B7  Olympics: Yugoslavs may snub an invitation.
B7  Sprinter gets in the spirit.
B10  Obituaries B6  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  Silence Serbia's big guns.
Mr.
Perot's chance for courage.
China invents a criminal.
Topics: Benedict Koch.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: No more waiting.
Josef Skvorecky: After the Velvet  Revolution.
Amy Brown: My starving soup kitchen.
Education A17


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Campaign Focuses on Baker As Bush Stumps in Northeast
President Bush's campaign has always had the sense of a political operation waiting for something to happen.
On the campaign trail today, waiting for James A. Baker 3d has simply added a new tang to the air of expectancy.
Months ago, the question was whether Mr.
Bush would name a new chief of staff and when he would pick his campaign team.
That done, Bush advisers wondered when he would announce his candidacy and answer demands for action on the economy.
Then, it was whether he would mount an attack on Congress, and after that, whether he would replace his new chief of staff.


Port Authority Says Cleaners Overcharged
Dozens of tenants at the World Trade Center were overcharged by a total of almost $1 million for cleaning services over the last year because of inadequate monitoring by officials of the Port Authority, the executive director of the agency said last night.
In acknowledging the failure in oversight, the executive director, Stanley Brezenoff, said he was reassigning two top officials who were responsible for managing the trade center and its contracts with Ogden Allied Services Corporation, which has cleaned the offices in the twin towers since the mid-1980's.
The Trade Center is owned by the Port Authority.


One-Third Can't Spell 'Potato'
Nearly a third of voters cannot spell "potato," according to an ABC News-Washington Post poll.
Four percent said they did not know or had no opinion, while the rest were able to spell the word properly.
The question was added to the poll after Vice President Dan Quayle encouraged a 12-year-old Trenton boy to put an "e" on the end of the word last month.
Mr.
Quayle said a flash card he was holding spelled the word incorrectly.


CoreStates Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Topics of The Times; Mayor Benedict Koch
After suffering a minor stroke in 1987, Edward I. Koch, then Mayor of New York, shared his musings about mortality with his fellow citizens.
He wanted his funeral service to be held at Temple Emanu-El in Manhattan, with John Cardinal O'Connor as guest speaker.
And among the 28 words he chose for his epitaph were "He fiercely defended the City of New York. . . ."
So how do you explain that commercial you just did for General Tire, Mr. Mayor?


Campus Journal; Vote to Sell TV Station Splits Iowans
In 1950, an unexpected windfall led to a visionary idea, and leaders at Iowa State University bought a commercial television station.
The station has been a laboratory for students in both journalism and meteorology ever since, while at the same time serving as a network affiliate station for central Iowa.
But in June the Iowa Board of Regents, which runs the state's three public universities, voted to sell the station.
Along with an expected $14 million, the vote produced a lawsuit.


Critic's Notebook; In Defense of the Made-for-TV Star
Certain actors are made for television, their special but less-than-superstar talents perfectly suited to the small screen.
New series come and go, but some faces stick around forever.
Two can be spotted on a couple of the better new summer entries on CBS.
At 9 P.M. on Wednesdays, Lee Majors co-stars with Jeffrey Meek in "Raven." At 10 on Thursday nights, Lee Horsley is in "Bodies of Evidence."
Mr.
Majors is one of television's most durable veterans, his career going back to the 1960's and "The Big Valley" series starring Barbara Stanwyk.
In the 1970's, he started off in the supporting cast of "Owen Marshall, Counselor at Law" and ended up as the star of his biggest hit, "The Six Million Dollar Man." In the 1980's, he played a top stunt man in "The Fall Guy."


Lilly (Eli) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yugoslavia May Snub Invitation To the Games
The United Nations Security Council informed the Spanish Government tonight that athletes from Yugoslavia would be welcome to compete in the Barcelona Olympics in individual events without national identification, but not in team sports.
But Yugoslav Olympic officials suggested they might withdraw from the Games rather than comply.


Hispanic-Hasidic Tensions Rise After Boy Is Accused and Beaten
The beating of a 13-year-old Hispanic boy by a Hasidic Jewish man who accused him of shoplifting prompted a spontaneous demonstration outside a housing project in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn Monday night, with about 75 Hispanic residents demanding that an arrest be made, the police said.
Williamsburg has long been racked by tensions between its Hispanic and Hasidic residents.


Man Shoots Waitress, Self
A 52-year-old man walked into a Brooklyn restaurant last night, shot and critically wounded a waitress, and then killed himself, the police said.
The shooting occurred about 7:15 P.M. at the Surprise Surprise Restaurant at 8619 5th Avenue in Bay Ridge, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Edele James.
The waitress, Elaine Fanning, 46, was shot once in the face and listed in critical condition at Staten Island Hospital, Sergeant James said.
Police identified the gunman as Thomas Ziti of 693 86th Street in Brooklyn.


Agreement Reported Close on Astros Sale
An agreement in principle for the sale of the Houston Astros and the Astrodome lease to DRAYTON McLANE Jr. of Temple, Tex., is expected to be announced later this week, according to people close to the negotiations.


For Inner-City Students, a Program Offers a Taste of Private-School Life
Picture a private school setting, with all of the educational extras such schools can afford.
Open the campus for a summer school that aims to help inner-city adolescents.
Then recruit as instructors bright high school and college students considering teaching careers.
Give the students, all of whom are in middle school, rigorous instruction in math, science, history and language, combined with electives in the arts and sports.
Offer hugs and support; then listen to the students who are accepted to the tuition-free, six-week program called Summerbridge.


Bell Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Global City Planning
As an urban planner and daily commuter from Fairfield County in Connecticut, Robert D. Yaro says he has always considered Manhattan's Grand Central Terminal "one of the grand urban experiences on earth." And he likes it even better now that he has visited Tokyo.
"For the first time, Grand Central doesn't seem crowded," he said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Baker's Farewell Tour; 'Shalom Y'All' Says It All (But Baker Won't Say It)
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's Middle East shuttle has turned into the Jim Baker farewell tour.
In public, when Baker aides are asked whether the Secretary will soon be leaving his job and moving to the White House to help oversee Mr.
Bush's re-election campaign, they respond, poker faced: "Baker? White House? Whatever gave you that idea?"


A Harrowing Trip Around the Learning Curve; What's More Nerve-Racking Than Learning to Drive in Manhattan? Teaching It
"O.K., start the engine, put your foot on the brake and put it in D for dumb," Bob Kousoulos said.
Ely Quezada, terror etched on her face, did as instructed.


Northern Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wider Chinatown Gang Warfare Feared
After months of relative peace in the violent and murky world of Asian-American gangs, the fatal shooting of a high-ranking Chinatown gang leader Monday has renewed concerns about warfare among rival groups.
Police investigators say they believe that Vinh Thang Luong, a reputed street boss of a faction of the Ghost Shadows, was killed by members of the Flying Dragons, considered the Ghost Shadows' oldest and most bitter rivals in Chinatown.


Corrections
A music review on Monday about a concert by the bands Faith No More, Metallica and Guns 'n' Roses on Saturday at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., misstated the date of the bands' repeat concert at the stadium.
It is to be next Wednesday.


Accent on Aggressiveness In New Defense for Giants
For years, the Giants' defense had been the best or close to the best in pro football.
It allowed the offense to play conservatively, knowing that even if it scored few points, the defense would probably give up fewer.
But last year, when the Giants slumped to an 8-8 record after their Super Bowl championship, the defense gave up big plays, tackled poorly and often faded in the fourth quarter.


CHRONICLE
They started lining up at 3 A.M. yesterday in front of Planet Hollywood on West 57th Street, some of them with fur stuck to large fake ears, blood on their hands, hideous masks covering their faces, others in business suits or jeans, waiting to audition for the starring role in a remake of "I Was a Teen-Age Werewolf."
It was an open casting call, and it brought out all manner of would-be werewolves.
SAMUEL Z. ARKOFF, who produced the original, had the idea of remaking the 1957 movie while writing his memoirs, "Flying Through Hollywood by the Seat of My Pants," published by Birch Lane Press.


Indurain's Strength Weakens LeMond
Stephen Roche won the 16th stage of the Tour de France, which covered 212 kilometers (131 miles) from St.
Etienne to La Bourboule, a resort noted for its arsenic-laden waters.
They are said to cure many ills, perhaps quickly.
It was a fitting place for Roche, an Irishman who rides for Carrera, to rediscover his racing health.
He finished first in the 1987 Tour before going into a decline.


FoxMeyer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bradley Is the Best, Say L.P.G.A. Peers
There are plenty of statistics in professional golf -- average driving distance, average number of putts, for example -- but statistics alone can't provide a barometer for ranking the game's best players.
In the case of the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour, the perception of the players themselves is just as important in measuring excellence; they know greatness when they see it.
What they see is greatness in many forms, all of which will be on display at the United States Women's Open, which begins Thursday at Oakmont in Pittsburgh.
And the best player, they say, is one of the most experienced: 42-year-old Pat Bradley.


Review/Theater; A Magic Lantern for 'The Tempest'
An essential ingredient for any revival of "The Tempest" is a touch of magic.
There is some magic here and there in the Royston Theater Company production, but it depends on which part of Prospero's island one visits.
Regarded by many as Shakespeare's valedictory, "The Tempest" has some of the playwright's most sublime poetry.
It is also one of the most difficult plays to stage well, and some argue that it is better read than performed.
And the same shoals on which productions have run aground for 380 years are not always successfully navigated by the director, Peter Royston, and his game cast.


Energy Efficiency Faces Roadblock in Senate
To the Editor:
The United States could lead the way in ending dependency on Middle East oil as well as subsidies to Middle Eastern despots with the use of efficient and cost-saving energy alternatives.
Both the Senate and the House have, to their credit, passed energy bills that would encourage greater energy efficiency and make it less risky for electric utilities to undertake construction of new base-load power plants.


Navy Commander Is Relieved In Inquiry on Sex Harassment
The commander of a Navy salvage ship based in Hawaii has been relieved of his duties, pending an investigation into accusations of fraternization and sexual harassment aboard the ship, the Navy has announced, and a report has found "a lack of a strong commitment" in Hawaii to the acceptance of women in the service.
The action against the officer, Lieut.
Comdr.
Donald J. Oswald, captain of the Safeguard, was announced Monday by the Navy in Pearl Harbor.
The existence of the report was disclosed by The Washington Post in its Wednesday issue and confirmed later by the Navy.


Olin Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U S West Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
The 1992 All-Star Game, organized by Bridge Today magazine and sponsored by Perrier, was played Sunday and Monday in Latham, N.Y.
Sixteen experts, nearly all of whom have won major world or national championships, played four deals with each of the others in an individual event.
The leaders at the finish were: first, Dorothy Truscott of the Bronx, plus 71 imps; second, Marcelo Branco of Brazil, plus 42; third, Ron Andersen of Chicago, tied with Neil Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., plus 34; fifth, Bob Hamman of Dallas, plus 25; sixth, Margie Gwozdzinsky of Manhattan, plus 4.
It Only Seemed Safe


Unions Challenge Changes In Trenton's Pension System
Unions representing state and local government workers filed a lawsuit today challenging a move to help balance the state budget that the unions say threatens their pension systems.
A victory by the unions could throw the state into fiscal chaos.
The law that the unions are challenging is not only a linchpin of the current $14.6 billion budget, but is also intended to give the state a recurring income of more than $500 million for years to come.


Wine Talk
A RESTAURANT with a couple thousand bottles of wine in its cellar is a serious restaurant.
One with 20,000 or 30,000 is in the big leagues, oenologically speaking.
What does that make a place with about eight million bottles? It makes it Air France.


A Last Resort In College Aid: The Kindness Of Strangers
It was another turn-down day at the Andriekus home outside Lansing, Mich.
In the mail was a bill for $9,999, one semester's tuition and housing at the University of Pennsylvania, where 16-year-old Amy E. Andriekus had been, to her unanticipated delight, accepted.
Also in the mail the same day last week was a standard rejection letter from former President Ronald Reagan, one of more than 800 people to whom Miss Andriekus has written to ask for contributions after Penn told her that the only financial aid she will get is a $2,500 loan.


Treasury Securities Little Changed
Congressional testimony by the Federal Reserve Board chairman, Alan Greenspan, contained few surprises for the credit markets yesterday, and prices of Treasury securities were little changed.
In his remarks, Mr.
Greenspan expressed confidence that the economy was expanding and that a sustainable recovery would be under way soon.
This echoed the views he presented to the Senate Banking Committee a year ago, and again in February.


Union Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Airborne Sprinter Gets in the Spirit
In a festive, pre-Olympic atmosphere, the world-class sprinter Davidson Ezinwa of Nigeria, a man who recently beat Carl Lewis at 100 meters, was exchanging collectors pins, taking photographs and giving autographs.
No, this wasn't downtown Barcelona but T.W.A.'s nonstop flight Monday night from New York.


Fruit of the Loom reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


UST Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


More Husbands, Sons, Brothers and Fathers Are Providing Care


Daniels Signs to Play With Spurs
It took a half-dozen years, but LLOYD DANIELS is finally getting his chance to play basketball under the coaching of JERRY TARKANIAN.
The San Antonio Spurs announced yesterday that the team has signed Daniels to a two-year contract.
Daniels, a schoolboy basketball star in New York, has never played in college or the National Basketball Association.
When he was coaching at Nevada-Las Vegas, Tarkanian recruited Daniels to play for the Runnin' Rebels, but he never did after being arrested in a crack house in Las Vegas.


Ballet Troupe Restructured
Joyce A. Moffatt, vice president and general manager of the San Francisco Ballet, has been named to the new position of executive director, effective immediately.
The appointment is part of a restructuring of the company administration that combines the jobs of president and general manager.
Miss Moffatt and the artistic director, Helgi Tomasson, will continue to report to the board and its chairman.
Miss Moffatt joined the company as general manager in 1987.
She served previously in administrative positions with American Ballet Theater, the 55th Street Dance Theater Foundation, the San Antonio Symphony and Opera and Radio City Music Hall.


Terra Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Equifax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rebel Serbian Republic in Croatia Agrees to Talks
Leaders of the rebel Serbian republic in Croatia agreed today to negotiate their republic's future status at talks with Croatia sponsored by the European Community, the head of the Community's peace conference on Yugoslavia said.
In doing so the Serbs dropped a long-standing precondition that Croatia recognize the rebel state's independence.
The agreement by the Serbians to abandon their insistence on independence as a starting point for talks and to accept negotiations on the basis of a "special status" within Croatia signals a dramatic departure from their often-repeated vow that the rebel Serbian republic's territory would never revert to Croatia.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In the Heartland; Candidates and Issues Stir Small-Town Frenzy
When Gov.
Bill Clinton and his bus caravan across the American heartland arrived here tonight nearly two hours late, he was still cheered like a rock star by a large crowd that had been gathering for seven hours.
Spontaneous enthusiasm for Mr.
Clinton appeared to have pulled many in the crowd of about 8,000 people out of their homes and kept them patiently waiting in the streets and on the lawn of the old State House on this rain-laced night.


London Journal; Gentlemen, the Question: Will We Let Them In?
"A very unclubbable man" was how Samuel Johnson disparaged Sir John Hawkins, his friend, editor and biographer, for lacking social graces.
Women are finding themselves so described in the battle of the gentlemen's clubs now raging in London.
What is especially appalling to the women is that it appears that this is not just the view of a tiny minority in Britain's male elite.


Review/Theater; The Stark Oratory Of a Wild Karen Finley
Karen Finley made a sensational stage entrance on Tuesday evening at Alice Tully Hall, where she performed her new 80-minute monologue, "A Certain Level of Denial," as part of the Serious Fun festival.
Wearing only shoes and a hat, the performer, her silhouette starkly projected on celluloid screens, delivered an anguished rant that described in harrowing detail the bodily deterioration and appalling medical treatment of an artist friend with AIDS.
The monologue went on to contrast the situation of her friend, whom she described as "a leper," with the fuss over George Bush's brief collapse and stomach upset during his recent trip to Japan.
Exploding with rage at the President, Ms.
Finley screamed: "I want to see him suffer! I want to see him hurt! I say just leave him there!"


Anheuser-Busch Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cab Inspection Is Fear; Passing It Is a Living
Angelo J. shuffled a wad of papers on the hood of his yellow cab outside New York City's taxi inspection center in Queens yesterday afternoon, shaking the crumpled receipts for repairs, inspection slips and summonses for mechanical violations.
"All this -- for what?" he said. "Because I don't pay!"


Rangers Sign Werenka, 2d-Round Draftee
A minor league defenseman, DARCY WERENKA, the New York Rangers' second-round choice in the 1991 National Hockey League entry draft, has signed with the club.
The terms were not disclosed yesterday.
Werenka, 19 years old, has played the last three seasons with Lethbridge of the Western Hockey League.
In 69 games last season with Lethbridge, Werenka had 17 goals and 58 assists, ranking him second among all defensemen in the W.H.L. (AP)


American General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kosher-Food Rules Struck Down by New Jersey High Court
The New Jersey Supreme Court today struck down the state's kosher food regulations, saying they violate both state and Federal constitutional prohibitions against any establishment of religion.
The ruling, which could have implications for 15 other states with similar laws, including New York and Connecticut, found that while the state had a valid interest in preventing fraud in the sale of kosher foods, the regulations "plainly violate constitutional standards."


Village, Sweet Village
FORGET about the weathered shingle or the white geometric.
On eastern Long Island, one of the country's most fertile landscapes for new architectural ideas, where new trendsetting beach houses appear every summer with the regularity of the tides, there's a whole new look.
This season, the house is no longer just a house. It's an entire village.


Home Video
Back in the 1980's when VCR's were new and tapes virtually rented themselves, the video industry's annual convention almost always displayed a bullish frame of mind.
But on the eve of this year's meeting, which begins next week in Las Vegas, Nev., the mood is guarded.
While conditions aren't critical, there is talk about the need for a shake-up, or at least for something that will invigorate the video business.
"Video is at a crucial juncture," said John Gaffney, the editor of Video Software magazine, a trade publication.
He and others point out that people have become throughly used to the medium and that familiarity breeds disuse.
"There are a lot of dormant VCR's out there," Mr.
Gaffney said.
The challenge, he added, is to get people interested again.


Foote, Cone Gains People and Business
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding announced yesterday that one of its offices had hired a top executive while another had won an account.
Ken Dudwick, 55 years old, was named to the new position of senior vice president and group creative director at the agency's San Francisco office, focusing on the Clorox Company's brands, including Clorox liquid bleach.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
Traditional window casing, one of the styles of the interior trim around windows, is the type that features a projecting horizontal indoor piece, called a stool, and a strip of molding beneath it, called an apron.
Installing traditional casings requires precise workmanship and usually takes longer than the simpler-looking picture-frame casings described in last week's column.
But achieving good-looking results is often easier, especially on uneven walls, because fewer miter joints are necessary.


Boggs in Glasses, but Royals in Victory
Royals 6, Red Sox 4
KANSAS CITY, Mo., July 22 (AP) -- Wally Joyner's leadoff double was the only ball that left the infield during a five-run fifth inning last night that vaulted Kansas City past Frank Viola and the Boston Red Sox, 6-4.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Assigned Dan Pasqua, outfielder, to Birmingham of the Southern League on a rehabilitation assignment.


Could Magic Become A Knick?
If Magic Johnson decides to resume his career in the National Basketball Association after the Olympics -- a decision he is not yet close to making -- it will not necessarily be with the Los Angeles Lakers, he said today.
"I'm looking for wherever would put me in the thick of it," he said, meaning a team that would seriously contend for the championship.
Of the Lakers, he said: "I'm still tied there, but which way are they going? Are they going to rebuild?"


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Gov.
Bill Clinton
SUNDAY: 9:30 P.M., C-SPAN, interview.


Big Bucks, Big Bets and a Big Mess
You call Gulfstream Park in Florida these days and the cheery voice on the tape says: "Thank you for calling Gulfstream Park, proud home of the 1992 Breeders' Cup."
Nobody is suggesting yet that it's time to change that greeting to a recording of a bugler playing "Taps." But so many people are drawing lines in the sand in Florida, so many people are playing brinksmanship, so many are joining the stampede to take the horse-racing business and hold it hostage for some piece of the political or financial pie -- well, can "Taps" be far behind?


Reynolds Risks Longer Ban
A senior official of the International Amateur Athletic Federation, the world body that oversees track and field, said today that Butch Reynolds is likely to receive an additional two-year suspension from the organization's governing council unless he apologizes for seeking court approval to compete in the United States track and field trials last month.
The official, who asked that he not be identifed, said that I.A.A.F. council members were angered that Reynolds, the world-record holder at 400 meters, found a way to run despite a two-year suspension that does not expire until Aug. 12.


Civilian Review Board Says the Police Have Nothing to Hide; Prosecutor's Job
To the Editor:
"Who Should Police the Police?" (editorial, June 29) suggests that the important question is not who is reviewing allegations of police brutality but rather the quality of such review.
No one disputes that.
But the term "police the police" leads to misunderstanding, among police and public.


Rudolf C. Ising, 80, a Cartoonist And Creator of 'Looney Tunes'
Rudolf C. Ising, an early aide to Walt Disney who left to create the "Looney Tunes" and "Merrie Melodies" cartoons and was the first independent cartoon producer to win an Academy Award, died on Saturday at his home in Newport Beach, Calif.
He was 80 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Bridge
To be eliminated from one major team event without being defeated might be called a misfortune.
To have it happen twice in the space of three days would certainly have been described by Oscar Wilde's Lady Bracknell as carelessness.
This rare parlay was achieved at the end of May by August Boehm of Manhattan.
He reached the semifinal of the Reisinger Knockout Teams but was barred from further play because his partner was unavailable.
Two days later he won the New York final of the Grand National Teams but had to withdraw from the next stage because of his own schedule.
The other winners, John Roberts, John Solodar, George Tornay, Alan Miller, and Tom Smith, began play yesterday in national playoffs in Toronto, with David Berkowitz replacing Boehm.


1 Killed, 5 Wounded In Dice Game Fight
A 16-year-old boy was killed and five other people wounded, none of them seriously, when two men opened fire last night on a dice game on a Staten Island street, the police said.
The teen-ager, Kiam Crabbe, of Bowen Street, was believed to have been one of the intended targets of the shooting, which stemmed from a dispute over the game, said Lieut.
William Quinn of the Crimes Against Persons Squad.
At least four of the surviving victims were thought to have been innocent bystanders, he said.


Fed to Cut Money-Supply Goal
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, said today that the Fed was planning to reduce its target for monetary growth below current levels to reduce inflation.
But in his testimony before the House Subcommittee on Domestic Monetary Policy, the Fed chairman said the central bank was holding off for the moment because it was still trying to analyze the erratic behavior of M-2, the most closely watched gauge of money.


Coalition Files Suit in Incinerator Dispute
A coalition of Bronx community groups filed suit yesterday, charging that the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and the New York City Department of Environmental Protection directed Bronx-Lebanon Hospital to file false information about its ownership of a new medical-waste incinerator.
The three-story incinerator, built and operated by the Remtech Corporation, was designed to burn 48 tons of waste from surgical and infectious-disease procedures a day.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finances; Image of a Wealthy Gore Is Belied by a Net Worth in Senate's Minor League
When Al Gore first ran for Congress from Tennessee in 1976 one of his opponents tried to make an issue of his wealth, though Mr.
Gore himself had a net worth of $273,000 at the time.
Today, after 16 years in office, Mr.
Gore, Gov.
Bill Clinton's running mate, finds himself still one of the least wealthy members of the Senate.
Not counting his two houses, one near Washington and another in Carthage, Tenn., Mr.
Gore and his wife have assets worth $153,000 to $345,000, according to Mr.
Gore's latest Senate financial disclosure statement, filed in May.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  TAXI INSPECTORS ACCUSED OF BRIBERY


Powwows Offer Indians a Path to Their Heritage


In Zimbabwe, World Bank Decrees Misery
To the Editor:
Since Zimbabwe is composed primarily of rural farmers, I found it curious that your July 10 report on the negative effect that the country's economic troubles are having on the stature of President Robert G. Mugabe quotes only businessmen, bankers and government officials.
Had your reporter spoken to the many grass-roots groups working with the country's rural poor, she would have discovered that Zimbabwe's crisis is as much attributable to the policies promoted by the World Bank and International Monetary Fund as it is to the lack of rainfall.


Car Insurers Abandoning Poor Areas, Panel Says
Drivers from lower-income neighborhoods in Brooklyn and the Bronx often must take out more expensive liability insurance than other New York residents because their communities have been "abandoned" by major insurance companies, says a city report released yesterday.


Sony's True-Blue Model of U.S. Laser
The Sony Corporation's announcement today that it had experimentally demonstrated the world's first semiconductor laser to emit blue light was described by several experts as an incremental improvement on breakthroughs made last year by researchers in the United States.
Researchers at the 3M Company in St.
Paul, and a separate team from Brown University and Purdue University were responsible for last year's technological advances.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; FACING PRESSURE, BUSH IS ADAMANT ON KEEPING QUAYLE
With pressures mounting within his own party for further measures to revitalize his re-election campaign, President Bush denied today that he was even considering the possibility of replacing Vice President Dan Quayle.
Deeply concerned about the President's dismal standing in the polls, two groups of Republican Senators, in separate meetings, held what Senator Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming, the minority whip, described as "spirited discussions of what should be done" to get the flagging campaign moving again.


AIDS Puzzle: No Cause for Panic
The mysterious cases of AIDS-like illness that have sparked public alarm in the past few days need further investigation.
But they are not yet a major public health threat -- and may never be.
The need now is for intensified study, and full release of data by scientists who have been hoarding it.
At latest count, some 30 individuals around the world have been found to have symptoms of AIDS, such as depressed immune systems and severe pneumonia, but no traces of infection with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.


Citicorp Stock Deal For Holders
Citicorp, in an effort to strengthen its financial condition more quickly than its own profits will allow, is offering its 70,000 shareholders a chance to buy additional company shares at 2.5 percent less than the price of its shares on the New York Stock Exchange.
The offering is similar to those of other companies that issue new stock to shareholders willing to invest their dividends or make additional cash payments.
Citicorp has paid no common stock dividend since late 1991, and shareholders must invest more cash to obtain additional shares.


Taxable Yields Fall Again; Tax-Exempts Rebound a Bit
Yields on taxable funds slipped a bit further in the latest week, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
The cut in short-term interest rates by the Federal Reserve three weeks ago is apparently still exerting downward pressure on taxable yields.
Yields on tax-exempt funds, however, rebounded slightly after a sharp slide.
Investors have been withdrawing their money to invest in higher-yielding stocks and bonds.
In addition, investors who had temporarily parked their income from a spate of municipal bond redemptions are also shifting those funds elsewhere.
The outflow has given yields a small lift.


Colombian Drug Baron Escapes Luxurious Prison After Gunfight
President Cesar Gaviria of Colombia said last night that Pablo Escobar, one of the world's most powerful drug traffickers, had escaped from the resort-like prison where he has been held for the last year.
After an attempt to move the notorious drug trafficker to a more secure prison, Mr.
Escobar was said to have taken two high-ranking government officials and the prison warden hostage.
The hostages were freed by soldiers who stormed the prison before dawn, but as many as six people have been reported killed.
In the confusion, Mr.
Escobar, his brother Roberto and a half dozen other inmates apparently got away.


Add Basques to the Precursors of Columbus; Norse Contribution
To the Editor:
"Norse America" deserves far more attention than "Norsemen In America Flourished Then Faded." South Dakota Historical Collections, Volume IV (1908), states, "The tax lists, now in the Vatican in Rome, show there were at least 1,000 families in the American colonies in the 12th century . . . In 1488 they begged again the pope for a bishop and priest and he ordained and sent them a new apostle by the name of Mathias, and there ends the record of the Catholic 'Nordske' missions."


Hampsten Is Moving Up But the Pressure Falls Off
He dreams about a place on the victory podium, as one of the top three finishers, when the Tour de France ends Sunday in Paris, but Andy Hampsten insists that he is treating the world's greatest bicycle race as anything but.
"I no longer look on the Tour as the only race," said Hampsten, an American rider for the Motorola team.
"I no longer feel that if I don't do well here, my season has been a failure. That pressure is off.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Ernestine Anderson  Blue Note 131 West Third Street Greenwich Village Through Sunday
When Ernestine Anderson first started to sing at the Blue Note on Tuesday night, it was business as usual.
She looked good, with her hair curling neatly and her eyelashes long; a white-and-gold sequined jacket sparkled against a satiny white pants suit.
And she sounded good.
She sang a couple of songs, and her voice was up to some classic tricks: she would backflip around a melody, slide hard into a low note, nail a high note and hold it steady without any vibrato.
Her trio of piano, bass and drums was chipper and exact.
Ms.
Anderson made elaborate vocal buildups toward the end of each song.
Sometimes she would hit a note square; other times she would miss it by a hair.
Then, during the third song of her set, the bluesy "Since I Fell for You," something happened.
As she neared the end of a certain phrase, a man sitting at one of the front tables was moved by the spirit of the song and shouted out, "Come on!" Ms.
Anderson heard him.
Her eyes didn't shift, but her voice suddenly changed.
It became looser and tougher.
Technique was replaced by spontaneous inspiration; what had been a pleasant song about the power of love was transformed into a physical and emotional crisis of pain and desire.
Others in the audience shouted, too.
When Ms.
Anderson sang "I get the blues every night," she wasn't just addressing the lines; she was living inside them.


Mielke Shoots for a Course Correction at State Open
Mark Mielke, in his first year as the head professional at Long Island's Lawrence Golf Club, has high hopes that the lessons he has learned from losing will help him win the $65,000 Michelob State Open.
Mielke will go into Thursday's final round of the 54-hole tournament at Hiland Golf Club with a one-shot lead after he tied the course record today with a six-under-par 66, giving him a two-day total of 136.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Samba Ngo  S.O.B.'s
Most musicians who arrive here from Zaire via Paris play an enjoyable but limited style of soukous, the buoyant Congolese pop that joins rumba rhythms to airy, interlaced guitar lines.
Samba Ngo, a guitarist and band leader who was born in the Belgian Congo (now Zaire), has hybridized soukous with more aggressive rhythms from Africa, the Caribbean and the United States.
Mr.
Ngo, who led an eight-member band at S.O.B.'s on Tuesday night, has come up with a world-beat hybrid that doesn't just tickle; it kicks.
Mr.
Ngo worked his way up through soukous bands and then, in Paris, with an African and Caribbean band called M'Bamina.
He moved to California in 1986, and his current group sets the guitar traceries of soukous atop rhythms with the intricacy of African music and the kick of funk.


Cost of Treating AIDS Patients Is Soaring
The cost of treating people infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, is soaring, an international meeting on AIDS was told here today.
The lifetime cost of treating an AIDS patient in the United States is now $102,000, up from $85,333 in 1991, said Dr.
Fred J. Hellinger, a Federal official who has been tracking the costs of caring for people infected with H.I.V. for the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, an arm of the Public Health Service.
The figure was $57,000 in 1988.


Senate Nears an Accord On a Coal-Benefits Issue
Breaking a logjam that had been holding up an ambitious energy bill, Senate Republicans and Democrats negotiated the broad outlines of a compromise on an amendment forcing coal companies to provide medical benefits to 100,000 retired coal workers.
The coal-company provision has attracted strong opposition from the Administration and has threatened to lead to a crippling filibuster.
But by this evening, senior aides of senators on both sides of the issue said that except for a few details, negotiators had reached agreement, essentially guaranteeing a demand by Senator Jay Rockefeller, Democrat of West Virginia, that retired miners and their families not be stripped of benefits they had been promised.


Egypt's Newspapers Muted on an Israel Trip
The Egyptian press, which is often used as a vehicle to criticize Israel, gave a muted response today to President Hosni Mubarak's announcement that he would be willing to travel to Israel.
The proposed visit, which would be the first by an Arab leader since President Anwar el-Sadat's trailblazing trip in 1977, was announced at a news appearance with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel here on Tuesday.


Redskins Believe In Matching Titles
Before capturing Super Bowl XXVI last season, the Washington Redskins had watched the San Francisco 49ers (two straight titles) and then the Giants strut and flash their diamond-filled championship rings.
Veteran Redskins, including Monte Coleman and Jeff Bostic, said the popular notion that the Redskins needed to discard more of their veterans to catch the 49ers and the Giants only made the older guys burn with more envy and more passion.


Compaq Income Rose By 42.9% in 2d Quarter
In a surprisingly robust earnings report, the Compaq Computer Corporation, the personal computer maker that has vividly reshaped its strategy, said today that its net income rose 42.9 percent in the second quarter.
The increase was the biggest for Compaq in more than a year, and some analysts said the results confirmed that the company had regained momentum under Eckhard Pfeiffer, who has cut costs and introduced several lower-priced models since being named chief executive last year.


Gingrich Holds On in Another Nail-Biter
"I'm not that much in favor of real-long late-night events," Representative Newt Gingrich told supporters shortly after 1 o'clock this morning as he finally declared victory in the Republican primary in Georgia's Sixth Congressional District.
But after spending more than $1 million to squeak past an underfinanced challenger for the second election in a row, Mr.
Gingrich may be getting used to them.
He won by 980 votes out of 70,384 cast.


Angels Chief Identifies His Attacker
Curtis Sliwa, the leader of the Guardian Angels street patrol who was shot last month, has identified his assailant from a police photo and the authorities say the suspect is connected to John Gotti Jr., the son of the head of the Gambino crime family.
The officials did not name the man in the photograph.
They also said they were "exploring" the possibility that another man who is also associated with Mr.
Gotti was involved in the attack.


Ernest E. Norris, Advertising Executive, 69
Ernest E. Norris, a former executive vice president and director of the BBDO New York advertising agency, died at the Princeton Club in Manhattan on Monday.
He was 69 years old and lived in John's Island, Fla.
Mr. Norris died of a heart attack, said Philippe Krakowsky, a spokesman for BBDO.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The U.S. plans secret talks with Russia and four other former Soviet republics to settle a dispute over whether sales of uranium to American utilities have been at illegally low prices.  [ Page D1. ]
North American free trade could deliver Mexico from underdevelopment, President Gortari pledges, but the new prosperity would be at best unevenly shared.  [ A1. ]


Music Notes; Remembering Bernstein, With T-Shirts and Mugs
If the world's upmarket cultural institutions have learned one lesson from the world of rock-and-roll, it is that sales of memorabilia can be surprisingly lucrative.
A classical music fan can already buy Carnegie Hall coffee mugs, Mostly Mozart T-shirts and Glyndebourne Festival ballpoint pens, not to mention tote bags, scarfs and sweat shirts bearing the names and symbols of any number of the world's great orchestras and opera companies.
And now there is the Leonard Bernstein collection, a series of items authorized by the estate of the composer and conductor, who died in October 1990.
The items are to be marketed by the Leonard Bernstein Society, which has issued a colorfully illustrated 12-page catalogue.
Included are mugs bearing either Bernstein's signature or part of the score for his 1954 "Serenade" ($12.95), umbrellas decorated with his manuscript and signature ($39.95), packages of writing paper with his signature as a watermark (25 sheets of recycled paper for $19.95) and a variety of T-shirts ($18.95) and sweat shirts ($24.95) that display his profile and signature.


Life After Louganis: A Deluge of Hopefuls
There is that moment at a party when Kent Ferguson is approached and asked, "What do you do?"
"I tell them I'm a diver," said Ferguson, "and they say, 'Oh.' Then they ask me if I know Greg Louganis and I say, 'Yeah, I once beat him.' And they say, 'Wow!' "


Vice President Confronted With Abortion Question in Interview


Growing
IT isn't easy keeping your hands off the pesticides when the flea beetles are hopping around on the eggplants and the Japanese beetles are burrowing into the roses.
Last weekend, the old smokehouse beckoned to me like some chemical fun house.
Come on.
It's so easy.
It's fun.
Spray a little Sevin on the whole garden -- and watch them die!


John Bratby Is Dead; 'Kitchen Sink' Artist and a Novelist, 64
John Bratby, an English painter and writer whose canvases were featured in the 1958 film "The Horse's Mouth," died on Monday outside his home in Hastings, England.
He was 64 years old.
He died of a heart attack while out walking, said his wife, Patti.


Review/Music; A Parade of Quartets
Seen from a certain perspective, the parade of string quartets at the Mostly Mozart Festival this summer is something like a swimsuit competition.
In close succession and with a somewhat more constricted (if not exactly skimpier) repertory than they play the rest of the season, the ensembles stroll on stage, display their endowments, and do their best to leave an impression of perfect balance and extraordinary beauty.
In its first two weeks the festival presented performances by the Cleveland and Tokyo String Quartets, and concerts by the Mendelssohn and American String Quartets are scheduled in the next two weeks.
This week's entrant was the Emerson String Quartet, which played Mozart's Piano Quartet in E flat (K. 493) with Andre Previn, Schubert's Quartet in A minor (D. 804) and Beethoven's Quartet in C (Op. 59, No. 3) at Avery Fisher Hall on Monday evening.


Lopez Would Love U.S. Open in Her Cap
No one could ever accuse Nancy Lopez of being less than a consummate champion, but it is one of the curiosities in golf -- and the most nettlesome fact of her career -- that the biggest winner and most charismatic woman in the game over the last 20 years has never finished first in the United States Women's Open.
At the historic Oakmont Country Club on Thursday, the 35-year-old Lopez will tee off in the biggest championship in women's golf for the 16th time.
The classic site -- where Ben Hogan, Jack Nicklaus and Johnny Miller won United States Opens -- would be a perfect setting for Lopez to attain what would be her most satisfying victory.


Russia's Motor City -- A special report.; Russian Auto Maker Follows A Survival Blueprint: Exports
Among Russia's giant state-owned manufacturing enterprises, the Volga Automobile Associated Works is one of the few that seem likely to survive and prosper in a market economy -- but not by selling cars to the many Russians who want them.
The company's energies and money are focused instead on making cars for sale abroad.
The concentration on exports is readily apparent at the auto works on the outskirts of this Volga River city.
Western machinery packed in huge wooden crates sits outside a nearly finished building where parts will be made for a new model, one with the lines of a Ford Taurus, that the company hopes will be a big seller abroad.
And a factory tour soon reveals that the company's top current export model is made with robots and computerized machine tools, while 20-year-old technology is used on cars sold to Russians.


Cone Uses His Arm, Head and Heart in Victory
The burden has been both physical and emotional, and its load has been enormous.
Pick up spirits, pick up the level of your game, pick up the baseball pitch after pitch, inning after inning.
David Cone has extended his right arm, and shouldered it all -- answering all the demands, absorbing all the innings, doing all the perceptive and relevant talking in the clubhouse afterward.


Tyco Loses Deal On Crash Dummies
The United States Department of Transportation said yesterday that as expected it would end a marketing agreement with Tyco Toys to produce doll versions of of the crash dummies that appear in its public-service commercials to encourage the use of seat belts.
The move comes as the department is introducing more of the humorous commercials that chronicle the adventures of the pair of dummies.


Anchor Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Promises, Promises. How to Keep Them.
It's a big fight -- DONOVAN (RAZOR) RUDDOCK versus LENNOX LEWIS on Oct. 31 in London -- and it took some doing to get it made.
On July 8 in London, it seemed that this World Boxing Council 12-round elimination fight between Ruddock (26-3-1, 19 knockouts) and Lewis (21-0, 18 knockouts), the W.B.C.'s No. 1 and No. 2 contenders, was officially set.
That's when a news conference was convened to announce the match formally.


Amgen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wyman, Ex-CBS Chief, Heads Warburg in U.S.
Thomas H. Wyman, whose 1986 downfall as chairman and chief executive of CBS Inc. began with an attack on the television network from Wall Street, has landed on the other side of the fence.
Mr.
Wyman, 62 years old, yesterday was named chairman of S. G. Warburg &amp; Company, the American arm of S. G. Warburg Group, the British investment firm.
Mr.
Wyman, who has never worked full time on Wall Street before, will succeed H. Nicholas Verey, who is returning to London in the fall as managing director in investment banking.


WHERE TO FIND IT
BRAIDED rugs have been around for a long time, which is one reason these sturdy, all-American floor coverings have an old-fashioned, grandmotherly image.
But aficionados of the braided rug are trying hard to change that impression.
Interior decorators like William Diamond have recently covered a number of stylish wood floors with braided wool.
And Cathy Comins, whose five-year-old company, Art Underfoot, offers custom handcrafted rugs, uses adjectives like sophisticated and chic to describe the braided rug.


The Password Is . . .
How do the computer intruders known as hackers break into huge multimillion-dollar systems?
Even relatively secure computers exchange messages using special programs, which can ask for passwords.
So, like lax guards who let a familiar mail carrier into Fort Knox, a computer lets in a hacker if he has the password identifying him as a program that distributes messages.


The Navy Announces a Plan to Reorganize Itself
Faced with a shrinking budget and dogged by a sex abuse scandal, the Navy today announced a plan to streamline its organization and to end infighting among its branches.
The reorganization plan has been in the works for a long time.
By announcing it with great fanfare today the Navy appeared to be trying to demonstrate that it was moving forward and adjusting to the end of the cold war.


Review/Music; Juggling Lyricism And Fire In Mozart
The Mostly Mozart concert at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday evening was an unusually vivid demonstration that a single orchestra, on a single evening, can play appallingly in one part of the program and with distinction elsewhere.
Gerard Schwarz conducted the program and delivered the bad news first, a slovenly account of Bach's Brandenburg Concerto No. 1.
Performances as brisk as Mr.
Schwarz's are not uncommon these days, and there are performers who regard tempo as a paramount issue.


OLYMPICS: Barcelona '92; Yugoslavia Agrees to Terms Of Restricted Entry in Games
Yugoslavia's uncertain participation in the Barcelona Olympics moved closer to resolution today when its national Olympic committee accepted a conditional invitation to attend the Games.
All that remains is formal agreement by the International Olympic Committee, which is expected to be announced on Thursday, along with a plan to have two republics once part of Yugoslavia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Macedonia, also participate.
That would bring to at least 171 -- a record -- the number of countries and territories competing when the Games open on Saturday.
In all likelihood, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Macedonia would compete as one team.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Watch; Democrats Use TV To Ride Momentum
"It's amazing," Senator Al Gore confessed to Steve Fox as they chatted today on ABC's "Good Morning America" about the crowds lining the Clinton-Gore bus route.
But Mr.
Fox didn't need encouragement.
He was amazed himself, describing the crowds as "astonishing."
By the time the bus pulled into St.
Louis, viewers of "Good Morning America" could hardly tell who was more amazed: the Vice-Presidential nominee or the reporter who interviewed him.
More and More Amazing


Brooklyn Union Gas reports earnings for 12mos June 30


Asian Nations Hope to Settle Dispute Over Islands Peacefully
Foreign ministers from across Southeast Asia, reflecting a growing fear of China's military intentions in the region, called today for a peaceful resolution of disputes over a chain of tiny islands in the South China Sea coveted by Beijing and thought to be rich in oil.
Earlier this year China claimed sovereignty over the entire chain of the Spratly Islands, which it calls Nansha, and in June Beijing announced it had contracted with the Crestone Energy Corporation, of Denver, to explore for oil and gas in the area.


Arvin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 5


Chronicle
BEN VEREEN went home from the hospital yesterday, six weeks after he was critically hurt when he was hit by a truck as he walked along the center of a darkened highway.
Mr.
Vereen, 45 years old, will have to rehabilitation at an undisclosed location on the East Coast, according to a statement released by his publicist, Paul Baker.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Washington Talk; Congress Hunts for Way To Gain a Little Respect
For a number of reasons, most of them pretty good, Congress is feeling unappreciated these days.
Because the Democrats run the place, it's mostly their problem, although the No. 2 House Republican, Newt Gingrich of Georgia, got to share the feeling Tuesday, when an underfinanced former State Senator came within 1,000 votes of denying him renomination in a primary.


Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A sports article on Tuesday about the Summer Olympics misstated a rule governing the soccer competition.
Participants must be no older than 23, not 21.


Beer Dispute Flares Up Between U.S. and Ontario
Ontario brewers are preparing for a new beer battle with the United States after learning that the Bush Administration's interagency Trade Policy Review Group has recommended a 50 percent import duty on Ontario beer.
The action is subject to approval by the Cabinet, and Canadians say they will retaliate in kind.


U.N. Arms Monitors Pulled Back in Iraq; Safety Threat Cited
In the face of threatening demonstrations, the United Nations today withdrew the teams of arms inspectors who have been parked in jeeps outside the Agriculture Ministry for 17 days, seeking entry to search around the clock for ballistic missile plans believed to be hidden inside.
The United States, Britain and France, which have indicated increasing exasperation with President Saddam Hussein's refusal to cooperate with the Security Council's gulf war cease-fire terms, have issued vague threats to use military force against him again if the inspectors continue to be barred.
But with their withdrawal today, the Iraqi leader appeared to have faced down the Council's threats.


Cuba Has a Right To Live in Peace
To the Editor:
"Carrots for Castro" (Op-Ed, July 8) by Wayne Smith, about the future of United States-Cuba relations, displays the arrogance certain Cubanologists and State Department personnel reserve for that "island of little importance." The author assesses the costs of the proposed Torricelli bill to the United States and its allies, not to the Cubans.
Yet food and medical supplies account for nearly three-quarters of the exports to Cuba by United States business subsidiaries threatened by the bill.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  BOOM AT A RUSSIAN CAR PLANT
By channeling its energy into sales abroad, an auto factory on the Volga River has become a model of what goes on at a successful state enterprise that aims to go private.
A1  TRADE PACT TRANSFIGURES MEXICO
After half a century of devout economic nationalism, Mexico has fixed on a proposed free-trade pact as a guarantee of deliverance from underdevelopment.
A1


The Hell Called Somalia
War, drought, the collapse of civil authority: these are the malign toxins that threaten the very existence of Somalia, a husk of a country on the Horn of Africa.
As Jane Perlez of The New York Times reports, a third of Somalia's more than 4.5 million people are likely to starve to death within six months.
A third of a country!
Small wonder a Red Cross worker exclaimed in despair: "Here is hell."
Worse, this hell is man-made, the result of a clan-based civil war waged by roving gangs of teen-agers.
The violence erupted after the overthrow last year of Somalia's longtime strongman, Mohammed Siad Barre, who played on cold war rivalry to amass a huge arsenal of weapons.


Greenspan Comments Help Prices
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher and interest rates declined yesterday, as credit market participants were encouraged by comments from Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, that suggested the Fed remained vigilant in the fight against inflation.
In response to a question during his appearance before a subcommittee of the House Banking Committee, Mr.
Greenspan suggested that in coming years the Fed might lower its money supply growth targets.


Fed Chairman Tries a Balancing Act
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, returning to Congress for a second day to testify about the economy's uncertain future, walked a tightrope again today between pressures from his White House friends in an election year and pressures from within to preserve the Fed's independence.
Economists said Mr.
Greenspan did not step into the domain of the brazenly political in giving his guardedly optimistic forecast.
But in their view he offered a few nuggets that might help the White House, notably his predictions that the economy would gain momentum soon and that the unemployment rate would fall substantially in the next 18 months.


Dismissed Probationary Officer Sues Police
Dorothy McKenna, a 22-year-old New York City probationary police officer, charged today that she had been dismissed because she was the fiancee of Thomas Mascia, a 29-year-old former police officer charged with selling cocaine.
Ms.
McKenna asserted that she had been wrongfully dismissed from her job in the 94th Precinct in Brooklyn on Monday.
She said the Police Department refused to give her any specific reason for her dismissal.


What Is a Team? U.N. Delays Bosnia's Olympians
Relations between the United Nations command and the Bosnian Government, strained for several weeks, took a turn for the worse today when United Nations officials made a last-minute decision to cancel a flight carrying athletes to the Olympic Games in Barcelona.
The United Nations officials said the Bosnian delegation had to be cut to 10 members -- two athletes and eight others -- from 27, before the United Nations would allow a plane carrying the delegation to leave.


Serving No Chip Before Its Time
For months, Silicon Valley has waited, and today it discovered it would have to wait a bit longer.
The Intel Corporation said it would take three months longer than expected to formally introduce the computer chip that is expected to dominate the industry through the middle of the decade.
The chip, which had been due this fall, will not be introduced until early next year, Intel said.
The company hopes the delay will enable it to make a bigger splash with the chip when it does become available.


Civilian Review Board Says the Police Have Nothing to Hide
To the Editor:
As a former New York City police officer, and as an elected official deeply concerned about a growing lack of public confidence in our law enforcement community, I must join Mayor David N. Dinkins in his call to establish an all-civilian complaint review board to examine police brutality charges (news article, June 26).


Topics of The Times; When Readers Really Scream
Over the Fourth of July weekend, Ray March, editor of The Carmel Pine Cone in California, inadvertently left out the crossword puzzle.
Looking back, Ray wistfully remembers that some of the resulting phone calls were not really unpleasant, just indignant.
Like all good editors he blames the lapse on "some inexplicable transition of type and page formatting." Even so, he moved fast to repair the damage.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: A Photo Opportunity; Serendipity or Not, Truck Full of Spuds Becomes a Star
When Lewis Miller, who farms a modest amount of potatoes in Elizabeth, Ind., about 15 miles from here, heard this morning that Bill Clinton and Al Gore were going to come to campaign at a rest stop on Interstate 64, he decided he would go to see them.
He parked his pickup truck in the lot, set up a stool by his rear bumper and sat on it, waiting in the sun.
After some time, eight buses arrived with a great many police and Secret Service cars, and a couple of hundred people got out.


British Experts Accuse Pretoria Police of Bungling
A team of British experts brought in to investigate South African police conduct in the Boipatong massacre last month said this week that they had found no evidence of police collusion in the killings, but wholesale incompetence in the response to it.
In a generally scathing report, the chief investigator, Peter A. J. Waddington, director of criminal justice studies at the University of Reading in England, said the South African Police had failed to prepare for the violence, reacted to it in a way that "allowed this massacre to be perpetrated unhindered," and were "woefully inadequate" in investigating the crime.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ANY child who has spilled a glass of milk or put a dent in the family car will be able to describe the subtle differences in his or her parents' styles of discipline.
One parent is often a bit quicker to yell or to forgive.
One may be more sensitive to appearances and propriety, while the other may focus on results.
Together, the parents form their family's approach to raising children.
But there are some families in which the parents' beliefs about changing children's behavior are so different that their attempts at discipline become more of a problem than a solution.
A child whose mother is strict but whose father is a consistent pushover, for example, receives confusing information about what's expected.
Such fundamental disagreements can lead to difficulties that go well beyond the disputed consequences of staying up beyond an appointed bedtime or borrowing a sibling's clothes without asking.


Corrections
A diagram on the Health page yesterday about how people rate ideal breast size in women included an incorrect label in some copies.
Point F, the second-largest of seven gradations, was the size men believe that men prefer, not the size men believe that women prefer.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Blossom-End Rot
Q.
The fruit on several of my tomato plants has developed leathery-looking bottoms.
What can I do about this? -- Bradford Ludwig, Holyoke, Mass.
A.
Very likely, what you're seeing is a symptom of a disease called blossom-end rot: dark, shrunken tissues that can cover as much as half the bottom of the fruit.
This problem, which affects peppers and squash as well as tomatoes, is not caused by any nasty insect or microscopic pathogen.
It is a result of one or more environmental conditions, among them cool weather during the fruit's early development, moisture fluctuations in the soil and a lack of soil calcium.


Chronicle
MARTIN EDELSTON, founder and president of Boardroom Inc., a New York publisher of consumer and business newsletters and books, is donating a substantial collection of contemporary American photographs to the Art Institute of Chicago, bypassing the New York museums.
Among the works going to Chicago are photographs by BARBARA KRUGER, CINDY SHERMAN, ANSEL ADAMS, DIANE ARBUS, DAVID HOCKNEY, ROBERT MAPPLETHORPE, ROBERT RAUSCHENBERG and ANDY WARHOL.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


INSIDE
AIDS Experts Examine Report of a New Virus
A California researcher said he had isolated a new virus in AIDS-like cases with no sign of H.I.V. infection, but some researchers at an AIDS conference in Amsterdam were skeptical.
The meeting also received a report on the soaring costs of treating AIDS patients.
Page B8.
Peruvian Rebel Offensive
Challenging Peru's President, Shining Path rebels ended a weeklong urban bombing campaign with an "armed strike" that hurt transport and trade in the capital.
Page A11.
Talks on Uranium Sales
Talks are planned to determine if five former Soviet republics are selling low-grade uranium to American utilities at illegally low prices.
Page D1.
G.E.
Settles Fraud Case
General Electric pleaded guilty to criminal fraud charges in the sale of military jet engines and agreed to pay a total of $69 million.
Page D1.
Computer Crimes for Status
One of the most extensive thefts of computer information was born in a rivalry between young hackers, prosecutors say.
Page B1.


Economic Scene; Will George Bush Read Their Lips?
A STIFF tax on gasoline . . . higher income taxes on the rich . . . caps on Social Security . . . tax incentives for business research and investment . . . more money for education and infrastructure . . .
To many analysts, Ross Perot's aborted call for shared sacrifice was the impossible dream that was, indeed, impossible -- tough common sense from a nonpolitician who in the end did not have the stomach to challenge a decade of national self-delusion.
"I might have written it myself," said Benjamin Friedman, a Harvard economist who has been tirelessly proselytizing for deficit reduction since Ronald Reagan inaugurated the decade of what-me-worry economics.


Magic Johnson to Cut Ties With Converse
Magic Johnson said yesterday that he would end his lengthy endorsement relationship with Converse Inc., citing dissatisfaction with the athletic shoe company's advertising and marketing strategies.
"Converse is still living in the 1960's and 70's," Mr.
Johnson told The Associated Press in Monte Carlo, following a practice session of the United States Olympic basketball team.
"They haven't arrived in the 80's and 90's, where advertising and marketing are the keys."


Dinkins Backs Abrams in Run For the Senate
State Attorney General Robert Abrams yesterday won Mayor David N. Dinkins's endorsement for the Democratic Senate nomination just seven weeks before the primary, saying that such backing was "critically important."
Both sides said the Mayor's endorsement had always been Mr.
Abrams's for the asking.
The two have been friends since they sat next to each other as freshman members of the State Assembly in 1965, and Mr.
Abrams's early backing of Mr.
Dinkins's 1989 mayoral candidacy was widely seen as giving him credibility with Jewish voters.
Not Without Risks
But it is arguable whether the Mayor's support will be of similar help with voters for Mr.
Abrams, who has stalled in the polls.
Primary endorsements are relatively rare, and Mr.
Dinkins's decision to choose a candidate was not without risks in a year when female candidates are riding high and when Mr.
Abrams is the only white man in the race.
The Mayor may irk blacks or women or both.


Computer Savvy, With an Attitude; Young Working-Class Hackers Accused of High-Tech Crime
Late into the night, in working-class neighborhoods around New York City, young men with code names like Acid Phreak and Outlaw sat hunched before their glowing computer screens, exchanging electronic keys to complex data-processing systems.
They called themselves the Masters of Deception.
Their mission: to prove their prowess in the shadowy computer underworld.
Compulsive and competitive, they played out a cybernetic version of "West Side Story," trading boasts, tapping into telephone systems, even pulling up confidential credit reports to prove their derring-do and taunt other hackers.
Their frequent target was the Legion of Doom, a hacker group named after a gang of comic-book villains.
The rivalry seemed to take on class and ethnic overtones, too, as the diverse New York group defied the traditional image of the young suburban computer whiz.


Add Basques to the Precursors of Columbus
To the Editor:
"Norsemen in America Flourished Then Faded" (Science Times, July 7) downgrades the Norsemen and does not even mention the role of the Basques in the Columbian saga.
You quote an archeologist from Hunter College saying: "Yes, the Norse were here first . . . so what?" The "so what?" is key to a question that has never been adequately answered: How did Columbus know, that by taking the southern route, he would reach land in exactly 750 leagues?


COMPANY NEWS
BETHLEHEM STEEL CORP., Bethlehem, Pa, signed a letter of intent to sell a coal mine 30 miles south of Pittsburgh to the Rochester and Pittsburgh Coal Co., Indiana, Pa.
FEDERATED DEPARTMENT STORES INC., Cincinnati, submitted an application to to open a federally chartered credit card bank.


House Ethics Panel Sees No Evidence Of Violations in Post Office Scandal
A Congressional panel investigating the House post office said today that it had found no evidence that any members of Congress violated ethics rules.
But it described a postal operation plagued by accounting failures, patronage problems and the gross inflation of mail volume to justify more jobs and a larger budget.
The House voted unanimously to turn over all the material from the five-month investigation to both the House ethics committee and Justice Department investigators, who are conducting a parallel inquiry.
As a practical matter, the report appeared to bring an end to the House's scrutiny of itself in the post office affair.


Driver Is Killed in Collision of Van and Transit Bus


In Free Trade, Mexico Sees An Economy in U.S. Image
When Mexico dreams of itself as a free-trading country, it imagines Monterrey.
Driving through this rugged city in a Mexican-made Ford or a Mexican Chevrolet, the vision comes into focus against the jagged spine of the Sierra Madre.
Past the freshly painted houses of factory workers and the apartment buildings sprouting satellite dishes, the elegant quarters of big industrial companies stare out from a hillside.
Beside the rusted carcass of what was the largest foundry in Latin America, 250,000 square feet of new convention center glow in rainbow colors.
New Commercial Landscape


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
3.15
5.63
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.15
3.18
5.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.24
5.70
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.31
6.35
8.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.61
7.65
8.41
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.58
8.64
9.42
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.20
6.24
7.13
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Port Authority Asserts It Overpaid for Security
The Port Authority may have overpaid as much as half a million dollars over the last two years to a company that provides security services for the World Trade Center because the authority failed to properly monitor its contracts with the company, authority officials said yesterday.
The overpayments to the security company, City Wide Security Services Inc. of Brooklyn, were disclosed the day after the authority said a cleaning company at the Trade Center was able to overcharge dozens of tenants because of a similar lack of scrutiny.


An Investigator Is Held in Plot To Get a Bribe
A staff member of an agency that provides background information about defendants was charged yesterday with posing as a police officer who could fix cases and receiving $15,000 in bribes from a defendant's family.
The authorities said the man, Rafael Lanzot, was arrested shortly after he took $5,000 of the payoff in marked money in his office in Queens Criminal Court.


Amdahl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Let the Trashing Game Begin
As the ultimate basketball scrimmage was winding down, Magic Johnson was doing what all players who abhor losing do: complain about the officiating.
Michael Jordan, he thought, had gotten the benefit of too many calls.


Walter J. Bayer, Judge, 87
Walter J. Bayer, a former judge of the Criminal Court of New York City, died on Monday at the Lawrenceville Nursing Home in Lawrenceville, N.J.
He was 87 years old.
Judge Bayer died of natural causes, said his son, Walter J. Bayer 3d.


Peruvian Guerrillas Test Government With Bombs
Challenging President Alberto Fujimori's military-backed Government, Shining Path guerrillas continued a weeklong urban bombing campaign today with an "armed strike" that hampered transport and trade in the capital.
Enforcing their strike call with terror, guerrillas burned buses, blocked streets with burning tires, killed taxi drivers, and set off a bomb at a school, wounding six children.


Pop and Jazz in Review
24-7 Spyz  Limelight
Jimi Hazel, the guitarist in 24-7 Spyz, did a lot of explaining on Tuesday night.
"As you can tell, this album is filled with messages," he said, talking about the band's new album, "Strength in Numbers" (East-West).
"Crime Story," he announced, is about a policeman who kills an innocent young man; "Purple" is a warning about crack; "Understanding" is about "why cultures can't get along"; "Stuntman" is about "people who stabbed us in our backs."
There's no doubting the band's earnestness.
But the audience was clearly there for the music's impact.
Throughout the set, people climbed up to or were lifted toward the stage, where they would flail-dance and then leap back down toward the dance floor, most of them caught by their cohorts.
The songs, pounding and churning, offered ample propulsion for the happy melee.


Sunset Names New President
The Sunset Publishing Corporation, publisher of Sunset magazine and Sunset Books, named Robin Wolaner as president and chief executive yesterday.
Ms.
Wolaner, 38 years old, is the president and founder of Parenting magazine, which she started in 1987 in a joint venture with Time Inc.
Three years later, Time bought out her 51 percent stake for an estimated $5 million to $10 million.


Agreement Reached On Schools Budget
The Dinkins administration and the Board of Education have reached an agreement that averts cuts to teaching staffs and keeps class sizes from growing without taking money from other municipal agencies, city and school officials said yesterday.
School officials had said last month that they faced a $375 million shortfall in the $7 billion budget under the Mayor's spending plan for the current fiscal year.
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez warned that the city would have to provide more money or the schools would face staff cuts and big increases in class sizes.


4 Banks Plan Automated Teller Setup
The Corestates Financial Corporation of Philadelphia, a leader in the processing of transactions through automated teller machines and electronic payments at merchants' checkout counters, said yesterday that it had agreed to join three competitors to form a new electronic banking network.
The other three banking companies -- Banc One of Columbus, Ohio; PNC Financial of Pittsburgh, and the Society Corporation of Cleveland -- previously operated smaller independent networks of automated teller machines and merchant outlets.
The companies have agreed to share their businesses and formed Electronic Payment Services, to be based in Delaware.


A Second Day of Debate Over the Riverside South Project


Braves Win 11th; Vault Past Reds
Braves 2, Cardinals 0
ST.
LOUIS, July 21 (AP) -- The Braves won their 11th straight game and John Smoltz extended his scoreless-inning streak to 27 as Atlanta moved into first place in the National League West tonight with a 2-0 victory over the St.
Louis Cardinals.


U.S. Aides Split Over Whether to Attack Iraq for Defying U.N.
Senior Administration officials are divided over whether to mount a military strike against Baghdad and, if an attack seems necessary, whether it could be done effectively enough to avoid backfiring in the midst of President Bush's re-election campaign, officials said today.
Publicly, the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said today that Iraq "must be held accountable for its defiance of the U.N. resolutions and for the safety of all U.N. personnel in Iraq, as well as other international personnel providing assistance to the Iraqi people." He added, "We are not ruling out any option, including the use of military force."


Simms Wants To Remain With Giants
Forget anything you hear about Phil Simms wanting to be traded.
The Giants' quarterback, almost 37 years old and no longer the starter, said emphatically today that he wanted to stay with the Giants, that he was content to back up Jeff Hostetler, that this was home and he did not want to leave home.
"I'm going to play here," said Simms at an informal news conference at the Giants' training camp at the Fairleigh Dickinson University campus here.
"I'm not going to play anywhere else this year. I'm not going to be traded. I would have to be willing to go there, and I'm not willing. And I'm not thinking about retiring.


Events: Arts, Crafts and Gardens
Crafts on Park  Lever House, 390 Park Avenue (53d Street); (212) 906-4685.
The Artist-Craftsmen of New York is sponsoring a show including ceramics, textiles, jewelry, glass and photography today through Aug. 13.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
No charge.
Classes and Tours  Horticultural Society of New York, 128 West 58th Street; (212) 757-0915.
Classes will cover subjects like flower potpourri (July 28 and Aug. 4) and summer gardening (Aug. 6 and 13).
There will also be lectures on water gardens (Aug. 19) and environmentally sound gardening (Aug. 25).
Fees range from $15 to $75 ($10 to $62 for members); some programs have an additional materials fee.


Pan Am Jury Awards $9 Million in First Case
A jury awarded $9.22 million yesterday to the family of a corporate lawyer who was one of the 270 people killed in the explosion of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
In the first of a series of trials to determine the amount of damages for the families of victims, the jury gave its verdict on "fair and just compensation" for the family of Robert I. Pagnucco of South Salem, N.Y., who was assistant general counsel of Pepsico Inc.


Keeneland Prices Plunge
Bluegrass owners were singing the blues at the end of the Keeneland Selected Yearling Sales here Tuesday night as prices dropped sharply from buyers worldwide.
Hopes were high for a turnaround year in thoroughbred racing's premier yearling sale, but gloomy reality quickly set in as Monday's opening session brought low prices and a record 38 percent buybacks, in which minimum prices set by owners are not reached.
Owners must then buy back their horses by paying a 5 percent commission.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Denver Broncos
How much is a former sophomore quarterback worth to a team that has John Elway as a starter and an adequate backup in Steve Pelleur?
The Broncos, who had already expended a first-round draft choice on Tommy Maddox of U.C.L.A., provided the rest of the answer yesterday.
They signed Maddox to a four-year, $4.4 million contract that includes a $1.4 million signing bonus.


After Big Call, Waltrip's Crew Chief Quits
DARRELL WALTRIP's crew chief resigned just two days after Waltrip credited him with making the call that broke a 30-race nonwinning streak.
On Sunday, Waltrip won the Miller 500 because of a call he said the crew chief, JEFF HAMMOND, made in the pits at Pocono Raceway in Long Pond, Pa.
On Tuesday, Hammond announced he will become manager of a new Winston Cup team that a Charlotte, N.C., businessman, FELIX SABATES, is forming for driver KENNY WALLACE, who is running the Grand National tour in a Sabates-owned car. (AP)


AMP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Film on Hollywood's Underbelly: How Success Lures Runaways
Take a walk down Hollywood Boulevard.
Lurking near the footprints of the stars and other tourist attractions are teen-agers -- desperate, angry, forlorn.
"They come here in the hope of striking it rich quick," said Marc Rocco, the 28-year-old director of "Where the Day Takes You," a new film about homeless young drifters.
"But the real reason they're here is to escape some form of abuse: sexual, physical, emotional," he said.
"In some cases it's parents not making a place for the kids in their home or not even liking their kids."


One Season Ruined, One Season Revived
Just about a month ago, both the Dodgers and the Mets were about as close to being train wrecks as is possible in major league baseball.
Mammoth winter spending sprees, once praised, seemed the major culprits as the two National League clubs suddenly looked not only bad, but also bloated with monstrous payrolls.
Big bats fell silent, once brilliant pitching staffs looked vulnerable and lost.
And, the teams could not deny, thoughts of evacuation routes out of 1992 and Marshall Plans to rebuild for 1993 began filtering into their executives' minds.


Inspectors Held in Bribe Scheme To Hide Cab Defects in New York
More than than half of New York City's 50 taxi inspectors were charged yesterday with taking bribes to overlook safety and emission violations in yellow cabs, city investigators said.
An 11-month inquiry by the city's Department of Investigation found that the inspectors had devised a variety of illegal methods to allow taxis to pass inspections that the vehicles otherwise would probably have failed, potentially jeopardizing the safety of millions of passengers.


Fancy but Thrifty, for a Cause
THRIFT shops aren't often chic.
They are usually humble, sometimes a little musty.
Not so the Housing Works Thrift Shop, which opens tomorrow at 136 West 18th Street.
The store, designed from scratch to look like an upscale boutique, will turn its proceeds over to Housing Works, a nonprofit Manhattan agency that finds housing for homeless people with AIDS or HIV-related illnesses.
The 1,200-square-foot store is in a former carriage house built in the 1860's.
It will offer things like a Barcelona-type chair ($100), a 1940's oak porch rocker ($150) and mixing bowls ($15 to $40).
The merchandise -- all hand-me-down, some of it elegant -- will be boldly displayed in a pristine setting designed at no cost by Gary Deam, a Manhattan architect.


Prof. F. S. C. Northrop, 98, Dies; Saw Conflict Resolution in Science
F.
S.
C.
Northrop, a protean scholar at Yale University who used the scientific method as his philosopher's stone and influenced politics, culture and the cold war, died yesterday at a nursing home in Exeter, N.H., where he had lived for many years.
He was 98 years old.
Professor Northrop died in his sleep, said his son Stuart J. Northrop.


Ryan Is Sued Over a Show of Hands
A Harris County couple has filed a lawsuit against Texas Rangers pitcher NOLAN RYAN charging that he breached a contract that gave their business the exclusive right to sell likenesses of his hands.
The lawsuit, filed by Bronze Memories Inc., and its owners, ROY and BERNADETTE CHAMPIOMONT of Katy, Tex., names Ryan, MATT MEROLA and Mattgo Enterprises, as defendants.


Bishop Thomas F. Reilly, 83, Dies; Resisted the Trujillo Dictatorship
Bishop Thomas F. Reilly, a Boston-born Roman Catholic prelate who defied the Trujillo dictatorship in the Dominican Republic, died on Tuesday in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
He was 83 years old and had lived at a residence for priests for more than a year.
He died of cancer, his brother said in Washington.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Bus Trip Leaves Bandwagon Air For Time Being
More than 25,000 office workers, labor unionists and curious onlookers jammed the streets for blocks around the city's main public library today to give the Democratic ticket of Gov.
Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore an ecstatic salute at the final stop of their six-day bus tour.
The 1,240-mile trip, which took the campaign through eight states with rallies along superhighways and two-lane rural roads, at times eclipsed its planners' efforts to make it exciting.
While the results were occasionally chaotic, they provided the Democrats with continuing coverage after the intensity of the New York convention.
Promises a Rescue


Market Place; New Lines Hold Hope For Chrysler
FEW new products from Detroit in recent years have provoked as much curiosity on Wall Street as the Chrysler Corporation's midsized models, code-named L/H and set to be sold as the Dodge Intrepid, Eagle Vision and Chrysler Concorde.
Accordingly, several financial analysts took the unusual step this week of attending the L/H debut in Rancho Santa Fe, Calif., held principally for automotive journalists.


COMMITTEE DEFINES U.S. GOAL IN WORLD
Saying the Administration and Congress are failing to meet the complex challenges of the post-cold-war world, a high-level panel of foreign policy experts warned today that a slide into isolationism and protectionism would be disastrous for the American economy and the international prestige of the United States.
"The world is new, but what isn't new is how we are dealing with it," said Winston Lord, a former Ambassador to China and chairman of the 23-member panel assembled by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, which issued its report at a news conference today.


Board Room Battle in Japan Comes to a Quiet Conclusion
A board room coup appeared to come to a surprisingly peaceful conclusion today when Hiroaki Shikanai, who was dismissed on Monday as chairman of a leading newspaper by its board, announced he was resigning all his other positions at the Fujisankei Communications Group, Japan's largest media conglomerate.
The news suggested that for the first time since the privately held group was assembled by Mr.
Shikanai's father-in-law 25 years ago, it would not be run by a member of the founder's family, which is still the key shareholder.


2 TB Cases Prompt Commodities Exchange to Require Testing
Officials of New York City's five commodities exchanges, where two workers have contracted tuberculosis, said yesterday that they would require their 2,800 employees at the Commodities Exchange Center and its exchange floor in the World Trade Center to be tested for the disease.
The testing was a precaution, a spokeswoman for the exchange center, Nachamah Jacobovitz, said, adding that there was no evidence that other workers were infected.


Want to Make a Boy Happy? Give Him a Boogie Board and Some Rapids


NBC Still Aims for the Gold in Its Olympic Sales
If selling spots for the 1992 Summer Olympics were an Olympic event like a footrace, NBC would find the finish line to be tantalizingly close.
But whether its performance was of gold-medal caliber would still be up to the judges.
The network has sold 96 to 97 percent of the $500 million worth of commercial time it has intended to make available during its 161 hours of Olympic coverage, which begins with the opening ceremonies on Saturday and continues through Aug. 9.
That translates into upward of $480 million, a notable achievement in a daunting, recessionary climate plagued with slackened demand from advertisers to sponsor sports programming.


Re-Regulation of Cable Is Likely to Pass House
In the marathon battle in Congress over re-regulating cable television, a campaign waged on behalf of consumers has largely depended on the political power of big business.
On Thursday, the House of Representatives is expected to pass a tough bill that would force many cable systems to roll back the prices of basic programming.
The bill could also include provisions that would erode the monopoly franchises that cable companies enjoy in most cities.


Powwows: Path of New Traditions
Jimmy Boy Dial moved to New Jersey from South Carolina feeling "like the only Indian in town." But that was before he started going to powwows.
Five years later, powwows, where members of different tribes gather to socialize and celebrate their heritage, are Mr.
Dial's life.
Most weekends, he and his wife, Suzanne -- whom he met at a local powwow -- follow the powwow trail, taking to the road in a 37-foot motor home he bought especially for such trips.
He also publishes a monthly newsletter listing and reviewing East Coast powwows that he says has more than 1,000 subscribers in 39 states.
This summer, Mr.
Dial, a civilian-in-command for the Navy Military Sealift Command, has also organized three powwows, one in New Jersey last month and two coming up this weekend and next in eastern Pennsylvania.


Add Basques to the Precursors of Columbus; Child of the Centuries
To the Editor:
I wish to add background information to "Case for Other Pre-Columbian Voyagers" (Science Times, July 7), which reminds us that the feat of Columbus was one more step in the adventurous and evolutionary nature of the human being.


Black Heritage Celebrated in Reunions Across America


Foreign Affairs; From Bush to Shove
Saddam Hussein's defiance of U.N. inspection rights in Iraq has put George Bush out on the shakiest limb of his Presidency.
If Mr.
Bush does nothing and allows Saddam to get away with violating U.N. cease-fire terms, he calls his foreign policy leadership into question and mocks his own finest hour, the Persian Gulf war.


No Headline
He's a lot better than most people seem to think, and he's a very good friend of most of us, but the public perception is just not very good. -- SENATOR WARREN B. RUDMAN, on Vice President Quayle.  [ A20:4. ]


AMR Is Offering 9% Debentures
The AMR Corporation, the holding company for American Airlines, offered $350 million worth of 20-year noncallable debentures yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The 9 percent securities were priced at $100, or par, 1.38 percentage points over the prevailing yield on the Treasury's 8 percent bonds of 2021 at the time of pricing.


Bankers Trust N.Y. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Topics of The Times; If Elected, I Promise . . .
If anyone doubts that Americans are a litigious people, note the case of Alexander v.
Perot, filed this week in the U.S.
District Court in Miami.
Michele Alexander, chairwoman of a group called Citizens for Responsible Government, has sued Ross Perot for reneging on his promise to run for President.
She asks the court to force him to run, or to provide other relief.
The idea of forcing someone to run for President who doesn't want to is far-fetched on its face, and patently unenforceable.
But some experts on contract law say there might be grounds for money damages if, relying on Mr.
Perot's word, volunteers had spent their own money to get his name on the ballot.


Black &amp; Decker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Photo Mystery at U.N.L.V. Solved
The anonymous source who provided the photos that led to the resignation of the University of Nevada-Las Vegas basketball coach, JERRY TARKANIAN, has come forward, 14 months after providing the photos to a newspaper.
LAMONT SUDBURY, an architectural designer, said he obtained the photos by accident from the former wife of a convicted sports fixer, RICHARD PERRY.
The photos, published by The Las Vegas Review-Journal in May 1991, showed Perry in a hot tub and playing basketball with three former Rebel players, ANDERSON HUNT, DAVID BUTLER and MOSES SCURRY.


G.E. Guilty Plea in U.S. Aid to Israel
The General Electric Company pleaded guilty yesterday to four Federal criminal fraud charges for its role in a scandal involving the sale of military jet engines to Israel.
General Electric entered the guilty pleas at a hearing in United States District Court in Cincinnati as part of an agreement with the Justice Department calling for the company to pay $9.5 million in fines for the criminal charges and $59.5 million to settle a related civil case.


The Best Buyer for Russia's Uranium
Russia has hung a "for sale" sign on the uranium that will be extracted from its dismantled nuclear warheads.
Private U.S. companies want to buy some.
So do nuclear wannabes.
But the proper purchaser of first resort is the American Government.
It would be money well spent.
Russia could use the hard currency.
And taking the material off the market would insure that it won't be used for bomb-making, by Russia or anyone else.


Nicaragua's Government Astir as Police and Ex-Troops Trade Fire
The police came under a military-like assault from demobilized soldiers on Tuesday night near key public buildings as the Government of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro struggled to defend itself against critics and opponents.
The 20-minute exchange of fire near presidential offices and the National Assembly, in which 14 police officers were wounded, pitted two elements controlled by the opposition Sandinista Front against each other.


Giants Talk to Hornets' Owner
The Charlotte Hornets' owner, GEORGE SHINN, has talked with the San Francisco Giants' owner, BOB LURIE, about the possible purchase of the National League club, a Hornets spokesman said yesterday in Charlotte, N.C.
SPENCER STOLPEN, president of the Hornets and Shinn Enterprises, said Shinn and Lurie talked on the phone briefly last week and plan follow-up conversations in the next few weeks.
Shinn has often said he wants to own a baseball franchise and has hinted if he bought an existing team he might move it to St.
Petersburg, Fla. (AP)


Tough Stance by a U.S. Prosecutor in Questioning Milken
Federal prosecutors got tough with Michael R. Milken yesterday as they sought to show a Federal jury in Manhattan that an investment partnership he created at Drexel Burnham Lambert in 1985 was nothing more than an illegal front through which Mr.
Milken enriched the best customers of his dismantled junk bond empire.
Kenneth Vianale, an assistant United States attorney, pressed Mr.
Milken, seeking to get him to admit that those who profited from the partnership were actually bribed.


Safety Chief and 2 Aides Resign After Accusations
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez accepted the resignations of the three top officials in charge of school security yesterday after they were accused of illegal real-estate deals, pension-rule abuses and hiring relatives.
Promptly after returning from a trip to Florida, Mr.
Fernandez met separately Tuesday night with Bruce A. Irushalmi, executive director of the school system's 2,500-person security force, and his two aides, Henry R. Murphy and Joseph Capalbo, to hear their response to the allegations against them.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi and McEnroe Advance in Toronto  The third-round conquest for the Wimbledon champion, Andre Agassi, was a bit more difficult than John McEnroe's but both earned quarterfinal berths at the $1.25 million Player's Canadian Open yesterday in Toronto.
The second-seeded Agassi beat Greg Rusedsi of Canada, 6-4, 6-1.
The fifth-seeded McEnroe, a Wimbledon singles semifinalist and the doubles champion, defeated a fellow American, Jonathan Stark, 6-0, 6-2.
Top-seeded Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia, ranked fifth in the world and a French Open finalist but overshadowed by the more famous names here, beat 15th-seeded Richey Reneberg, 6-4, 6-2.
Other winners were third-seeded Ivan Lendl, who beat an Australian, Simon Youl, 6-1, 6-4, and fourth-seeded Aaron Krickstein, a 6-4, 7-6 (7-4), victor over Henrik Holm of Sweden.
Korda, who won last week in Washington, will meet Wally Masur of Australia.
Agassi will play eighth-seeded Amos Mansdorf of Israel, sixth-seeded MaliVai Washington will face Krickstein and 12th-ranked Lendl will face 18th-ranked McEnroe in their 36th career meeting.
Lendl leads the series 20-15. (Reuters)


Big and Little Reunions For Black Americans
THEY stood in the doorways of the Stop 1 Supermarket, the Red Hook Chinese Kitchen, Freddy's Fast Cleaners and other small businesses, smiling, waving and looking delighted and puzzled as the 28-piece marching band strutted and danced along Van Brunt Street in Brooklyn at noon on Saturday.
They waved, too, at the matriarch sitting in the horse-drawn carriage that followed, who acknowledged their greetings with a gracious nod and a flutter of a hand reminiscent of Britain's Queen Mother.
Most of the crowd had no idea what the woman, the people marching behind the carriage or the black and gold uniformed band from the Jackie Robinson Center in Brooklyn were doing on their street.
But before the entourage had reached the entrance to Coffey Park, word had spread among the curious.
The procession was a prelude to what was believed to be the biggest African-American family reunion ever held in Red Hook.


Jets' Move Gives Byrd More Rushing Room
As the Jets' right defensive tackle the last three seasons, Dennis Byrd sometimes found the lane to the quarterback cluttered with flying bodies, most of them crashing into him.
He has been given a new route.
With defensive end Marvin Washington recovering from off-season shoulder surgery, Byrd has been shifted to left end, where the Jets hope he will find more freedom and fewer obstacles.


Allison Feels Better and Wants to Race
DAVEY ALLISON, hospitalized after a frightening crash at Pocono last Sunday, was feeling much better yesterday and may even attempt to race until the first caution flag in Sunday's Diehard 500 at Talladega, Ala., his team spokesman said.


Going 2 Out of 3 Isn't Bad (Unless You're a Yankee)
There were three games, two victories and a certain sense of rejuvenation to the Yankees, but it was still not enough to satisfy Manager Buck Showalter.
He wanted a sweep.
Instead, on a bright and warm afternoon, the Yankees wasted a four-run lead and lost to the Oakland Athletics, 8-5, today, leaving afterward for Seattle and the final stage of their three-city trip.


Review/Television; How Ozzie and Archie Influenced America
Television families, from the Cleavers to the Kramdens to the Conners, have been much kidded and commended over the years, but questions remain.
To what extent do they reflect reality?
To what extent have some reflected an ideal that few American homes have matched?
What is their influence, if any?
Such matters, raised anew by Vice President Dan Quayle's attentions to "Murphy Brown," are treated in "Through the Looking Glass: Television and the Family," a brisk hourlong documentary that resolves none of the questions but touches the concerns behind them.
Once again, sitcoms of the 1950's, like "Ozzie and Harriet" and "Father Knows Best," are mocked as "squeaky-clean, picture-perfect" visions of America.
The reminders of these all-white, middle-class, sub urban households, with two parents, backyards, cars and the passing follies of adolescence that were always resolved in a half-hour minus commercials, are put in context by the host, Jim Jensen.
They were made obsolete in the 1960's by demographic changes and by transformations in the nation's attitudes toward race and sex.
Clips from the mild old shows seem as dated as the non-Japanese automobiles in their driveways.


'La Mancha' Is Closing
"Man of La Mancha," a revival of the 1965 musical by Dale Wasserman, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Marquis Theater, 1535 Broadway, at 45th Street.
The matinee of the show, directed by Albert Marre, with music by Mitch Leigh and lyrics by Joe Darion, will be its 108th regular performance; it had 28 previews.


Bush on the Attack But Charges Against Clinton and Gore Could Raise His Own Negative Image
President Bush has wasted no time attacking the Democratic nominee, accusing Gov.
Bill Clinton this week of peddling birth control pills to teen-agers without their parents' consent and encouraging children to "haul their parents into court."
Today, Marlin Fitzwater, Mr.
Bush's spokesman, accused Senator Al Gore, Mr.
Clinton's running mate, of selling out the economy to environmentalists and making America look bad before the world.


Oakley Takes Issue With Offer to Grant
The Knicks had set up the news conference as an image-polishing event, but Charles Oakley, the designated spokesman, used the opportunity to tarnish the wisdom of the club's recent attempt to acquire Harvey Grant.
Oakley was expected to confine his remarks to his work with the Creative Arts Workshop, the club's high-school mentor program, but he wandered from the game plan by venturing into the Knicks' frontcourt and front office.


Books of The Times; How to Make a Fast Buck Without Really Dying
um Punch By Elmore Leonard  297 pages.
Delacorte Press. $21.
Trombone  By Craig Nova  247 pages.
Grove Weidenfeld. $20.95.
Once again, as in Elmore Leonard's previous novel "Maximum Bob," the pivotal character in "Rum Punch," Mr.
Leonard's 30th work of fiction, is a woman.
This suggests that the author of such crime thrillers as "Stick," "LaBrava" and "Glitz" is intent on continuing down his path away from stories starring macho men compelled to seduce every woman who falls in their way.
And this time the experiment works, because unlike Kathy Diaz Baker in "Maximum Bob," Jackie Burke in "Rum Punch" is surrounded by a strong supporting cast involved in an intricately compelling plot.


U.S.-Russia Uranium Talks Seen
The United States will hold secret talks with Russia and four other former Soviet republics to settle a dispute over whether the republics have been selling low-grade uranium to American utilities at illegally low prices, Administration officials said today.
At stake is whether the Energy Department will be able to buy weapons-grade uranium from Russian nuclear warheads for peaceful uses, as Russia has offered.
The American uranium industry, in a longstanding lawsuit, is trying to make all uranium from the republics subject to the prohibitive duties that the Commerce Department imposed May 29 on low-grade imports from the republics.


2 Killed and 3 Hurt In Brooklyn Crash
Two teen-agers were killed and three young people injured when the stolen car they were riding in veered off Kings Highway in Brooklyn and slammed into a tree last night.
The two dead youths, a 17-year-old boy who was driving and a 14-year-old girl at his side, were not immediately identified by the police, pending notification of the families, said a police spokesman, Detective Joseph McConville.
Three other young men, 16, 17 and 21 years old, none critically injured, were taken to Kings County Hospital, said a hospital spokesman, Michael Leibowitz.


ON THE ROAD WITH: K. D. Lang; Patsy Cline Meets Judy Garland
K.
D.
LANG is the type of politically radical vegetarian lesbian defender of wildlife you'd want to bring home to mother.
Wholesome, endearing, strident and polemical, she has a golden voice that could fill the Grand Canyon.
So could some of her opinions.
Quiet but not shy, she was sickened when she learned that a baboon's liver had been used to save the life of a man.


U.N. Chief Rejects Plan to Collect Bosnian Arms
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali has rejected a plan, already approved by the Security Council, for United Nations forces to locate and collect heavy weapons from three warring factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In a report issued today, the Secretary General cited difficulties posed by the incessant fighting, but objected most stongly to procedural issues surrounding an agreement reached in London last week by the three sides.


Sports of The Times; These Games Will Begin On High Note
Put on your walking shoes, we're going to the Summer Games.
These Games are not just for the athletes and they are not just for the fans with tickets.
The most popular event in Barcelona this week is climbing Montjuic, and feeling part of these Summer Games.
On Saturday, the games will be officially opened in Estadi Olimpic, where the track and field will take place later.
Also perched near the top of Montjuic are the swimming and diving pools, and an airy modern arena for volleyball, gymnastics and team handball.


Executive Changes
BP AMERICA, Cleveland, named Ron A. McGimpsey, senior vice president, to the additional post of chief financial officer.
BIZMART INC., Arlington, Tex., named Monty L. Jackson advertising director and Marc Metteauer creative director.


New Virus Said to Cause a Condition Like AIDS
Scientists in California reported Wednesday that they had discovered a new virus in a woman suffering from an AIDS-like condition, but the announcement was greeted with skepticism at the international AIDS conference here.
The discovery was reported by a team headed by Dr.
Sudhir Gupta, an immunologist at the University of California at Irvine.
He said he had found the virus in a 66-year-old woman and her 38-year-old daughter.


Alberto-Culver Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COURT IS ASKED TO APPOINT TRUSTEE FOR BRANIFF BREAKUP
The United States Trustee's Office, a unit of the Justice Department, has asked a bankruptcy court to replace the principals of Braniff International Airlines with a court-appointed trustee to oversee the disposition of Braniff's assets.
The carrier, which abruptly suspended operations July 2, had operated under Chapter 11 since last August.


In Milford, Finding Faith in a Maple Tree
The 80-foot-tall maple tree on Hawley Avenue hasn't changed much over the years.
There are new leaves, of course, in the spring and bare branches in the fall.
And there is the spot where a limb came off when Hurricane Gloria blew through in 1985.
It was that spot that Claudia Voight was looking at Monday when she said she saw something new: a face that looked to her like the face of Jesus Christ.


Large Recall of School Buses Is Ordered to Fix Fuel Tanks
The nation's largest manufacturer of school buses said yesterday that it would recall tens of thousands of them because of Government tests showing that the fuel tanks could rupture, producing a fire hazard in a collision.
The company, Navistar International Corporation, said it was complying with a request from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in making the recall.
But the company, based in Chicago, questioned whether all 185,000 buses that it has manufactured since 1978 have to be recalled.
It suggested that only 24,000 would need to be recalled for repairs because of the size of the gasoline tank.


Review/Dance; A Procession of Pilobolus Successes
Part yogi, part pretzel, Adam Battelstein tumbles, twists and rolls exuberantly across the stage in "Pseudopodia," one of the seven pieces that the Pilobolus Dance Theater presented on Tuesday night in a genuine hit parade of its works from the 1970's.
Choreographed in 1974 by Jonathan Wolken, "Pseudopodia" is faithful to the innovative company's core idea: mainly, that anthropomorphic shapes can flow out of gymnastic energy and that an audience can empathize with humans who look like creatures.
Or is it creatures who act like humans?


No Headline
Actually, I'm a little envious of Murphy Brown.
At least she's guaranteed of coming back this fall. -- VICE PRESIDENT QUAYLE.  [ A12:4. ]


AIDS-LIKE ILLNESS TO GET CLOSE LOOK
Health officials at the international AIDS meeting here said today that they would intensify research into a mysterious condition in which patients develop an AIDS-like illness but show no evidence of infection with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
As yet, they said, there is no reason to believe that a new AIDS virus is on the loose.
But an alarm has been raised around the world by reports of about 30 of the cases.
In addition, a California scientist reported that he had discovered a new virus in a woman suffering from the condition.


The Art Market
Wishing and Hoping
Just how permanent is the Guggenheim Museum's permanent collection?
It's a question many art-world insiders are asking, now that all the extensive publicity and glittering parties surrounding the museum's recent reopening are over.
While the need to expand the space available to display the large permanent collection was the reason most often cited for the museum's $45 million renovation and expansion, the first exhibition in the new galleries, "Masterpieces From the Guggenheim Collection," includes many works that the museum does not, in fact, own, and a few that it probably never will.
A number of wall labels read: "On Extended Loan."


COMPANY NEWS
SUZUKI MOTOR CORP., Japan's largest mini-car producer, said it and SEAT S.A., a Spanish member company of Germany's Volkswagen A.G., had agreed to develop a mini-car.
CRAIN COMMUNICATIONS INC.  bought RCR Publications Inc., the publisher of RCR Radio Communications Report in Denver, from Charles W. Cleworth.
Terms were not disclosed.


Arab Militant Is Slain in Beirut
A key aide of Abu Nidal, the radical Palestinian guerrilla leader, was shot dead in a Beirut refugee district today.
The aide was Walid Khaled, spokesman for the Fatah Revolutionary Council, the Palestinian faction opposing the leadership of the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat.
Mr.
Khaled was found dead inside his white Mercedes at the entrance of Mar-Elias in southern Beirut.


On Stage, and Off
Next Season at Second Stage
Carole Rothman, the artistic director of the Second Stage, has announced her new season.
First up is "A . . . My Name Is Still Alice," the topical musical revue that recently played six weeks at the Old Globe Theater in San Diego.
The show was conceived and directed by Joan Micklin Silver and Julianne Boyd, who created the original "A . . . My Name is Alice" in 1984.
Among the numbers in the new version, Ms.
Rothman says, are "The Clarence Thomas Home for Unwed Mothers" and "It Ain't Over," about sex and the older woman.
Contributors to the revue include Steve Tesich, David Zippel, Carol Hall, Amanda McBroom, Lucy Simon and Susan Birkenhead.


Corrections
An article on July 6 about Croatian nationalism in Bosnia and Herzegovina misstated the percentage of Bosnians who are Muslim.
It is 44, not 51.


Loral Joins Thomson in Bid for LTV Unit
The Loral Corporation, a leading military electronics concern, said today that it had agreed to join with Thomson C.S.F. of France in a radically altered bid by Thomson to acquire the missile unit of the LTV Corporation for $260 million.
Thomson withdrew its $300 million offer for the missile unit earlier this month after the Administration indicated it would reject the bid because of concerns that the French Government, a majority owner of Thomson, might obtain United States military secrets.





Mosquito Is Linked to Deadly Virus, Worrying Health Officials
For the first time since the feared Asian tiger mosquito entered the continental United States in 1985, scientists have found it to be carrying a serious disease that could be transmitted to humans: Eastern equine encephalitis, a relatively rare but often fatal brain affliction.
In the seven years since the spectacularly striped mosquito first appeared in Houston, public health officials have feared that it would become a major new carrier of infectious diseases in this country.
It is believed to have arrived in water in used tires that had been shipped from Japan for the American recapped-tire market.


Suleiman Franjieh, Lebanese Ex-Chief, Dies at 82
Suleiman Franjieh, a stern Christian warlord who was President of Lebanon from 1970 to 1976, died early yesterday in the hospital of the American University in Beirut, which he entered three weeks ago.
He was 82 years old and lived in the northern town of Zgharta, southeast of Tripoli.
He died of acute pneumonia and had heart and stomach ailments, an employee of the university said.
The employee did not identify himself.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on July 10 about an announcement by Esprit de Corp., a women's wear company, rendered three names incorrectly.
The company's chief executive is Fritz Ammann.
The Dutch designer who was a candidate to succeed Susie Tompkins as creative director is Ronaldus Shamask.
Esprit's spokeswoman is Liz Mazurski.
In addition, the article misidentified the company's chairman.
He is Isaac Stein, not Mr.
Ammann.


Kidnapping and 'Taxes' Transform Guerrilla Inc.
Hunched over computers confiscated from a guerrilla group here, detectives recently discovered a surprising electronic file: a list of 239 Peruvian businessmen forced to contribute "war taxes" and a directory of 2,500 additional candidates for extortion or kidnapping.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union and the near-bankruptcy of Cuba, South America's orphaned guerrilla groups survive by honing their skills at local fund-raising.
Several groups in Peru and Colombia might rightfully be named "Guerrilla Inc." And the sophistication of their intelligence-gathering apparatus testifies to the seriousness of their pursuits, with some keeping detailed files on the finances, personal lives and movements of local executives.


I.O.C. Plays Politics and Delays Vote On U.S. Spot
The current surge of the Democratic Party in the United States played a major role today in a decision by the International Olympic Committee to delay naming a second American to the I.O.C.
The postponement until next year was a blow to William Hybl, the president of the United States Olympic Committee, whom U.S.O.C. officials regarded as the leading candidate.


Market Place; Newspapers Start To Rebuild Profits
SECOND-QUARTER earnings reports from newspaper companies paint a picture that seems so rosy as to be hot pink.
For instance, the Gannett Company's earnings per share increased 13 percent; net income at The Washington Post Company was up 35 percent; Knight-Ridder Inc. reported an 11 percent increase in earnings; net income at The New York Times Company jumped to $15.2 million from $5.4 million, and Dow Jones &amp; Company said net income for the quarter rose 25 percent.


Books of The Times; A Woman in Search of Her Past and Herself
Possessing the Secret of Joy  By Alice Walker 286 pages.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $19.95.


Never Daunted by a Little Water on a Busy Day


TV Weekend; Gielgud, His Own Kind of Royalty
Sir John Gielgud is introduced tonight on PBS's "Talking With David Frost" as "the greatest theatrical actor alive today." Mention of the greatest anything often smacks of exaggeration, but not in this instance.
Sir John is the last of a legendary acting group that included Laurence Olivier, Edith Evans, Ralph Richardson and Peggy Ashcroft.
Talk about British royalty.
Now 88 years old, Sir John sits facing Mr.
Frost on the stage of London's restored Playhouse, a theater he actually never played.
Wearing a brown suit, cream vest, white shirt, tie and handsome jade ring, the actor looks remarkably fit.
And as becomes clear in the course of a conversation that ranges back to his childhood, he is enviably lucid.
The manner is thoroughly British: bemused, amusing, artfully self-deprecating.


Report Praises Tough Testing At Beaches
More than a third of the beaches closed for health reasons in the United States last year were in the New York City region.
However, the closings reflected stringent monitoring of waters and a readiness to close contaminated beaches rather than unusually poor water quality, an environmental study released yesterday said.
The 54-page study, done by the Natural Resources Defense Council, a private environmental group, found uneven practices for examining water cleanliness in 22 states -- all of the states with coastlines except Alaska -- and recommended a national policy to test water and close beaches that pose a health threat. 4 States Test Regularly


ISRAELIS CALL OFF FUTURE DWELLINGS IN OCCUPIED LANDS
Israel's new Government stopped all planned construction for Jewish settlers in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip today, but said thousands of apartments and houses already started would be completed.
The decision means that more than 8,700 new housing units in progress will be built in the territories while nearly 6,700 that were on the drawing boards will be frozen.
Those include many for which construction contracts were signed but real work not begun.


Steinbrenner to Miss The Big Announcement
The long-awaited but anticlimactic announcement on George Steinbrenner's baseball future is scheduled for today.
Barring a last-minute snag -- the Steinbrenner saga has been filled with snags -- Commissioner Fay Vincent will announce that the owner can return to active duty with the Yankees next March 1.
Although the timing of the announcement was based on the commissioner's schedule this week, it comes on the eve of the start of the Barcelona Olympics, which have occupied much of Steinbrenner's time in his 23-month absence from the Yankees.
Steinbrenner is a vice president of the United States Olympic Committee and is in Barcelona with the United States delegation.


The Iconoclast as Icon: Filling Lenny's Shoes
The stream of consciousness was oddly familiar.
So was the wicked irreverence.
And even the performer, restlessly stalking the stage, a compact dark young man with a shadowy beard, stirred the memory.
"What could you do to build a girl singer?" he asked.
"The chick that comes out that makes them all go, 'Look at that! Gown they've done, hairstyle they've done, voice they've done. What could you do?"


Let's Do Some of This After the Convention Too
To the Editor:
Don't get me wrong.
I'm as glad as the next New Yorker that we put on our best face for the Democratic National Convention.
But why can't some of the great events we came up with be repeated every year?
Today, for example, I had a memorable lunch at elegant Le Perigord for $19, courtesy of the delegate dine-out program.
This evening, I strolled along Fifth Avenue, which was turned briefly into a pedestrian mall, with every museum along Museum Mile free to the public, and street artists and musicians performing on each corner.
This, too, was organized for the convention.


Economic Memo; Yeltsin Walks Path That F.D.R. Once Trod
President Boris N. Yeltsin, as did Franklin D. Roosevelt, has only a layman's knowledge of economics.
Yet like F.D.R. he is presiding over a historic economic reorganization.
And like Roosevelt, Mr.
Yeltsin is groping for the right mix of free markets and government intervention to make Russia's economy function and prosper.
Yevgeny Yasin, director of the Russian League of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs, sees considerable similarities between the leaders.
"Where the two men converge is on the question of how much government help any market-oriented, capitalist economy must have," he said.


Robbers Take Gems and Cash At Gunpoint
The owner of a Los Angeles jewelry company and seven employees were robbed of $400,000 in gems and $250,000 in cash yesterday by two gunmen just as they were preparing to leave a midtown Manhattan hotel, the police said yesterday.
The eight robbery victims had participated in a trade show in Manhattan that ended on Wednesday.
As they stepped into the hallway yesterday morning, the waiting gunmen forced them back into the owner's room, taped their hands and mouths and fled with the jewelry and money, the police said.


Youths and Police Clash in Britain





Robbers Take Gems and Cash At Gunpoint
The owner of a Los Angeles jewelry company and seven employees were robbed of $400,000 in gems and $250,000 in cash yesterday by two gunmen just as they were preparing to leave a midtown Manhattan hotel, the police said yesterday.
The eight robbery victims had participated in a trade show in Manhattan that ended on Wednesday.
As they stepped into the hallway yesterday morning, the waiting gunmen forced them back into the owner's room, taped their hands and mouths and fled with the jewelry and money, the police said.


Triplecast Still Hopes To Attract Subscribers
Triplecast.
Triplecast.
Triplecast.
I'm so awash in Triplecast commercials I'm writing in Triplicate.
I can't avoid the Olympics Triplecast's $40 million propaganda campaign to persuade Americans to pay pay pay $125 for 15 days of commercial-free Olympics action on three channels.
The average cable subscriber will see eight or nine Triplecast commercials this week.
I'm sure I've seen a hundred.
"LIVE WITH NO INTERRUPTIONS. CHOOSE WHAT YOU WANT TO WATCH WHEN YOU WANT TO WATCH IT."


U.N. Chief Mired in Dispute With Security Council
In the midst of juggling efforts to solve several volatile disputes around the world this week, the Security Council has become mired in a dispute of its own with Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali that diplomats here said was one of the sharpest in recent memory.
The issue involved Bosnia and Herzegovina, where the United Nations has been involved for some time, but the underlying problem seemed to be a fundamental difference between the Secretary General and member nations over the direction, financing and personality of the United Nations.


Review/Architecture; Steel and Backbone in Hard Times
LEAVE it to the Municipal Art Society to mount a tasteful political protest.
Last week, when the Democrats were in town, the members of this century-old organization of civic do-gooders didn't surround Madison Square Garden with bullhorns or scrawled posters.
Instead they occupied the decorous Urban Center Galleries and opened a dignified rally of a show.
Its theme is New York's tradition of great public works; its purpose is to stimulate ideas for reviving that tradition.
"Steel, Stone and Backbone," which runs through Sept. 19, is a protest against recessionary thinking.
It's a strike against the idea that in hard economic times people should lower their expectations about what kind of city they want to live in.
In fact, the point of the show is to offer historical proof to the contrary.
When the going gets tough, the tough get ambitious about architecture.
Much of the New York that is most admired -- its water and transportation systems, housing, cultural institutions -- emerged from periods of economic crisis.


Vowing A Fight, Florio Names An Advocate
Vowing to fight the Republican-controlled Legislature to restore full power to the office, Gov.
Jim Florio nominated Zulima V. Farber today as the state's Public Advocate and Public Defender.
"She's got a tough job ahead of her," Mr.
Florio said in introducing his choice to succeed Wilfredo Caraballo, who announced his resignation on July 1, the same day a Republican budget took effect, stripping the Office of the Public Advocate of much of its power.


Reviews/Art; Life Styles of the Rich and Famous
The 60-odd paintings in "An Album of 19th-Century Interiors: Watercolors From Two Private Collections," on view in the Frick Collection's basement gallery through Aug. 23, are depictions of rooms in the homes of the European rich and famous of a century and a half ago.
Usually commissioned by the owner of a house after the premises had been redecorated, the watercolors were placed in albums to be handed around among friends and, in a few cases, passed down through generations like a family Bible.
Around 1850, paintings of interiors were replaced by photographs, and the Frick exhibition features a rare example of a watercolor album that has survived intact.
It should be said right away that the esthetic stature of these paintings is ambivalent; they fall under the category of decorative rather than fine art.
Intended as documents, they demanded little more of their artists than an observant eye and a decent command of perspective.
Sometimes they didn't get even that.
While the best painters show a flair for audacious touches -- for example, a floating shaft of sunlight like an opaque diagonal column through a royal bathroom -- a few seem not to have a grip on the most basic optical problems.
In the "Salon in the Governor's Residence, Hermannstadt," attributed to M. Sekim, the damask-covered walls evidence a surreal warp, and the patterned carpet seems to vibrate uncontrollably.


Barnes Gets Go-Ahead On International Art Tour
The trustees of the Barnes Foundation in Merion, Pa., have won their drawn-out fight to allow about 90 of the foundation's works by such artists as Renoir, Degas, Monet and Cezanne to go on tour.
Judge Louis D. Stefan of Montgomery County Orphans' Court issued a decision on Wednesday under which the reclusive, 70-year-old institution may break the restrictions -- established by its founder, Dr.
Albert C. Barnes -- on showing its paintings outside its own walls.
But just this once.


May Rudin, 95, a Philanthropist And New York Real-Estate Owner
May Rudin, philanthropist and matriarch of one of Manhattan's real-estate dynasties, died yesterday at her East Side home.
She was 95 years old.
She died after a brief illness, her family said.


At 39, Larrieu Smith Gets Nod to Carry Old Glory
Francie Larrieu Smith of Dallas, a 39-year-old runner, will carry the American flag for the United States delegation at the opening ceremonies on Saturday.
Larrieu Smith, who will run the marathon here next week, competed for the United States in the 1988, '76 and '72 Olympics, and made the United States team that boycotted the 1980 Games.
She was selected tonight by team captains and representatives of the 25 United States teams here in the Olympic Village.


Art in Review
Kenji Fujita Luhring Augustine Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through July 31
For anyone familiar with Kenji Fujita's work, the four small sculptures in this show will offer few surprises.
The pieces, collectively titled "Wall Flowers," are made of clamplike plywood objects resembling little bookbindings and what look like cast plastic containers cut up into fragments.
These components are linked together in a vertical stack by means of screws and twists of aluminum wire.
A length of black rubber hosing, stamped "Made in the U.S.A.," hangs in a loop from the bottom of each piece.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; JACKSON PLANS CHICAGO-TO-MISSISSIPPI CAMPAIGN TRIP
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson announced yesterday that he would make a two-day campaign swing from Chicago to the Mississippi Delta, in part to support the Democratic Presidential ticket.
Mr.
Jackson will begin the tour Saturday at a rally in his honor at the Chicago headquarters of Operation PUSH, the civil rights organization he founded.
He will then fly to Jackson, Miss., and will speak at churches and community centers in six cities before ending the tour in the Mississippi Delta town of Indianola on Sunday night.


TV Figure Pleads Guilty In Fraud Case
A Manhattan securities broker who was the host of an investment segment on a television show aimed at Indians and Pakistanis in the metropolitan region pleaded guilty yesterday to engaging in a fraud scheme that netted him more than $3 million over the last five years, Federal prosecutors in Manhattan said.
The investment adviser, Deepak Gulati, was the host of a segment entitled "You and Your Money" on the program "Vision of Asia," which is broadcast on WNJU-TV, Channel 47.
Mr.
Gulati used his appearances on the show to help engineer "an affinity scheme," in which "members of a particular ethnic or immigrant community are specifically targeted in a fraud scheme by a fellow member of that community," said Roger S. Hayes, the Acting United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York.


Quayle Words About Abortion
Following is an excerpt from Vice President Dan Quayle's appearance on Wednesday on "Larry King Live."
KING: What if your daughter grew up and had a problem, came to you with that problem all fathers fear?
How would you deal with it?
QUAYLE: Well, it is a hypothetical situation.
I hope that I never do have to deal with it.
But obviously ----
Q. What would you do?
A. I would counsel her and talk to her and support her on whatever decision she made.
Q. And if the decision was abortion, you'd support her, as a parent?
A. I'd support my daughter. I'd hope that she wouldn't make that decision.


Engineer for Clinton; Man Behind the Man on the Podium
Whom, Representative Thomas J. Manton, the Queens Democratic leader, was asked recently, would he call to get someone a job in Washington if Gov.
Bill Clinton wins?
"From my standpoint," Mr. Manton replied, "I'd start with Harold Ickes."


In the Realm of Pitchdom, Things May Be Too 'Official'
IT'S official: "Official" is fast becoming the favorite hyperbolic term of pitching products.
In the latest chapter in the history of puffery in advertising, marketers are designating themselves as the official sponsors of things that until now got along just fine without them.


Ya Gotta Believe?
Ya Gotta Believe?
Go ahead.
What's not to believe in the National League Easy, er, East?
National League East.
That's it.
The Mets, after stumbling to a 47-48 record, are in a race.
It's not one that will take your breath away.
It's not one that will make your heart accelerate.
But it might be a race that won't let you take your eyes off it.
REASON TO BELIEVE
1 -- Zane Smith, the quality left-hander for the first-place Pirates, is suffering from tendinitis in his left shoulder.
He hasn't started since the All-Star break and his longterm status is uncertain.
Smith's absence takes the luster off the acquisition of Danny Jackson, and it will create ever greater reliance on the club's beleaguered bullpen.
There is no bona fide closer.
Stan Belinda, its closest approximation, had a tough but typical week for the Pirates, surrendering a decisive ninth-inning homer to Ryne Sanberg in a loss to the Cubs last Sunday and allowing the Astros to score three runs in the ninth inning of their 4-3 triumph on Tuesday night.
2 -- Lee Guetterman, the reliever acquired in a trade earlier in the season that provoked more yawns than analysis, has offered evidence that the bullpen might at long last boast a reliable, even nasty, left-hander other than closer John Franco.
Guetterman, his earned run average swollen to near double digits when he was transfered from the Bronx to Queens, has allowed one run in his last 12 1/3 innings.
He has stranded eight of the nine inherited men on base.
"What's the difference been?" Guetterman asked after two strong, scoreless innings against the Dodgers Wednesday.
"Well, I've been given a role in deciding the outcomes of games rather than one of remaining in the bullpen unused. Obviously, I didn't feel too comfortable with an earned run average over 9.00. But it's all a cycle."
The Mets, of course, can't afford for Guetterman (who has a 2.38 e.r.a since the trade) to enter any downswing in his cycle.
The left-hander, who was sensational against Will Clark and the Giants last weekend and who got two more double-play grounders with his sinker in Wednesday's 7-5 triumph over the Dodgers, could be invaluable against Bonds and Andy Van Slyke.
3 -- David Cone's record matching his talent, as well as the prospective ability to send Cone, Bret Saberhagen and Sid Fernandez out to the mound every turn through the rotation.
Cone has been an anchor of guts and strength.
Saberhagen hit 93 miles per hour on the radar gun in his start last Tuesday, and the needle on his right index finger's pain meter registered zero.
Fernandez has allowed three or fewer runs in 15 of his last 16 starts.
4 -- Torborg has at last seen the wisdom of starting Mackey Sasser behind the plate with frequency.
5 -- Howard Johnson has been moved out of center.
He won't be so confused finding baseballs in the sky, and so maybe, at merciful long, he'll last start seeing them better at the plate.
6 -- The Montreal Expos might be the club to beat. REASON TO WONDER
1 -- The Mets are 1-6 against the Pirates in 1992.
The Pirates are 32-16 against the N.L.
East.
Barry Bonds, with home runs in three of the last four games, is on fire.
Manager Jim Leyland, in his encounters to date with Jeff Torborg of the Mets, has consistently outmaneuvered his competitor.
2 -- Oh, merely the rest of the bullpen.
John Franco's elbow is full of cortisone at the moment, and so the rest of the season for the closer is full of doubt.
Anthony Young has done splendidly in Franco's absence, underscoring the debatable difficulty of piling up saves.
But can the rookie right-hander be the man in the stretch?
That'll take a whole lot of belief.
"One's temperament for being closer isn't tested until you have had your rearend kicked and then have to come back the next night," said Mel Stottlemyre, the pitching coach for the Mets.
"I hope we don't find out if Anthony Young has the right temperament for a couple more months."
Jeff Innis and Wally Whitehurst have been sharp in spots and hit with great regularity, as well.
The two right-handers have together given up 118 hits in 118 innings.
3 -- Cone has averaged 140 pitches over his last six starts.
Will there be anything left in his tank in September?
Saberhagen didn't throw an effective curveball last Tuesday, and his ability to do so might be compromised by his problematic finger.
Observers of his career have long said his curveball is essential to his consistent sucess.
Fernandez, for all his repeated effectiveness, is 8-8.
That he can win in adverse circumstances and with everything at stake is rather less than a given.
4 -- Torborg hasn't seen fit to let him play a full nine innings.
5 -- Vince Coleman is taking Johnson's place in center.
6 -- The Montreal Expos might be the club to beat.


Police Council Member Charges Officers Beat Her and Family
A local school board chairwoman in Brooklyn who serves on her precinct's community council said that at least six police officers beat one of her sons and then assaulted her and two of her children in front of her home yesterday as dozens of stunned neighbors watched.
Several witnesses' accounts supported the allegations and described a violent and tumultuous scene at the house, at 999 Lafayette Avenue, in Bedford-Stuyvesant.


Salomon Earnings Increased More Than 18.5% in Period
Underscoring its renewed vigor almost a year after the Treasury market scandal rocked the firm, Salomon Inc. reported yesterday that its earnings for the second quarter climbed more than 18.5 percent from the comparable period last year.
For the quarter, Salomon reported net earnings of $211 million, or $1.68 a share, compared with $178 million, or $1.43 a share, in the second quarter last year, which was the last full quarter before the trading scandal broke in August.
Almost all of those profits came from the firm's brokerage subsidiary, Salomon Brothers.


Time to Punish Hussein -- Again
Saddam Hussein continues to flout the authority of the United Nations, most recently by interfering with its arms inspectors.
The U.N.
Security Council cannot allow his repeated and flagrant violations of international law to go unpunished.
Devising appropriate and effective punishment won't be easy.
But the U.N. cannot rule out military action -- including air strikes.
That action has a clear objective: to disarm Iraq in a way that bolsters the U.N.'s authority and undermines President Hussein's.
Unilateral action by the U.S. won't do that.
U.N. implementation of the cease-fire resolution has been chipping away at Saddam Hussein's authority.
He has reacted with calculated desperation, defying the U.N. wherever he can.
He has just turned away U.N. arms inspectors from Iraq's Ministry of Agriculture, where Iraq was believed to have filed records of its arms purchases.
These records could document Iraq's continuing non-compliance with the disarmament provisions of the cease-fire resolution.
That's not all.
He has bullied U.N. personnel, even threatened them with hand grenades and car bombs.
He has barred participation in U.N. efforts to draw Iraq's frontier with Kuwait.
He has refused to renew the memorandum of understanding by which international humanitarian agencies have been conducting relief efforts in Iraq.
And he continues to wage war on Shiite refugees near Basra.
These provocations put President Bush under pressure to take military action.
But acting unilaterally, or blindly bombing Baghdad, won't shore up the U.N.
Even a punitive raid on the Agriculture Ministry building would simply scatter, if not destroy, evidence of illegal Iraqi arms.
Mr.
Bush would be wiser to encourage the U.N. to take a number of steps that, together, would bring home to Iraq the costs of Mr.
Hussein's continued defiance.
The Iraqi Air Force has breached the cease-fire accord by resuming flights of fixed-wing aircraft.
Its air bases and planes can be put out of action.
Selective attacks on military targets would show Iraq's armed forces that keeping this dictator in power is suicidal.
Mr.
Hussein is trying to intimidate U.N. humanitarian workers and guards and force them out of Iraq.
One has already been slain.
The U.N. needs to protect its people in Iraq and punish those responsible for the slaying.
And Iraq continues to circumvent the economic embargo by way of Jordan.
If Jordan cannot enforce the embargo, it can admit armed U.N. monitors to patrol its border.
If it is unwilling to do so, it too could be liable to sanctions.
Saddam Hussein cannot defy the world with impunity.
Stern punishment is required if the U.N. is not to emerge weaker, and a desperate dictator stronger, from the present confrontation.


Digital Lost $1.85 Billion In 4th Period
The Digital Equipment Corporation, the huge and troubled computer maker whose founder and longtime president resigned last week, yesterday reported a loss for its fourth quarter of $1.85 billion and a loss for the fiscal year of $2.8 billion.
The quarterly loss, which included a $1.5 billion charge to cover further reductions in employees and operations, was more than double an $871 million loss a year earlier.


Justice Thomas Defends Democratic Process
To the Editor:
In "Justice Thomas, the Freshman" (editorial, July 5), you condemn the judicial record of Clarence Thomas during his first year on the Supreme Court.
You state, "Justice Thomas has failed the test of judiciousness." As evidence, you cite phrases of Justice Thomas's opinions out of context.


Bosnian Delegation Certified
The International Olympic Committee today granted provisional membership to the former Yugoslav republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and officially invited its athletes to participate in the 1992 Summer Olympics here.
A delegation of about 15 athletes and officials will be allowed to display its own national colors.
The I.O.C. also said that athletes from another former Yugoslav republic, Macedonia, would be welcome at the Games.
But because Greece, in which there is a region called Macedonia, has raised objections to use of that name, the athletes will dress in white uniforms and, in case of victory, will stand beneath an Olympic flag.


Robbers Take Gems and Cash At Gunpoint
The owner of a Los Angeles jewelry company and seven employees were robbed of $400,000 in gems and $250,000 in cash yesterday by two gunmen just as they were preparing to leave a midtown Manhattan hotel, the police said yesterday.
The eight robbery victims had participated in a trade show in Manhattan that ended on Wednesday.
As they stepped into the hallway yesterday morning, the waiting gunmen forced them back into the owner's room, taped their hands and mouths and fled with the jewelry and money, the police said.


Lengthy Inquiry Was Said To Disturb Taxi Officials
Weeks before the police arrested more than half of New York City's taxi inspectors for accepting bribes, officials of the Taxi and Limousine Commission expressed grave concerns that the city's investigation of the matter was taking too long, delaying steps to fix the problem, several senior city officials involved in the conversations said yesterday.
The taxi officials argued that corruption at the city's taxi inspection center in Woodside, Queens, had increased during the 11 months that it took the city's Department of Investigation to conduct its inquiry.
While taxi officials wanted to crack down on the bribery, they could not because of the continuing investigation, City Hall officials said.


White-Black Disparity in Income Narrowed in 80's, Census Shows
The long-standing income gap between black and white households in the United States remained wide in the 1980's, narrowing only slightly.
But data from the 1990 Census released today show there were also sharp regional disparities.
The new data provide the most comprehensive state-by-state picture of the range of incomes among racial and ethnic groups.
In the Northeast and on the West Coast, where many households did well, black households generally fared better than others.
In New York State, for example, among whites the median household income, adjusted for inflation, increased 19 percent to $35,811; among blacks it increased 29 percent to $24,089.


Top of the World In a Spot by the Sea
THE string of beach towns that extends from Long Branch to Atlantic City can seem like an endless radio dial of heavy-metal stations, cranked up and blasting at full volume.
Spring Lake is the weak classical signal offering an instant of blessed repose.
More than any other town in the northern half of New Jersey, it has preserved the special appeal that made the Jersey Shore a magnet for urban Americans keen to try out a thrilling new experience: summer vacation at the beach.
The pleasures of Spring Lake are small but satisfying.
The town's name comes from a large spring-fed lake in its center.
The beach is clean and uncrowded, and the boardwalk is noncommercial, anchored at either end by a huge municipal swimming pool and bathhouse pavilion.
The white heat of the beach gives way to deep shade and lush green lawns on the town's residential streets, where the sprawling Victorian houses come fitted out with long verandas and canvas awnings.


Rating Some of the Best Places (Behind Bars, That Is)
Cable television is available, varied meals are prepared daily and fully equipped recreation areas are provided indoors and out.
These are some of the amenities enjoyed by people who are jailed in Fairbanks, Alaska.
The Fairbanks Correctional Center ranks first on a list of comfortable jails, according to people who ought to know: prisoners who have stayed there.


Coleman, Still Weak, Stays on Disabled List
The Mets, not satisfied with the results of strength tests on Vince Coleman's left leg, announced yesterday that the outfielder would not be activated from the disabled list today as had been expected.
The Mets said Coleman was still experiencing a lack of strength in the aftermath of the latest damage to his left hamstring.
Coleman was placed on the disabled list for the third time in 1992 after straining a tendon in the hamstring area in a game against the Cardinals on June 26 in St.
Louis.


Lawyer Accused of Using Surrogate Court as Racket
A Manhattan lawyer was charged yesterday in Federal court with stealing nearly $1 million from three clients in what the Government called his use of Surrogate's Court "as a racketeering enterprise."
The lawyer, Melvyn Altman, was charged with racketeering, mail fraud, money laundering and witness tampering in stealing more than $921,000 from three clients.
The charges were a result of what Otto G. Obermaier, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, said was "an ongoing Federal investigation into allegations of criminal activity" in the Surrogate's Court in Manhattan.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon:
Closing This Weekend
"AS YOU LIKE IT," Delacorte Theater, Central Park, entrance at Central Park West and 81st Street or Fifth Avenue and 79th Street, Manhattan.
Adrian Hall directs Shakespeare's comedy.
Final performance: Sunday at 8 P.M.
Other performances: today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Free.
Ticket vouchers are distributed beginning at 3 P.M.; the vouchers may be exchanged for tickets at 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 861-7277.


Pierre Uri, 80, a Chief Architect Of European Community Treaties
Pierre Uri, a French economist who was one of the chief architects of the European Community, died here on Tuesday.
He was 80 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Further details on the cause of death were not available.


NFL Training Camp Report
Buffalo Bills
The Bills, who had tried to dismiss the continued significance of the mysterious knee infection that kept strong safety Leonard Smith out of the Super Bowl, faced up to reality yesterday.
Smith, a mainstay of the Buffalo defense since he arrived from Phoenix in 1988, was released after failing his physical.
The 31-year-old Smith, whose recovery had been slow despite hard work at rehabilitation, had known he might not be ready for immediate action, but he was surprised by the cut.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Clinton's Policy Test; On Accord With Mexico, He Can Be Free-Trader or Critic of the President
The trade agreement the Bush Administration is about to conclude with Mexico will present Gov.
Bill Clinton with one of his first important policy decisions of the general election campaign.
If he endorses the agreement, he will alienate labor unions, some environmentalists and other legs of his political base.
But he will be praised by most academic experts and business interests and will burnish his argument that economic growth is the most important issue in the campaign.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about shares of stock sold short and not covered by mid-July included an erroneous figure supplied by the American Stock Exchange.
The number of shares sold short on that exchange for the period ended July 15 was 69.5 million shares, up 5.6 percent from the 65.8 million shares reported in mid-June.


Corrections
A report in the Book Notes column on Wednesday about books on Ross Perot misstated the timing of their departure from the New York Times best-seller list.
All such books except "On Wings of Eagles" will be off the list of Aug. 2, not this Sunday's.


Iberian-American Talks Start As 18 Nations Meet in Madrid
Inspired by the example of British and French ties to their former colonies, the leaders of Spain, Portugal and 16 Latin American republics gathered here today to promote the idea of an Iberian-American community of nations held together by history, languages and culture.
The two-day meeting, born of Spain's desire to strengthen its links with Latin America during the quincentenary of Columbus's first voyage, was timed to enable the visitors to attend the opening ceremony of the Summer Olympic Games in Barcelona on Saturday.


CYCLING: Biking in the U.S.A. -- Day 46
In Bruce Springsteen's lyrics, "The Promised Land" is some place as far as possible from Asbury Park, N.J.
But for riders on this trip, Asbury Park is the promised land, the finish line, the end of the road.
After 3,360 miles in 48 days, we are scheduled to reach there Saturday.
Barring unforseen problems, only one rider of the original field of 33 won't be there.
He was forced to drop out because of an infected knee.
Meanwhile, we have a competition still under way.
Who will end with the most flat tires -- Mike Hebert of Minnesota who currently has 15, or Bob Hilton of Seattle, with 13?


2d Big Bank Sets I.O.U. Deadline For California
California's budget crisis deepened today when the Bank of America, the nation's second-largest bank and the biggest in the state, said that on Aug. 5 it would stop accepting the i.o.u.'s the state has been issuing employees and other creditors while Gov.
Pete Wilson and legislators fight over the $11 billion deficit.
Later, Wells Fargo Bank, the state's second-largest bank, reiterated its position that it would stop accepting the i.o.u.'s, or "registered warrants," dated after July 31.


Accounts
*
The Barbados Board of Tourism, Bridgetown, Barbados, to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Toronto, to handle its consolidated American and Canadian advertising accounts.
D.M.B.&amp; B., which had handled the Canadian account, defeated the incumbent on the American account, Grey Advertising, New York, in a review.
Combined billings were estimated at $7 million. *
Apothecon, Princeton, N.J., to Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss Advertising, New York, to handle a nationally distributed medical consumer product, previously handled in-house.
Neither the product nor the billings were disclosed.


Electrical Fire Hurts 6 at Trade Center
An air-conditioning transformer five stories below the World Trade Center caught fire after an explosion last night, the authorities said.
Six people were injured, none of them seriously, but the 110-story twin towers did not have to be evacuated, the authorities said.
The fire was first reported at 10:02 P.M. in a 13,000-volt transformer in the Trade Center's refrigeration plant, which provides air conditioning and ventilation for the complex, the Fire Department and the Port Authority said.
The electrical fire, which went to three alarms, was brought under control at 11:24 P.M., said a Fire Department official, Lieutenant Erick Weekes.


5 Are Tied for Lead as Rain Stalls Open
Rain flooded the fabled fairways of Oakmont Country Club during the first round of the 47th United States Women's Open today, preventing the full field from completing play and making the longest course ever to hold the championship play even longer.
Among the 90 players in the field of 156 who finished the round, five women shot two-under-par 69's, the lowest scores of the day.
They were two veterans, Patty Sheehan and Muffin Spencer-Devlin, and three nonwinners on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour: Donna Andrews, Nancy Ramsbottom and Tracy Kerdyk.


VONS PLANS STORES IN POOR CALIFORNIA AREAS
The Vons Companies, the largest supermarket company in Southern California, said yesterday that it would open as many as 12 new stores in South Los Angeles and other poor neighborhoods in coming years, creating at least 1,000 new jobs for inner-city residents.
The commitment by Vons, which plans to spend $100 million building the new stores, is the largest corporate initiative to create new jobs and provide new services to the inner- city neighborhoods since last spring's riots.
Roger Stangeland, chairman and chief executive, said Vons had seen a good business opportunity in the inner city even before the riots because there are relatively few food stores serving the poorer neighborhoods in the Los Angeles area.
But he said the company accelerated its plan after the riots.
The company said it would hire and train 1,000 to 2,000 people to work in the new stores.


Bogota Is Criticized Over Drug Baron's Prison Escape
The Colombian Government and its policies on drug trafficking came under sharp criticism here today after the escape from prison on Wednesday of Pablo Escobar, a leader of the one of the world's most powerful cocaine cartels.
Politicians from rival parties, academic experts and ordinary citizens said Mr.
Escobar's success in eluding hundreds of soldiers at his luxurious mountaintop prison near Medellin while it supposedly was under military siege raised serious questions about corruption in the Government and the military.


City Ballet Closes Ranks And the Shows Go On
A curtain parted on the private world of the ballet on Tuesday to reveal that ballet stars, for all their glamour, are merely mortal.
The news was out that Peter Martins, balletmaster in chief of the New York City Ballet, had been arrested early Sunday morning by the police in Saratoga Springs, the company's usually relaxed summer home, on charges of beating his wife, the ballerina Darci Kistler.
The story broke on Wednesday, with lurid front-page headlines in several New York City tabloids.
By Thursday afternoon, the curtain had dropped back into place.


Molinari Letter Chills Welcome As Dinkins Prepares Trip to S.I.
They have pulled back the welcome mat on Staten Island, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday.
He plans to spend all of next week on Staten Island, as part of his effort to spend time in each borough.
But he said yesterday that he had canceled his plan to use the private office of Guy V. Molinari, the Staten Island Borough President, because he was upset over criticism by Mr.
Molinari of the Mayor's actions during the disturbances in Washington Heights in Manhattan two weeks ago.


Bear, Stearns Raids Kidder
In what might be called a coup in investment banking, Bear, Stearns &amp; Company has hired almost the entire utility financing team from Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, the firm announced to employees yesterday in an internal memorandum.
The former Kidder executives will bring a new strength to Bear, Stearns, which has recently been beefing up its investment banking coverage.
The new group will cover electric, gas and water utilities for the firm, as well as the independent power industry, according to the memo.


Break the Political Stranglehold
When Ross Perot suddenly quit the Presidential race, he left millions of supporters without a candidate.
Frustrated with a two-party duopoly, many feel they are without real choices or real voices; they wonder what to do next.
It doesn't have to be this way.
We could easily make it simpler for new candidates like Ross Perot to run and allow supporters of these new candidates to vote their true beliefs.
In 1980, I ran for President as an independent.
I had my name put on the ballot in all 50 states and for a time my standing in the polls was over 20 percent, showing that millions of Americans supported my platform.
Yet in the end I only received about 7 percent of the vote.
It wasn't because all those voters stopped supporting me.
It was because many calculated that I couldn't win and that a vote for me would be wasted.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Delta Air Lines lost $180.2 million for its fourth quarter, and said it would reduce its work force of 80,000 by 5 percent.
The loss followed poor performances by other domestic airlines.  [ Page D1. ]
Digital Equipment lost $1.85 billion, including a $1.5 billion charge to cover further reductions in personnel and operations.
The loss was one of the largest in computer industry history.  [ D3. ]


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Fleet Mortgage Group Inc., a unit of Fleet Financial Group Inc., Providence, R.I., filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $750 million of debt securities.
The company did not list underwriters.
*
Kellogg Co., Battle Creek, Mich., is offering $300 million in 5.90 percent notes due May 15, 1997, at 99.785 to yield 5.95 percent, through Goldman, Sachs.
The noncallable notes are rated Aaa by Moody's Investors Inc. and AAA by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Quayle Insists Abortion Remarks Don't Signal Change in His View
Under increasing pressure to prove that he is a political asset, Vice President Dan Quayle found himself on the defensive once again today, this time on abortion, an issue that is central to his appeal to his conservative base.
Mr.
Quayle intended to use today's trip to Indiana and Kentucky to shift blame for the country's economic troubles to the Democratic majority in Congress.
But much of that message was obscured by the political storm surrounding his comments on Wednesday night that he would support his daughter "on whatever decision she made" if she decided to have an abortion.


Sounds Around Town
Soulful Voices
Nona Hendryx, Darlene Love and Lani Groves, Central Park Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, mid-park at 72d Street, Manhattan, (212) 360-3456.
The soul singers on this promising triple bill have strikingly different personalities.
Among the three, Nona Hendryx, with her husky pop-funk delivery of sophisticated original street songs that lean toward poetry and reveal a New York bohemian sensibility, is the most interesting.
Darlene Love, who was the driving voice on a number of 1960's hits produced by Phil Spector, still exudes a healthy vocal radiance.
Lani Groves is more gospel-oriented.
Show time is 3 P.M. tomorrow, and the concert is free.
Clowns and Ramblers
David Shiner, with Bill Irwin and the Red Clay Ramblers, Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, (212) 875-5050.
Two smart, funny clowns -- one known for his aggressive personality, the other for his shyness -- team up for a loose-limbed evening of play as part of the Serious Fun festival.
The Red Clay Ramblers, who share the bill with them, are a solid, old-timey band whose music has found its way into many of Sam Shepard's plays and films.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; tonight's show is sold out.
Tickets are $30.
Dearie at the Ballroom
Blossom Dearie, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
This wispy-voiced jazz singer and pianist epitomizes a certain style of dry jazz sophistication.
Her enunciation is impeccable, her pianism robust, her wit equal to her usually clever material written by herself, Dave Frishberg and others.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 6:30 P.M. and on Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets are $15, with a two-drink minimum.


The Homeless Are Greeted With Mixed Feelings on Return to the Garden
As the homeless have trickled back to the streets around Madison Square Garden, something akin to guilt has come with them.
Tommy Michos, the manager of Don Pepi Pizza in Penn Station, had noticed how nice things were during the Democratic National Convention when the homeless disappeared, and he liked it.
But he felt bad all the same.


INSIDE
Plan for Ultimatum to Iraq
Western allies prepared an ultimatum to gain entry to a building where Iraq may be hiding missile secrets, but the timing is unclear.
Page A6.
House Backs Cable TV Limits
The House overwhelmingly approved legislation that would allow regulators to limit price increases for basic cable television service.
Page D1.
Inquiry on AIDS-Like Illness
Health officials are intensifying efforts to understand about 30 cases of an AIDS-like illness in patients with no sign of H.I.V. infection.
Page D16.
A U.N.
Crisis of Its Own
While battling world crises, the United Nations has acquired a dispute of its own, between the Security Council and the Secretary General.
Page A3.
Cubs 1, Commissioner 0
A judge blocked Commissioner Fay Vincent from ordering the Chicago Cubs to switch divisions.
Page B9.


Art in Review
'Still'  Andrea Rosen Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Aug. 9
The title of this show, "Still," refers to the static photographic image, which is, at least by implication, cinematic.
Angela Bulloch's "King of Comedy," for example, literally includes a shot from that Hollywood film projected onto the gallery wall, while David Kelleran's four color photographs of a microcomputer screen are meant to be read sequentially from left to right as one follows an on-line dialogue between the computer's user and "Elvis." The first message, "You are the biggest loser in the world," is only the start of an abusive exchange that accelerates in sadomasochistic fury from one screen to the next.


Jets Ask Lewis To Learn New Job
Caught in a wave of defensive changes that Jets coaches hope will help sweep them back into the playoffs this season, linebacker Mo Lewis can't help but go with the flow.
Actually, that's what his new job at right outside linebacker is all about.
"We can do some different things with him," Bruce Coslet, the Jets' head coach, said today at the team's training camp.
"We can blitz him more. He can cover the back coming out of the backfield. That's no problem. He's the type of athlete that can flow behind the line of scrimmage and make a lot of plays."


The Spoken Word
CHILDREN'S STORYTELLING, Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, mid-Manhattan.
Three variations of the tale "Puss in Boots" (the traditional story and Filipino and Italian versions), by Marcia Lane, a storyteller.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
This is the last reading of the summer; the library's Reading and Print rooms will be closed from Aug. 17 to Sept. 7.
Free.
Information: (212) 685-0008.
LECTURES AND WALKS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, near Delancey Street, Manhattan.
"The Streets Where We Lived," a walking tour of the Lower East Side, Sunday at noon, followed at 1 P.M. by "House of Heritage," a slide show documenting the history of the museum's building, and at 2 P.M. by "Vaudeville Vagabonds," a walking tour that highlights the lives of turn-of-the-century vaudevillians.
Separate admission is required for each event.
Lecture tickets: $4.
Walking tours: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
"American Paintings," by Janet Whitaker, today at 2 P.M.; "Painters of a New Century: The Eight and American Art," by Betty Kahn, tomorrow at 1 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $4; $2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly.
Information: (718) 638-5000.
GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Manhattan.
"A Touch of Classicism: Decorative Arts of Louis XVI," by Joyce Volk, today at 11 A.M.; "Auguste Rodin," by Nelly Silagy, today at 3 P.M.; "The Origins of Writing in Ancient Mesopotamia," by Zainab Bahrani, tonight at 6; "Understanding Northern Renaissance Painting: Portraiture," by Katie Luber, tonight at 7; "African Art and Statecraft," by Alisa La Gamma, tomorrow at 11 A.M.; "The Legacy of Islamic Spain" (speaker to be announced), tomorrow at 3 P.M.
"Tradition and Innovation in Italian Renaissance Painting," by Matthew Kennedy, tomorrow at 7 P.M.; "Art and Architecture for the Spanish Golden Age," by Ines Powell, Sunday at 11 A.M.
All free with museum admission: $6; $3 for children.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
"George Bellows," today at 3:30 P.M. and tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M., by Leslie Heiner; "Gifts and Acquisitions in Context," today at 1:30 P.M. and tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M. by Ms.
Heiner.
Free with museum admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.


Economic Memo; Yeltsin Walks Path That F.D.R. Once Trod
President Boris N. Yeltsin, as did Franklin D. Roosevelt, has only a layman's knowledge of economics.
Yet like F.D.R. he is presiding over a historic economic reorganization.
And like Roosevelt, Mr.
Yeltsin is groping for the right mix of free markets and government intervention to make Russia's economy function and prosper.
Yevgeny Yasin, director of the Russian League of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs, sees considerable similarities between the leaders.
"Where the two men converge is on the question of how much government help any market-oriented, capitalist economy must have," he said.


Senate in Trenton Votes Assault-Gun Bill
The State Senate today put the finishing touches on legislation to make it legal again to own and transport military-style semiautomatic assault weapons in New Jersey.
But Gov.
Jim Florio said he would veto the measure and called for a public referendum on the question.
The legislation, adopted 26 to 0 in the Republican-dominated Senate, included last-minute amendments to make it clear that the owners of assault weapons could also transport them and pass them on to their heirs.


Republican Leaders Speak to Their Leader


Kenny Anderson Is a Star In Developmental League
Kenny Anderson continues to play with impressive confidence and assertiveness at point guard during summer developmental league games.
On Wednesday night, in the Midwest Review, a professional developmental league, Anderson led the Nets to a 119-111 victory over the Minnesota Timberwolves in Minnesota.
He scored 27 points and had 10 assists, 7 rebounds and 3 steals.


Where Diplomacy Has Gone to Seed
THEY call the big stone house at the top of the hill in the Glenwood Lake neighborhood here "the embassy," and there are people who remember lines of limousines pulling in for cheerful receptions.
These days, the 21-room former home of the Ambassador to the United Nations from the Central African Republic is a different sort of symbol of international diplomacy: neighbors are ready to declare a new cold war on the former French colony.
It has, they say, allowed its now-boarded-up property to deteriorate, and that has damaged the neighborhood of carefully kept $200,000 to $400,000 homes.


Bonn Aides Say Honecker to Return for Trial Soon
Senior officials in Bonn said today that Erich Honecker, longtime Communist leader of East Germany, might soon be returned to Germany to face trial on manslaughter and embezzlement charges.
Painstaking negotiations among officials from Chile, Germany and Russia have reportedly produced an accord under which the 79-year-old Mr.
Honecker will leave the Chilean Embassy in Moscow and be escorted onto a plane to take him back to Germany.


Critic's Notebook; After Intermission, A New Glyndebourne
A few hundred yards below a hill where sheep graze on the Sussex Downs, and a short walk from the sculptured hedges of formal gardens where men in black tie and women in summer evening dresses dine from hampers stocked with Moet and pate, a green wooden fence surrounds an enormous pit.
Through holes cut in the wood, one can see piles of red bricks, poured concrete and scaffolding.
The Mildmay Tea Room and the Walled Garden are no more.
After tonight's performance of "The Queen of Spades" and Friday night's gala concert, Glyndebourne will not have an opera house, either, and there will be no season next summer.
A new theater is to be in place by May 1994, but on this country manor, where an eccentric, wealthy gentleman, John Christie, thought of creating a British Bayreuth more than 60 years ago, the destruction of the old theater is no small matter.
The opera festival that developed from his Wagnerian conceit has had an impact far beyond its 830-seat hall and its wealthy patrons, some of whom arrive at this estate 50 miles south of London by limousine and helicopter.


Florida's Tax On Newspapers
Reversing a longstanding exemption, the Florida Supreme Court told publishers today that they must collect taxes on newspaper sales.
Newspapers have been collecting sales taxes since 1990 on subscriptions and single-copy sales, but publishers had hoped Florida's high court would uphold their tax exemption.


Let's Not Go to the Videotape
No television outlet, not even NBC News, will be able to show even a snippet of taped footage of NBC Sports' coverage of the Summer Olympics in Barcelona until the end of each broadcast day at midnight Eastern time.
Practically, that means no clips can be seen anywhere else until at least the morning news or more likely the 5 P.M. or 6 P.M. newscasts.
Even Tom Brokaw will be unable to give more than the results of events on NBC Nightly News.
A spokesman said Brokaw's reports will be preceded by a caution for viewers who don't wish to hear the results.


Sounds Around Town
Tom Russell's Country
Tom Russell Band, CBGB Gallery, 313 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, East Village, (212) 677-0455.
Tom Russell has a country honker's twang, a truck driver's toughness and an urban poet's shrewd eye for detail.
Raised on the early-1970's Austin music scene of Willie Nelson and Jerry Jeff Walker, he harbors a strong allegiance to the roots tradition.
Now based in New York, he can toss off country, folk, Tex-Mex and rock as though the words were written equally large in his heart, and his band adds Dobro, fiddle, accordion and pedal steel guitar with the utmost precision.
Although Mr.
Russell has love songs, prison songs and protest songs in his repertory, his most intriguing moments come when he applies his country sensibility to the city-oriented life around him; "Bergenfield," from his album "Poor Man's Dream" (Philo/ Rounder), is a look at suburban teen-age suicide.
Show time is tomorrow at 10 P.M.
Admission is $6.
Joe Henry at 2 Clubs


Exxon, Texaco and Occidental Earnings Fall in Quarter
The Exxon Corporation, Texaco Inc. and the Occidental Petroleum Corporation today reported lower earnings for the second quarter, reflecting troubles in refining and chemical operations that suffered from weak demand in sluggish global economies.
Exxon, the world's largest oil company, said profits fell 15.1 percent in the quarter.
Income at Texaco declined 8.9 percent and Occidental's earnings plunged 49 percent.
A large independent refiner, Ashland Oil reported a 52.2 percent drop in earnings.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 591 money market mutual funds increased by $4.61 billion, to $506.09 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 217 institutional funds increased by $4.04 billion, to $195.67 billion.
The assets of the 284 general-purpose funds were up by $52.0 million, to $171.40 billion.
The 90 broker-dealer funds increased by $518.4 million, to $139.02 billion, the institute said.


How Much Bump Can the Bumper Take?
To the Editor:
Your July 11 summary of actions taken in the New York State Legislature's 215th session misses one of the most beneficial pieces of consumer protection legislation -- the bumper quality consumer information disclosure bill (A. 6212a).


Euro Disney Sees Loss; Disney Profit Rises 33%
Euro Disney, acknowledging that its elaborate theme park had not performed as strongly as expected, announced today that it would incur a loss in its first fiscal year, ending Sept. 30, but did not specify the size.
In Burbank, Calif., the Walt Disney Company, which owns 50 percent of Euro Disney, said that earnings for its fiscal third quarter ended June 30 increased 33 percent.
Theme park attendance and spending by visitors rose and filmed entertainment and consumer goods reached record levels, the company said.
Disney earned $220.8 million, or 41 cents a share, up from $165.5 million, or 31 cents a share, in the corresponding period in 1991.
Revenue rose 23 percent, to $1.85 billion from $1.51 billion


At the Bar; For lawyers and judges in the fight against drugs, the repugnant becomes run of the mill.
The scene is Kennedy International Airport.
The principals are some drug-enforcement agents and a 36-year-old Nigerian named Ojiabo Onumonu.
The key exhibits are 83 condoms -- all stuffed with heroin and all carried in Mr.
Onumonu's stomach as he entered the United States.
Consider a world in which officials spend their days scrutinizing disembarking passengers, looking for a telltale tic.
Consider how they then yank such persons aside, chain them to a bed and wait, for however long it takes, for them to defecate.
Consider a suspect, under the watchful eyes of three Federal agents, extricating nugget after nugget after nugget of contraband from his own feces.


On My Mind; Getting Saddam Hussein
By God, we have to teach that Saddam Hussein a lesson. Bomb Iraq.
Great idea, sir.
The only thing is, then what?
Do we go on bombing him until he resigns or something?


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.40
5.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.15
5.59
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.22
5.71
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.15
6.31
8.04
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.53
7.61
8.37
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.53
8.58
9.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.14
6.20
7.12
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
Two years ago, ILYA TSYMBAL, a quiet teen-ager from Minsk in the Soviet Union, arrived in this country, hesitant to talk or even to ask directions for fear he would not be understood.
Now he's getting ready to go to Harvard University, where he plans to major in computer science and minor in psychology.
What made the difference, Mr.
Tsymbal said the other day, was Opportunity to Learn, a different kind of English as a Second Language program for outstanding high school students who are immigrants.


Opening Up the Skies
The agreement between British Airways and USAir to form the world's largest airline partnership is great news for travelers everywhere.
British Airways will pump $750 million into USAir, enabling the limping U.S. carrier to take on behemoths like Delta, American and United and force them to offer better service at low prices.
For its part, British Airways gains a toehold in the U.S. market -- anticipating the day when Britain and the U.S. drop antiquated restrictions on foreign ownership of domestic carriers.
As Lord King, chairman of British Airways, said of the agreement: "For us they bring entry into the U.S. domestic market. We're bringing them the rest of the world."


Review/Art; Contrasting Visions, Exhibited Together
The small one-man shows of the American painter Joe Zucker and the Danish painter Per Kirkeby, which are sharing the Parrish Art Museum here, form an odd but effective unit.
The two artists could not have less in common.
Mr.
Zucker is a thoroughly irreverent painter, prone to physical eccentricities like cotton balls on canvas, while Mr.
Kirkeby makes dark, romantic abstractions, full of the poetry of the hand and allusions to nature.
Yet the play of contrasting styles and materials clarifies each artist's sensibility, including its strengths and limitations.
And there are grounds for comparison in terms of career: both artists emerged from the esthetic turmoil of the early 1970's to achieve solid reputations at home, but neither is very well known abroad.
Mr.
Zucker hasn't shown in Europe very much, just as Mr.
Kirkeby's art, which has been associated with the German Neo-Expressionists, has never caught on in America.


Japan's Prime Minister Calls Meeting on Plunging Stocks
Three days before an important election, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa took what some analysts described as a desperate gamble to arrest the stock market's relentless tumble -- announcing that he would hold an emergency meeting of top political leaders today to try to formulate a market rescue plan.
The announcement met with skepticism among many market experts, since they believe there is little the Prime Minister can do on such short notice.


Sports of The Times; Sweet Dreams at $900 a Night
AT the El Prat airport, a house of glass surrounded by yellow-and-black taxis buzzing like bumblebees, Jordi the Olympic guide had a question almost before he could be asked one.
"When is the Dream Team coming?" he said.
In other centuries, this medieval Mediterranean seaport was invaded by the Greeks, the Romans, the Visigoths, the Arabs and the French.
But today the Dream Team of United States Olympic basketball players will arrive.
Seldom, if ever, has a city been so thrilled to be conquered.


Review/Film; Child's-Eye Perspective On Terror
Mark Peploe's chilling, meticulous "Afraid of the Dark" begins by introducing a quiet London neighborhood that is filled with menace.
This dangerous world is seen through the eyes of Lucas (Ben Keyworth), an impassive and very peculiar young boy.
His mother (Fanny Ardant) and her friends are blind women, all of them menaced by a vicious slasher.
His father (James Fox) is the policeman in charge of apprehending this fiend.
"Don't rob a bank or I'll have to put you behind bars," the father says jovially to his son.


Senate Approves Bill Curbing Interstate Garbage Shipments
After four days of debate, the Senate tonight approved a proposal that would give states new authority to restrict imports of garbage from other states.
The vote was 89 to 2.
The legislation, sponsored by Senator Daniel R. Coats, Republican of Indiana, and Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana, is intended to put more pressure on states like New York and New Jersey that ship out their garbage to solve their own disposal problems.
Supreme Court's Views
President Bush has opposed the bill on the ground that it restricts interstate commerce.
The House does not have a companion measure, though it is expected to develop a bill now that the Senate has passed one.


Two Executives Promoted by Mattel
Mattel Inc. announced yesterday that Jill Elikann Barad, 41 years old, had been named president and chief operating officer.
Ms.
Barad had been president in charge of the girls and activity-toys division.
The company also said that David Mauer, 43, fomerly president in charge of the boys and preschool division, had been named the president of the United States marketing and sales operations and of all company categories and brands.
Mr.
Mauer will report to Ms.
Barad.


Not Dan, Not Dave. Just a U.S. Decathlete With a Dream.
He's the American decathlete who isn't Dan or Dave.
He's the one who's not in the Reebok commercial.
He's the one Dan O'Brien outvaulted in practice a few minutes before the Olympic qualifying event began.
But, said 22-year-old Aric Long, "I knew four years ago I'd be standing here today."


Envoy to Moscow Presses Congress for Russian Aid
With the House apparently ready to approve a Russian-aid package but delaying the politically sensitive vote until leaders can assemble a healthy bipartisan majority, Ambassador Robert S. Strauss is back from Moscow to work the Hill.
Demonstrating that he is still a consummate Washington insider, he is cajoling House members, posing for pictures with their aides, slapping lobbyists on the back, and cursing reporters in good- humored fashion, asking them to help him persuade Congress that the security of the United States could be at stake.


U.S. Rejects Dinkins's Plea for Old Burial Site
The Federal Government has rejected Mayor David N. Dinkins's request to stop excavation on part of the site of a 34-story office tower being built over a Colonial-era cemetery for black New Yorkers in lower Manhattan.
The regional head of the General Services Administration, William J. Diamond, told the Mayor that to stop the project now "would jeopardize the fragile human remains which are no longer sealed" under layers of earth deep below the street. 400 Remains Taken


Edgartown Journal; Rare Baby Birds Delay Chappaquiddick Bridge
As the patrolling Jeep lurched slowly along the sand track, the driver radioed ahead to a surveillance team in the dunes.
"Do you have them in sight?" he asked.
"We had them in the scope a minute ago," came the reply, "but we've lost them now behind a dune."


Trade Center Overcharge Found Again
A second cleaning company has overcharged the Port Authority thousands of dollars for work at the World Trade Center, a spokesman for the agency said yesterday.
The overcharges, which have not been fully calculated, represent the third instance of overbilling on Port Authority contracts disclosed by the agency this week.
The firm, Prompt Maintenance Services, holds a $3.5 million contract to clean Buildings 4 and 5, two nine-story structures adjoining the twin towers of the World Trade Center, which is owned and operated by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.


Pop/Jazz; Drumming With Muscle And Wit
Impassive behind sunglasses, Ralph Peterson sat calmly behind his drum kit at Sweet Basil a few days ago, smiling now and then.
But his hands and feet seemed to be everywhere, sparking and steering the music: making his tom-toms erupt sporadically under Don Byron's clarinet lines, trading glassy cymbal accents with plinks from Bryan Carrott's vibraphone, rumbling in the low register along with Belden Bullock's bass.
The group is Ralph Peterson's Fo'tet, a quartet whose name reflects its unusual lineup; it is appearing through Sunday at Sweet Basil in Greenwich Village, playing compositions by Mr.
Peterson along with selections from Billy Strayhorn, Wayne Shorter and Ornette Coleman.
A Challenge at Rutgers


Yugoslav Refugee Crisis Europe's Worst Since 40's
The exodus resulting from war and suffering in the former Yugoslavia is presenting Europe with its biggest refugee crisis since World War II, prompting urgent appeals from United Nations refugee officials for a political solution.
Roughly 2.3 million people have fled from towns and villages in the former federation of six republics since the country began to disintegrate in June 1991, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Most of the displaced people are from Croatia or from Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose moves toward independence have met with fierce resistance from Serbian fighters backed by the Yugoslav Army.


Guilt Denied in Bank Scandal
Joseph Mollicone Jr., the executive accused of bringing on Rhode Island's banking crisis by stealing $15.8 million from the Heritage Loan and Investment Company, pleaded not guilty on Wednesday to 47 state charges of embezzlement, bank fraud and conspiracy.


Shea: Where Just Plain Ball Is Beautiful
BOOKSTORES are crowded these days with sugary odes to great ball parks and green cathedrals, the lost ruins of Ebbets Field and Hilltop Park, the oddities of Seals Stadium and Wrigley Field.
The opening of Oriole Park at Camden Yards in Baltimore this year has inspired a greater wash of purple prose than the decline of the House of Windsor.
Shea Stadium is a poetless stadium of the modern age, functional, impersonal, newish and worn at the same time.
It was built in Flushing, Queens, in 1964, of modest proportions to house a team of modest ambition.
Shea Stadium came into the world without ever taking on airs; indeed, it was christened with waters from the Gowanus Canal in Brooklyn and the Harlem River. (One imagines that the Yankees imported the good stuff from Lourdes.)


Justice Thomas Defends Democratic Process; Republican Appointees
To the Editor:
I don't mind your July 5 castigation of Justice Clarence Thomas ("Justice Thomas, the Freshman") because I didn't think him qualified to be confirmed in the first instance.
Nevertheless, you include at least one unfair and potentially misleading remark, especially as it implies that Democratic justices are great defenders of civil liberties, while Republican justices are not.


White-Black Disparity in Income Narrowed in 80's, Census Shows
The long-standing income gap between black and white households in the United States remained wide in the 1980's, narrowing only slightly.
But data from the 1990 Census released today show there were also sharp regional disparities.
The new data provide the most comprehensive state-by-state picture of the range of incomes among racial and ethnic groups.
In the Northeast and on the West Coast, where many households did well, black households generally fared better than others.
In New York State, for example, among whites the median household income, adjusted for inflation, increased 19 percent to $35,811; among blacks it increased 29 percent to $24,089.


Executive Changes
CATO CORP., Charlotte, N.C., which operates approximately 500 women's apparel specialty stores in 23 states, named Alan E. Wiley chief financial officer and executive vice president for finance.
CHYRON CORP., Melville, L.I., a unit of Pesa Electronica S.A. that designs, manufactures and markets products for the broadcast industry, appointed Peter J. Lance vice chairman and Roi Agneta corporate vice president for marketing.


Howe Cites Behavior As Hyperactive Child
Steve Howe, who is undergoing tests to determine how hyperactive he is and whether it contributed to his cocaine dependency, said drugs he took as a child to curb hyperactivity may have increased it and contributed to his dependency.
In his autobiography, "Between the Lines," Howe wrote that his mother, Barbara, made him and his brother, Jeff, take the drug, Ritalin, because they were hyperactive children.
Howe said he was 9 or 10 years old when he began using Ritalin.
The Food and Drug Administration later determined that Ritalin increased hyperactivity in some children, which has caused Howe to ponder whether the drug contributed to his addiction.


Weak Economic Data Lift Treasuries
Another jolt from more pessimistic economic data gave the bond market a strong lift yesterday, pushing the price of the 30-year bond up almost a point and bringing long-term yields down toward the levels of January.
The rally also provided some needed support for a difficult issue of notes from the Tennessee Valley Authority and may provide a good background for a first-of-its-kind issue by the American Express Company that will be priced today.


Cubs, in Court, Get Reprieve From Realignment
In a rare ruling against an action taken by a baseball commissioner, a Federal judge temporarily blocked National League realignment yesterday, issuing a preliminary finding that Commissioner Fay Vincent exceeded his authority in ordering the Chicago Cubs to go west.
Judge Suzanne B. Conlon of United States District Court in Chicago granted the Cubs a preliminary injunction in their lawsuit against Vincent.
Judge Conlon said that Vincent's "unprecedented action" violated a provision of the Major League Agreement, the rules under which the business of baseball is administered.


Corrections
A music review on Tuesday about the New York City Opera production of "110 in the Shade" at the New York State Theater misidentified the creator of new dances in the show.
The choreographer was Susan Stroman; Peter Howard supplied additional dance-music arrangements.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Deficit Politics; White House Prods Congress on Deficit
In a midyear recalculation apparently motivated by election-year as much as economic considerations, the White House asserted today that President Bush's economic program could eliminate the Federal deficit by 1998 if Congress were to pass it.
The revision comes only six months after President Bush sent Congress a budget projecting the deficit's being reduced to $200 billion a year in five years' time.
In Mr.
Bush's tenure, the deficit has doubled, to about $350 billion a year, from $155 billion in 1988; in the month that he took office, the Administration forecast that the deficit would be just $32 billion this fiscal year.


Qyanjhari Journal; India's Worst Case: The War Between the Castes
Paulus Ekka hitched the hand-hewn wooden plow on his shoulder, letting his eyes wander down the muddy path that plunged past the pounded-earth huts of his village and into the early-greening rice paddies.
He shifted his weight from one foot to another, saying nothing for a moment.
"I think until now nothing has happened," he said finally, "nothing has ever changed in this village. There is no school. There is no electricity."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Lendl Beats McEnroe
Ivan Lendl stopped John McEnroe, 6-2, 6-4, yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Players International tournament in Toronto.
In the upset of the day, Wally Masur defeated top-seeded Petr Korda, 7-6 (7-3), 4-6, 6-3.
Second-seeded Andre Agassi continued to roll in the hard-court event, defeating Amos Mansdorf, 6-2, 6-4, and sixth-seeded MaliVai Washington defeated No. 4 Aaron Krickstein, 7-6 (7-5), 6-1.
The third-seeded Lendl improved his career record against McEnroe to 21-15. (AP)


For Children
'Breaking Boundaries: American Puppetry in the 1980's'  The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts 40 Lincoln Center Plaza, at 65th Street Manhattan (212) 870-1630 Recommended for all ages Through Oct. 31
Children will be startled (and possibly scared) by this exhibition if they think puppets are benevolent but misguided creatures who fall into the bellies of beasts and then miraculously swim out.
The show is meant to prove to anyone who has any doubts that puppetry is an art form; many of the puppets are aimed at adult audiences.
Some huge and some small, the puppets do break boundaries as they tantalize, excite, terrify and illuminate every alley of one's imagination.


NAVY CALL FOR NEW F-18'S MEANS JOBS AT NORTHROP
The Navy's go-ahead for new versions of the F-18 jet fighter means the Northrop Corporation will create 500 jobs by year's end, a rare bit of good news for California's depressed aerospace industry.
Half the 500 jobs will be filled by existing Northrop employees who might otherwise have been laid off, a spokesman for the Los Angeles-based builder of the B-2 bomber said.
Northrop's chairman, Kent Kresa, has said the F-18 variants could ultimately mean 2,000 more jobs at Northrop's El Segundo and Hawthorne plants, an estimate affirmed Wednesday by another spokesman.
The Navy issued a $3.96 billion development contract this week for E and F versions of the F-18, allowing the McDonnell Douglas Corporation and Northrop to continue development until September.
By then, Congress will have decided whether to proceed with the program.
Opposition is fierce.


The New Yorker Names Its First Television Critic
Tina Brown, who is to become editor of The New Yorker in the fall, said yesterday that she had named James Wolcott, a contributing editor of Vanity Fair as The New Yorker's first television critic.
Although the magazine has not had a television critic as such, it has carried many articles about television over the years.
Writers have included Michael Arlen, John Lardner, Jonathan Miller and Renata Adler.
Mr.
Wolcott has written critiques of television, books and film for Vanity Fair since 1983.
He wrote an arts column for Harper's Magazine from 1981 to 1983 and a television column for The Village Voice from 1976 to 1981.
For two years, he has been an interviewer and actor on the "Late Show" on the BBC and "Edge" on PBS.
Mr.
Wolcott joins his Vanity Fair colleagues Pamela McCarthy, Kim Heron, Virginia Cannon and Stephen Schiff in moving to The New Yorker.
Graydon Carter, who is to replace Ms.
Brown as editor in chief of Vanity Fair, has named Bryan Burrough a contributing editor of Vanity Fair.
Mr.
Burrough is a former Wall Street Journal staff reporter and co-author with John Helyar of the best seller "Barbarians at the Gate." Chris Garrett, managing editor and deputy editor of Conde Nast Traveler, is to join Vanity Fair as managing editor.


Board Rejects Trump's Waterfront Plan
A community board voted overwhelmingly last night against Donald J. Trump's plan for Manhattan's largest undeveloped waterfront property, a plan that would add nearly 6,000 apartments and a twin-tower office building to a neighborhood that many residents say is already more crowded than they would like.
The vote by Community Board 7 on the Upper West Side was 35 to 1, with 2 members abstaining and 1 present but not voting.


CHRONICLE
Celebrating 40 years together, the songwriting team of JERRY LEIBER and MIKE STOLLER, authors of such pop classics as "Hound Dog" and "Jailhouse Rock," started a new joint effort yesterday: a scholarship program for aspiring composers and musicians in New York City and Los Angeles.
Two 17-year-old girls are the first New York recipients: EMILY LIN, a harpist, pianist and graduate of the Bronx High School of Science, and NKENGE SIMPSON, a soprano who is a graduate of the Fiorello H. La Guardia High School for the Performing Arts and a former student of the Harlem School of the Arts.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  ISRAEL HALTS NEW SETTLEMENT  Israel stopped all future construction in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, but said thousands of apartments and houses in progress would be completed.
The freeze affects nearly 6,700 units that were planned but for which real work had not begun.
A1  BAKER IN SURPRISE LEBANON VISIT  Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d made a surprise visit to Lebanon to reaffirm Lebanon's sovereignty and to signal the Syrians that Washington expects them to withdraw their troops from Beirut.
A1


David Wojnarowicz, 37, Artist in Many Media
David Wojnarowicz, one of the most individual artists of the 1980's, whose impassioned and outspoken work about AIDS thrust him into the center of the recent debates involving the National Endowment for the Arts, died on Wednesday night at his home in Manhattan.
He was 37 years old.
He died of AIDS, said his companion, Tom Rauffenbart.


Bruce Henderson, 77, Consultant And Writer on Business Strategy
Bruce D. Henderson, a pioneering writer and hugely successful salesman in strategy consulting for major corporations, died Monday.
He was 77 years old.
He died 10 days after suffering a stroke at his home in Nashville, said a spokesman for the Boston Consulting Group, which he founded.


Nose-Tackle Job Worth Seeking
One reason the Giants fell from a 16-3 team and Super Bowl champions in 1990 to 8-8 last year was Erik Howard's back.
The starting nose tackle seemed ready for a Pro Bowl season when a herniated disk led to surgery, and he missed 10 games and was limited in the ones he played.
Howard is unsigned and absent from training camp here, but the Giants have six other nose tackles fighting for probably one job as Howard's backup.
Today, George Rooks, a long shot in the nose-tackle derby, improved his chances to make the team.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton, in Houston Speech, Assails Bush on Crime Issue
Gov.
Bill Clinton took a page from the Republican playbook today, standing on the steps of City Hall here with uniformed police officers arrayed behind him as he denounced President Bush's record on fighting crime.
Mr.
Clinton said the President was guilty of inaction on crime because he had said he would not sign handgun legislation unless it was part of a Republican-crafted legislative package, and he accused the President of talking tough on crime to divide America.
Call for 'Order and Safety'
"We cannot take our country back until we take our neighborhoods back," the Governor said as thousands of onlookers cheered.
"Four years ago this crime issue was used to divide America. I want to use it to unite America. I want to be tough on crime and good for civil rights. You can't have civil justice without order and safety."


Rev. John Meyendorff Dies at 66; An Eastern Orthodox Theologian
The Very Rev.
John Meyendorff, an internationally known Eastern Orthodox theologian and an American leader in the ecumenical movement, died on Wednesday in Montreal.
He was 66 years old.
He became ill while on vacation in Canada and died of pancreatic cancer at St.
Mary's Hospital, his family said.


Pro Turns Lucky Bounce Into a One-Shot Victory
The shot with the 4-wood from the 11th tee was headed for trouble.
Then the ball struck the left knee of a woman in the gallery of about 50 spectators and kicked back onto the fairway.
From there, Mark Mielke saved par.
From there, he went on to capture the Michelob New York State Open by a shot.
"That was my worst shot in the tournament, and I started thinking that maybe this was my lucky day after that break," Mielke said of his 11th-hole adventure.


BOSNIAN SHELLING LIFTS CIVILIAN TOLL
Shelling and sniper fire killed at least 5 people in the besieged Bosnian capital today and wounded at least 30 more, including a camera woman for Cable News Network.
Margaret Moth, the wounded CNN camerawoman, was struck in the jaw by a sniper's bullet and severely wounded as she rode in a minivan to the Sarajevo Airport for a report on the United Nations airlift.


Legislators Hear Proposal For a Public TV Merger
Money was on the minds of Republican legislators when they began looking for a way to dispose of the state-subsidized New Jersey Network.
And money was the issue again today as they heard a proposal from WNET, Channel 13, for merging the operations of the two public television stations.
WNET's executive vice president, George L. Miles Jr., outlined a plan for two statewide public television systems: one that would air general interest programs and the second devoted to educational programming.


U.S. Begins Releasing Documents on M.I.A.'s
The Bush Administration began releasing thousands of classified documents today on Americans still unaccounted for in the Vietnam War.
The start of the declassification of up to 1.3 million documents over the next few months follows an executive order by President Bush on Wednesday to release all P.O.W.-M.I.A material, with certain exceptions, for the first time since American troops returned from Indochina in 1973.


Games' Soccer Lowly by Europe's Standards
Olympic organizers, leaving no gimmick unturned, believed they had finally discovered something snappy about the United States soccer team.
The Americans, who will share the honor of opening all competition with a match against Italy Friday night, have a midfielder named Cobi Jones.
The mascot of these Barcelona Games happens to be a dog named Cobi.


L.T. Checks In; His Bill $6,000
Lawrence Taylor, the Giants' prize outside linebacker, reported to training camp tonight, more than three days late.
He will be on the practice field Friday at 9 A.M. and 3 P.M.
For each day Taylor missed, the Giants will fine him $1,500, the maximum allowed by the National Football League for players under contract.
His fine will be $6,000 because he missed Monday's running as well as two-a-day practices Tuesday, Wednesday and today.


Democracy Denied in Algeria
When Algeria's army staged a coup in January, heading off an anticipated Islamic electoral triumph, Washington, like other Western governments, winked.
Apologists for the coup warned of frightening consequences if Algeria's Islamic Salvation Front had been allowed to compete.
Though the Front's official leadership had promised conciliation and economic reform, apologists argued that radicals would soon have swept aside these moderates.
Further elections would have been banned, foreign policy radicalized, market reforms diluted, human rights of non-believers abused.


MCI Earnings Climb 9.3% On Higher Calling Volume
The MCI Communications Corporation, citing business from newly won residential and business customers, said yesterday that second-quarter earnings rose 9.3 percent, to $141 million, as revenue rose 10.6 percent.
Despite the favorable news, the stock market bid MCI's stock price down slightly.
In over-the-counter trading yesterday, MCI closed at $32.50 a share, down 37.5 cents.


Art in Review
Frank Gehry 'New Bentwood Furniture Designs'  American Craft Museum 40 West 53d Street Mid-Manhattan Through Aug. 2
This small but dazzling exhibition will please anyone attracted to sculpture, design, chairs or wood.
The show, organized by the Montreal Museum of Decorative Arts, traces the evolution of a series of chairs designed over the last three years by the architect Frank Gehry.
These light, airy objects, which are made of two-inch-wide ribbonlike bands of laminated maple plywood draw on several traditions.
Most prominent are the bentwood furniture invented by the Thonet brothers in Vienna in the 1850's and the related technique of molded plywood that Alvar Aalto and Charles and Ray Eames made an indelible part of the 20th-century design landscape.
The basic American bushel basket also figures into the thin woven bands of wood in Mr.
Gehry's chairs, as does the tradition metal and wrought-iron lawn furniture and, perhaps, Japanese armor.


Berkshire Holds 14.9% of General Dynamics
Berkshire Hathaway, the conglomerate that acts as an investment vehicle for Warren E. Buffett, has acquired 4.35 million shares of General Dynamics, giving the billionaire investor 14.9 percent of the weapon maker's stock.
Although rumors had been circulating on Wall Street in recent weeks that Mr.
Buffett would be taking a position in the company, shares of the General Dynamics Corporation nevertheless jumped yesterday after the holdings were announced, closing at $75.625, up $1.75, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


After Furor, Americans Are No Closer to Having Abortion Pill
For all the legal hoopla, last week's showdown over a pregnant California woman's attempt to import 12 pills of RU486 has done nothing to lower the barriers that are keeping the abortion pill from American women.
The drug's manufacturer, Roussel Uclaf, which sells the drug under tight controls to women in France and Britain, has made no move to seek Food and Drug Administration approval to sell the drug in the United States.
And after last week's court actions, it may be more wary than ever about doing so.


New York Illustrates What Diversity Means
To the Editor:
On May 2, our apartment complex -- seven 17-story buildings hard by the Brooklyn entrance to the Brooklyn Bridge -- had a party for one of the doormen who was retiring.
He is white.
The people who came to honor him were of all colors, as reflects the population of those who live and work in our complex.
The party's disk jockey, a young African-American man, brought a friend to film the event.
I was embarrassed that whenever the camera caught me, it caught my tears.
Asked why I was crying, I said I was sad because the doorman was retiring.


Is Dan Quayle Pro-Choice?
Wednesday night, on CNN's "Larry King Live," Vice President Quayle forgot momentarily that he is a politician.
Forgot, too, that he is part of an Administration committed to overturning women's constitutional right to abortion.
Asked what he would do if his young daughter grew up and chose to have an abortion, he gave the answer that many a concerned parent would give.
"I'd support my daughter," he said.


New Spots Are Set For Diet Coke, Pepsi
Two soft-drink marketers are introducing big, splashy television commercials involving celebrities, some living and some dead.
The singer and dancer Paula Abdul performs some fancy footwork in a spot for Diet Coke by Lintas New York, the second that weaves clips from vintage films with contemporary live-action footage.
In the spot, which begins running on Tuesday after a "teaser" campaign, Ms.
Abdul dances with Gene Kelly (as he appeared in "Anchors Away" and "On the Town") and Groucho Marx ("Duck Soup").
Cary Grant watches ("The Awful Truth"), then pours Ms.
Abdul a Diet Coke ("Indiscreet").


Last Charges Dismissed in Tourist's Slaying
All charges against Luis Montero, the eighth and final defendant charged in the Manhattan subway slaying of Brian Watkins, a tourist from Utah, were dismissed yesterday by Justice Edwin Torres in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
Thomas Schiels, an assistant dIstrict attorney, said in court papers that there was not enough evidence to convict Mr.
Montero of murder.
Moreover, Mr.
Schiels said, a witness said Mr.
Montero did not go down to the subway platform of the IND Seventh Avenue Station at 53d Street where the Watkins family was attacked and Mr.
Watkins was stabbed to death on Sept. 2, 1990.


Time for U.S. to Rediscover Philippines
To the Editor:
Corazon Aquino's triumph over Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines six years ago, with its inspiring slogan of People Power, was headline news in the United States, avidly followed by millions of Americans.
In sharp contrast, Fidel Ramos's recent assumption of the Philippine presidency received very little attention, in Washington or on Main Street.
Undoubtedly, this is partly a reflection of this country's general fatigue with international affairs -- given our domestic economic malaise and this being an election year.
But I suspect it also has to do with the specific unhappiness of Washington over having been booted out of our military bases in the Philippines, plus considerable official disappointment over what Mrs.
Aquino's once-promising people power failed to achieve.


CHRONICLE
When BARRY TUCKWELL, the French horn player, married SUE ELLIOTT on June 21, they asked their friends not to send wedding presents.
Instead, they suggested contributions to the Maryland Symphony Orchestra and the Maryland Theater in Hagerstown; Mr.
Tuckwell founded the orchestra, and Mrs.
Tuckwell is president of the theater.
So far, the couple said yesterday, the contributions total $9,089.


REPORT IS CRITICAL OF ESTATE SYSTEM IN NEW YORK CITY
More than four years after a state report found widespread mismanagement and theft in the handling of certain estates in New York City, a follow-up investigation has found that the problems remain largely unabated and in some cases have worsened.
The estates at issue are those in which there was either no will or a will whose terms could not be executed.
Thus, they fell under the supervision of public administrators, appointed officials assigned by the Surrogate's Court in each of the city's five boroughs.


Red Machine Sputters Again
Cardinals 3, Reds 2
ST.
LOUIS, July 23 (AP) -- The Cincinnati Reds' scoring woes continued tonight as the Cardinals' Rheal Cormier pitched seven strong innings and drove in the go-ahead run with a squeeze bunt as St.
Louis notched a 3-2 victory.
The Reds have scored only two runs in their last three games and have lost all of them, falling a game behind the Atlanta Braves in the National League West.


METRO DIGEST
PASSENGER TAX APPROVED
In a move described as the "necessary first step" to building a road and rail system to speed travel to and from Kennedy, La Guardia and Newark airports, the Federal Government yesterday approved a $3 passenger tax to finance the initial stages of the plan.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  INQUIRY FAULTS HANDLING OF ESTATES
More than four years after a state report found widespread mismanagement and theft in the handling of certain estates in New York City, a follow-up investigation has found that the problems largely continue and in some cases have worsened.
The new investigation found problems ranging from unexplained delays in the handling of the estates to using estate funds to pay office and personal expenses.
A1.
CONCERNS OVER TAXI INQUIRY
Weeks before more than half of New York City's taxi inspectors were arrested on charges of accepting bribes, officials of the Taxi and Limousine Commission expressed grave concerns that the investigation was taking too long, delaying steps to fix the problem, officials said.
B3.
TRYING TO BE LIKE LENNY
The words were those of the philosopher-comic Lenny Bruce, working out, in his thoughtfully meandering, ungrammatical, quietly savage way, a facet of his obsession -- the hypocrisy of those who determine what is fit to be discussed in public..
B3.
TRUMP'S WATERFRONT PLAN VOTED DOWN
A community board voted 35 to 1 last night against Donald J. Trump's plan for Manhattan's largest undeveloped waterfront property, a plan that would add nearly 6,000 apartments and an office building to a neighborhood many residents say is too crowded.
B4.
BEHIND THE BEAUTY OF BALLET
A curtain parted on the private world of the ballet on Tuesday to reveal that ballet stars, for all their glamour, are merely mortal.
C3.
U.S. rejects Mayor Dinkins's request to stop work at burial site.
B4.
The Mayor prepares for a tense week on S.I.
B6.
REGION  GUN LAW REVISITED
The New Jersey State Senate put the finishing touches on legislation to again make it legal to own and transport military-style semiautomatic assault weapons.
The bill, which Governor Florio said he would veto, would also allow the owners of assault weapons to pass them on to their heirs.
B5.
TELEVISION FOR THE PUBLIC
Money was on the minds of Republican legislators when they began looking for a way to dispose of the state-subsidized New Jersey Network.
And money was the issue again as they heard a proposal from WNET, Channel 13, for merging the operations of the two public television stations.
B5.
FILLING A VACANCY
"She's got a tough job ahead of her," Gov.
Jim Florio said in introducing Zulima V. Farber, his choice to be New Jersey's Public Advocate and Public Defender.
She would replace Wilfredo Caraballo, who announced his resignation on July 1, the same day a Republican budget took effect, stripping the Office of the Public Advocate of much of its power.
B5.
GETTING STRICT ON SUBSIDIES
A top N.J.
Transit official promised to tighten up a bus subsidy program in the wake of charges that the owner of two companies misappropriated more than $1 million.
B6.
Our Towns by William Glaberson B5  Chronicle B6


IMMUNEX SETTLES TWO HOECHST SUITS AND POSTS A LOSS
The Immunex Corporation settled two lawsuits with Hoechst A.G. by agreeing to pay the German drug and chemical company higher royalties for a jointly developed cancer drug.
In exchange, Immunex will receive the exclusive right to market the drug in the United States.
This spring, Immunex sued Hoechst and certain subsidiaries, contending that their marketing practices breached their contract with Immunex.
Immunex manufactures the drug, Yeast GM-CSF (Sargramostim), and sells it under the name Leukine.
It treats certain cancers and is used by recipients of bone-marrow transplants.
Immunex also reported a second-quarter net loss of $3.4 million, compared with profit of $504,000, or 3 cents a share, a year earlier.
Sales rose 7.5 percent, to $17.1 million from $15.9 million.
Immunex shares rose $1.75 yesterday, to $34.75, in over-the-counter trading.


No Ifs, Ands or Bunts: Mattingly Is Mr. Glove
Even if he is no longer the hitter he once was -- and even if he never will be -- there is still one thing about Don Mattingly that hasn't changed through the seasons: his defense.
Afield, Mattingly is routinely reliable, occasionally brilliant.
But today, at a moment when the Yankees needed a big play, he went beyond the spectacular.


Allies Prepare Iraqi Ultimatum on Access to Site of Possible Secrets
The United States and its allies prepared an ultimatum to Iraq today, demanding that the United Nations get access to the Agriculture Ministry in Baghdad, allied and Administration officials said.
United Nations inspectors want access because they say Iraq is hiding ballistic-missile secrets in the building.
Under the ultimatum, which could be issued as early as this weekend, President Saddam Hussein would be warned that if he did not grant access by a specific date, he would face serious consequences.


House Approves Plan To Regulate Cable TV
Setting the stage for an election-season confrontation with President Bush, the House of Representatives today overwhelmingly approved a bill to re-regulate prices for cable television.
By a vote of 340 to 73, the House passed a measure similar to the one adopted by the Senate in January, one of the only big pieces of consumer legislation to clear both houses of Congress in years.
Since both measures were adopted by margins that could override a veto, tonight's action means that the legislation is virtually certain of becoming law, once the minor differences between the measures are ironed out.


New Advocate Editor
Jeff Yarbrough, a senior editor of The Advocate, has been named the magazine's editor in chief to replace Richard Rouilard, who resigned.
Mr.
Yarbrough is a former contributing editor of Interview and former West Coast editor of Egg.
He has also been a television producer for the Fox Broadcasting Company.
The 25-year-old Advocate is the largest national gay and lesbian magazine.


Reviews/Art; Contemporary Works From Japan
Japan has a vibrant contemporary art scene, though we haven't seen much evidence of it in New York City of late.
The last major exhibition of younger artists was the traveling "Against Nature: Japanese Art in the 80's" two years ago.
Throwing technology, art history and tradition into one big messy stew, it was an uneven affair, though its slightly unhinged energy proved exhilarating.
"Contemporary Painting and Calligraphy From Japan," at the Bronx Museum of the Arts, couldn't be a more different show.
Half the work here is calligraphy, by its very nature an intimate, soft-spoken art, and one rarely exhibited in the West.
The other half consists of a stylistic grab bag of modest-size paintings, many of which are deeply indebted to Western modernism.
Far from being a cutting-edge vanguard art, which in Japan these days usually takes the form of sculpture, this work is conservative in the extreme.
It isn't surprising to learn that the 65 paintings included in the exhibition were chosen from an annual open call to artists sponsored by the International Arts Council of Tokyo, an organization that primarily supports academic painting.


Bogota Is Criticized Over Drug Baron's Prison Escape; Frustration in Washington
Shaken by the escape from a Colombian prison of Pablo Escobar, the Administration and its critics expressed anger and frustration yesterday, and some members of Congress called for a fundamental review of United States anti-drug policies in South America.
"Nobody can credibly argue that the Escobar escape is not going to have to lead to a dramatic change in American policy," said Representative Robert G. Torricelli, the New Jersey Democrat who serves as chairman of the House Subcommittee on Western Hemispheric Affairs.


Senate Panel Opposes Radio-Frequency Shift
The Senate Appropriations Committee moved today to block a Federal plan to assign a big band of radio frequencies for advanced pocket telephones and other emerging technologies.
At the behest of Senator Ernest F. Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina, the committee inserted language into a financing bill for the Federal Communications Commission that severely hampers the agency from moving forward on the issue.


A New Indictment in the Reso Kidnapping
Federal authorities today dropped kidnapping charges against Arthur D. Seale in the abduction and death of Sidney J. Reso, a top Exxon executive, clearing the way for a state trial.
Michael Chertoff, the United States Attorney for New Jersey, said he did not have enough evidence to prosecute Mr.
Seale, a 45-year-old former Exxon security officer, under Federal kidnapping law because there is no indication that Mr.
Reso was taken from New Jersey after he was seized outside his home in Morris Township, N.J., on April 29.


Amid Glitter, Mullin Champions Routine
The view from the fifth-floor balcony in the luxury French Riviera hotel is the Mediterranean Sea, which for many would be the symbol of a lofty place and of a life filled with all the amenities of success as far-reaching as the eye can see.
Chris Mullin has come a long way to stare at these calm, blue waters, although he has never believed that his point of origin, a bedroom he shared with three brothers in the family home in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, was all that bad.


Sorting Out the Source Of AIDS-Like Illnesses
Researchers are puzzled by a number of patients around the world who appear to have acquired immune deficiency syndrome but who have no detectable infection with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Scientists must investigate many aspects of the cases before they can know what caused them and whether they reflect a threat to public health.
THE DISEASE: The condition may be some form of AIDS or it could be a breakdown of the immune system caused by some quite different agent.
If it proves to be a new disease, it could be the beginning of an epidemic, or it could be a longstanding but rare disease that has only now been noticed because of new techniques made widespread by AIDS researchers to monitor the immune system.


Iraqi Official Rejects Threats of U.N. Attack
A senior Iraqi official said today that threats of new bombing strikes or other military action would never persuade Iraq to allow United Nations arms inspectors to search the Agriculture Ministry here or any other buildings that are "symbols of sovereignty."
"Such threats do not change Iraq's position," the official, Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, said at a news conference the day after the United Nations inspectors ended their 17-day vigil outside the ministry, saying the Iraqi authorities were no longer protecting them against threatening demonstrators.


At Last, a Real Team With a Heart of 'Gold'
This is going to be my favorite Olympics.
Thanks to Michael and the Happy Campers, this will be the first Guilt-Free Games.
After all these years of watching athletes who have sacrificed so much to make the team, who have given up any chance of working a 9-to-5 job, who have had to sell their soles to the sneaker devils and fill their cossetted bodies with dangerously exhilarating chemicals, all to "fill our hearts with admiration and pride" (according to the last fund-raising letter signed by the disgraced Robert H. Helmick), we finally have some athletes who are just doing it for themselves.
No wonder they're called the Dream Team.
Golf in the mornings, the casinos at night.
As Michael said, "It's like summer camp, except I can't swim, so I'm not going near the pool."


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
TODAY: 10 A.M., Christian Broadcasting Network, taped interview.


Diner's Journal
Many Manhattan restaurants plan to extend their $19.92 prix fixe lunches, which were begun for the Democratic National Convention last week.
Some restaurants are already fully booked, but waiting lists for cancellations may be available.
These establishments will continue the special through Labor Day unless otherwise noted.
AMBASSADOR GRILL, United Nations Plaza Hotel, 44th Street and First Avenue, East Side, (212) 702-5014
AMERICAN HARVEST, Vista International Hotel, 2 World Trade Center, (212) 432-9334 (through July 31)
AQUAVIT, 13 West 54th Street, midtown, (212) 307-7311
ARCADIA, 21 East 62d Street, Upper East Side, (212) 223-2900
ARIZONA 206, 206 East 60th Street, Upper East Side, (212) 838-0440
BALLROOM, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005
BARBETTA, 321 West 46th Street, West Side, (212) 246-9171
BELLINI BY CIPRIANI, 777 Seventh Avenue, at 50th Street, midtown, (212) 265-7770
BOULEY, 165 Duane Street, at Hudson Street, TriBeCa, (212) 608-3852
BRAZILIAN PAVILION, 316 East 53d Street, East Side, (212) 758-8129
BROADWAY GRILL, Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza, 1605 Broadway, at 48th Street, midtown, (212) 315-6161
B. SMITH'S, 771 Eighth Avenue, at 47th Street, West Side, (212) 247-2222
CAFE BOTANICA, Essex House, 160 Central Park South, (212) 484-5120 (through December)
CAFE DES ARTISTES, 1 West 67th Street, Upper West Side, (212) 877-3500
CAFE LOUP, 105 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4746.
Offers a $14.92 lunch and a $19.92 dinner.
CAFE PIERRE, Pierre Hotel, 2 East 61st Street, Upper East Side, (212) 940-8185
CAPSOUTO FRERES, 451 Washington Street, at Watts Street, TriBeCa, (212) 966-4900
CHIN CHIN, 216 East 49th Street, East Side, (212) 888-4555
COCO PAZZO, 23 East 74th Street, Upper East Side, (212) 794-0205
DELMONICO'S, 56 Beaver Street, lower Manhattan, (212) 422-4747 (through Election Day).
540 PARK, Regency Hotel, 540 Park Avenue, at 61st Street, Upper East Side, (212) 759-4100 (through Election Day)
GUS'S PLACE, 149 Waverly Place, at Avenue of the Americas, Greenwich Village, (212) 645-8511 (through Election Day)
LES HALLES,411 Park Avenue South, at 28th Street, midtown, (212) 679-4111 (July 27 through Aug. 31)
HARRY CIPRIANI, Sherry-Netherland Hotel, Fifth Avenue at 60th Street, Upper East Side, (212) 753-5566
HUDSON RIVER CLUB, 4 World Financial Center, West Street south of Vesey Street, (212) 786-1500
JOCKEY CLUB, Ritz-Carlton Hotel, 112 Central Park South, (212) 664-7700
LOLA, 30 West 22d Street, Chelsea, (212) 675-6700
LE MADRI, 168 West 18th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 727-8022
MARK'S, Mark Hotel, 25 East 77th Street, Upper East Side, (212) 879-1864
MESA GRILL, 102 Fifth Avenue, at 15th Street, Flatiron district, (212) 807-7400
IL MONELLO, 1460 Second Avenue, at 76th Street, Upper East Side, (212) 535-9310
MONTRACHET, 239 West Broadway, at Walker Street, TriBeCa, (212) 219-2777
NOSMO KING, 54 Varick Street, at Canal Street, TriBeCa, (212) 966-1239 (through Election Day)
OYSTER BAR IN GRAND CENTRAL TERMINAL, Grand Central Terminal, lower level, Vanderbilt Avenue at 43d Street, midtown, (212) 490-6650
PALM, 837 Second Avenue, at 45th Street, East Side, (212) 687-2953
PARK AVENUE TOWN HOUSE, 47 East 29th Street, midtown (212) 447-1822
PARK BISTRO, 414 Park Avenue South, at 28th Street, midtown (212) 689-1360 (July 27 to Aug. 31)
LE PERIGORD, 405 East 52d Street, East Side, (212) 755-6244
PETROSSIAN, 182 West 58th Street, midtown, (212) 245-2214
LE PISTOU, 134 East 61st Street, Upper East Side, (212) 838-7987
RUSSIAN TEA ROOM, 150 West 57th Street, midtown, (212) 265-0947 (through July 31)
RUSTY STAUB'S, 575 Fifth Avenue, at 47th Street, midtown, (212) 682-1000
SAN DOMENICO, 240 Central Park South, (212) 265-5959
SECOND AVENUE DELI, 156 Second Avenue, at 10th Street, East Village, (212) 677-0606
SHUN LEE, 43 West 65th Street, Upper West Side, (212) 595-8895
SHUN LEE PALACE, 155 East 55th Street, midtown, (212) 371-8844
SIGN OF THE DOVE, 1110 Third Avenue, at 65th Street, Upper East Side, (212) 861-8080
TRIBECA GRILL, 375 Greenwich Street, at Franklin Street, (212) 941-3900.
"21" CLUB, 21 West 52d Street, midtown, (212) 582-7200
WATER CLUB, 500 East 30th Street, East Side, (212) 683-3333
WINDOWS ON THE WORLD, 1 World Trade Center, (212) 938-1111
WORLD YACHT, Pier 62, West 23d Street at the Hudson River, Chelsea, (212) 929-7090 The Changing Scene
OPEN: The Crystal Room, an American restaurant at 97 Sullivan Street, near Spring Street, SoHo, owned by Eric Bromberg and Stephanie Hoffman, who also own Nick and Eddie, a restaurant at 203 Spring Street.
CLOSED: Mondrian, the French restaurant at 7 East 59th Street . . .
Chelsea Place, a North Italian restaurant at 147 Eighth Avenue, near 17th Street, in Chelsea . . .
Greene Street, the SoHo restaurant and nightclub, 101 Greene Street, for at least three months for renovation.


Justice Thomas Defends Democratic Process; Madison a Left Winger?
To the Editor:
It is almost incredible, but "Again, a Struggle for the Soul of the Court" (Op-Ed, July 8) by Robert H. Bork, manages to discuss a variety of constitutional issues, notably abortion, without once acknowledging the place of individual rights in our system of government.
Mr.
Bork writes as if the Bill of Rights does not exist, as if it were not a high duty -- perhaps the highest -- of Supreme Court justices to "Secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our posterity," as the Preamble to the Constitution states.


Mother Cleared of Passing Drug to Babies
The Supreme Court of Florida yesterday overturned the conviction of Jennifer Clarice Johnson, the first woman in the nation convicted of delivering drugs to her newborn infants through the umbilical cord in the seconds after their births.
Ms.
Johnson, 26 years old, of Altamonte Springs, was charged and found guilty under laws intended to apply to drug traffickers.
About 160 such criminal cases have been brought nationwide.


New Editor Is Named at Times of London
Peter Stothard, a deputy editor of The Times of London, was named today to succeed Simon Jenkins as the newspaper's editor in October.
Mr.
Jenkins is stepping down as editor to resume his career as a writer.
Earlier this month, Fleet Street became immersed in speculation that big changes might be in store for The Times, the prestigious but money-losing daily owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, following the disclosure that a tabloid editor, Paul Dacre, who now runs The Daily Mail, had been approached about replacing Mr.
Jenkins.


Restaurants
Often when a restaurant changes its name, its decor and its cuisine, one can liken the effort to fussing with the mainsail while water gushes in through the galley.
Not so in the case of Hosteria Fiorella (formerly just Fiorella), a winsome Italian seafood grill that has made both cosmetic and substantive improvements.
Not only is the setting cheerful and appealing, but also the food is sparkling fresh and prepared with verve.
One doesn't grasp the scope of the refurbishment from the street, where all that's visible is the bar and reception area.
Upon first glance the smaller of the two dining rooms has a peculiar design motif: inside what look like giant translucent blocks of ice mounted on the walls are dozens of hand-painted wooden fish.
In contrast, the long, rectangular main dining rooms are done in a Conran's-goes-to-Vermont theme, an amalgam of mismatched blond wood tables, rustic murals, mirrors, quilts and a (fake) fireplace with an electric log.
The overall effort works, however, creating a relaxed, informal feeling.


In a Bulletproof Motorcade, Baker Whips Into Lebanon
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, riding in an armor-plated motorcade, made a surprise visit to Lebanon today to reaffirm Lebanon's sovereignty and to signal the Syrians that Washington expects them to withdraw their troops from Beirut by this fall.
Mr.
Baker, the first senior American official to visit Lebanon since Secretary of State George P. Shultz in 1983, drove from Damascus to Zahle to call on the Lebanese President, Elias Hrawi.
His home village is 10 miles from the border, on the western edge of the Bekaa region, where many United States hostages were once held by renegade militias.
Short Notice
Security was so tight that most of Mr.
Baker's staff and the journalists covering the trip were told only two hours before Mr.
Baker departed.
On top of that, a 12-car dummy motorcade, complete with official limousines, flags, police cars and an ambulance, drove along the route from the border to Zahle five minutes before the real motorcade came by, in order to draw out any potential assassins or trigger any car bombs.


Top Scorer Sits While U.S. Soccer Team Loses
Overcoaching. Defeat. Mutiny.
Here was a little bit of home cooking, served up from the United States to Barcelona on the occasion of the first Olympic competition of the Summer Games of 1992.
Italy defeated the United States, 2-1, in a preliminary-round soccer match tonight at Barcelona F.C.
Stadium in a game hardly that simple, or explicable.
For reasons that seemed obscure to all but him, the United States coach, Lothar Osiander, did not play his leading scorer and team leader, Steve Snow.


Starocherkasskaya Journal; Cossacks Revive. But Can They Recapture Glory?
Even now, as weeds choke the former palace of the Cossack chiefs and rusty debris litters the yard of the imposing cathedral, the spirit of the Cossacks hangs heavy over this village on the slow-flowing Don River.
It could have been here that Russia's greatest fictional ataman, or Cossack chief, Taras Bulba, roused the peasant-warriors to battle with the cry: "Enough cooking beer and lying around your stoves and feeding flies with your fat bodies! It's time to gather Cossack glory!"


Where Jesse Jackson Erred About Mary
To the Editor:
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson stated in his speech before the Democratic National Convention that "Jesus was born to a homeless couple." Not so.
Mary and Joseph had a home in Nazareth and were returning to Bethlehem, the ancestral home of the House of David, to which Joseph belonged.
Their journey was undertaken to comply with orders of Augustus Caesar that a census be taken, thus compelling the population to be counted at their place of birth.
Mary and Joseph simply could not find lodging the particular night at issue.


Miami Athletes Implicated in Illegal Grants
The United States Attorney's office asserted today that more than 65 University of Miami students, almost all of them athletes, received Federal financial aid fraudulently during a two-year period commencing June 1989.
The Unitd States Attorney's office said that more than 40 of those were football players.
It is the first public indication of just how widespread the practice was at Miami, the co-defending national football champion.


Officer Shoots Robbery Suspect in Subway
An off-duty housing police officer shot and wounded a 24-year-old man in a Brooklyn subway station yesterday after the man pulled a gun and robbed the officer of a gold chain, a ring and $61 in cash, the authorities said.
The suspect, identified as Victor Faison of 1200 Sutter Avenue in Brownsville, Brooklyn, was struck once in the right leg, said a transit police spokesman, Lieut.
Robert Valentino.
He was treated at Brookdale Medical Center and released to police custody and was charged with robbery, criminal possession of a weapon and criminal possession of stolen property, Lieutenant Valentino said.


CHRONICLE
VICTOR BORGE has offered to match the reward for information about the theft this week of manuscripts by Hans Christian Andersen from the Andersen Museum in Odense, Denmark.
The museum is offering $8,500 for information about the stolen papers that include the manuscripts for "The Little Mermaid" and "The Emperor's New Clothes."
The burglary was discovered Wednesday, the police in Odense have said.
The burglars drilled holes into a wooden door and removed a panel, circumventing the museum's alarm system.
The museum estimated the manuscripts' worth at about $700,000.


Fans' Point of View? It's Eternally Divided
Mike Feder and Henry Ford, colleagues in the admissions department at Technical Career Institutes in Manhattan, were eating lunch yesterday at Charley O's, debating the readmittance of George Steinbrenner to baseball.
"If he acts normally, he could be good for baseball," said the 51-year-old Feder, dean of admissions at the school, who lives in Staten Island.
"He has a good young manager now, but he probably wants to get rid of his general manager. He has to realize that you can't stay on top of people constantly. You have to give them a chance to do their job."


U.N. HEAD PROPOSES EXPANDED EFFORTS FOR SOMALI RELIEF
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali today proposed a broad expansion of United Nations forces in Somalia, an impoverished nation that he says has been denied its share of world attention as it sinks into lawlessness and famine.
Coming only two days after he opposed a decision by the Security Council for new aid to Yugoslavia, and at the end of a week of diplomatic jousting and recriminations over the priorities of the United Nations, the plan appears to be another sign of his determination to shift the way the organization operates.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE--Announced that George Steinbrenner, New York Yankees principal owner, can reassume the position of managing general partner of the team on March 1, 1993.
American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS--Sent Bruce Ruffin, pitcher, on a temporary assignment to Denver of the Pacific Coast League.
Purchased the contract of Alex Diaz, outfielder, from Denver.
National League
HOUSTON ASTROS--Announced that an agreement in principle has been reached to sell the club to Drayton McLane Jr.
MONTREAL EXPOS--Placed Spike Owen, shortstop, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 20.
Purchased the contract of Wil Cordero, shortstop, from Indianapolis of the American Association.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES--Activated Jim Lindeman, first baseman-outfielder, from the 60-day disabled list.
Sent Ruben Amaro, outfielder, to Scranton Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
Moved Tony Longmire, outfielder, from the 15-day to the 60-day disabled list.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS--Announced the resignation of Tony Harris, trainer.
Global Basketball Association
MISISSIPPI COAST SHARKS--Traded the rights to Joey Wright, guard, to the Huntsville Lasers for Stan Kimbrough, guard.
Football  National Football League
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS--Signed Johnny Rembert, linebacker; Jim Gray, defensive tackle, and Steve Gordon, offensive center.
Hockey  East Coast Hockey League  NASHVILLE KNIGHTS--Named G. Scott Greer executive vice president, and David N. Nivision vice president for group ticket sales, publicity and merchandise sales.
College
SOUTHWEST CONFERENCE--Named Tim Fitzpatrick assistant commissioner-director of basketball operations.
ARIZONA STATE--Announced the resignation of Steve Loy, men's golf coach.
CLEMSON--Announced the resignation of Len Gordy, men's assistant basketball coach, effective Sept. 15.
FLORIDA--Named Greg McGarity associate athletic director for internal affairs.
GEORGIA--Promoted John Shafer, assistant athletic director, to associate athletic director for business and event management, and Freddy Jones, ticket manager, to assistant athletic director for ticket operations.
Named Tony Cushenberry director of athletic facilities; Lewis Gainey events and facilities coordinator; Avery McLean promotions director and special projects coordinator, and Charley Whittemore administrative assistant and events management and athletic team travel assistant.
KANSAS STATE--Named Greg Grensing men's assistant basketball coach.
MISSOURI WESTERN STATE--Named Dave Kragthorpe, assistant football coach.
ST.
FRANCIS, PA.--Announced that Bill Seaward, basketball center, will transfer to St.
Marys College in Canada.
WASHINGTON--Named John Krebs men's golf coach.


Dr. Gavril A. Ilizarov Dies at 71; Pioneer Bone Surgeon in Russia
Prof.
Gavril A. Ilizarov, an orthopedic surgeon who developed a procedure to correct deformed bones, died yesterday in Kurgan, Russia, home of his institute in Siberia.
He was 71 years old.
He died of heart failure, according to the Hospital for Joint Diseases in New York, which reported his death.
The hospital has a working arrangement with Dr.
Ilizarov's Research Institute of Experimental and Clinical Orthopedic and Traumatology.


3 Congressmen Defy Post Office Subpoena
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the powerful chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, and two other Representatives today spurned a subpoena to appear before a Federal grand jury investigating the House post office, asserting that a United States Attorney was playing politics with the law.
In a letter to United States Attorney Jay B. Stephens, the three cited Fifth Amendment rights in an effort "to resist prosecutorial overreaching." It was unclear whether they would attend the grand jury session on Tuesday and invoke the Fifth Amendment there or would simply not attend.


TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Chicago Bears
He is 29 years old, he has been around since 1985, and he's been a legend of sorts on defense and offense and the training scale.
But yesterday defensive tackle William (Refrigerator) Perry asked the Bears to put him on the trading block because contract talks are at an impasse.
"This is the first time we've ever attempted to trade William Perry," player personnel director Bill Tobin said.
"It's at his request. It could be tomorrow, it could be never. It doesn't mean he won't be in a Bear uniform either, but we are exploring the option of trading William."


Guidepost
Putting Up Summer's fresh vegetables and ripe fruit are abundant in home gardens and farmers' markets, so now is the time to put up preserves, chutneys, pickles and pasta sauces. come midwinter, these foods will be even more enjoyable.
They also make good holiday gifts.
Safe canning calls for proper equipment and a reliable recipe.
Guides to home canning are available from the United States Department of Agriculture, cooperative extension agencies and makers of canning equipment.
"Putting Food By," by Ruth Hertzberg, Beatrice Vaughn and Janet Greene (Stephen Greene Press, 1982), is a trustworthy guide.
EQUIPMENT: 6- to 8-quart saucepan USE: For cooking foods to be canned.
EQUIPMENT: Ladle and tongs USE: For filling and handling jars.
EQUIPMENT: Home-canning jars USE: The kind that take two-piece lids.
EQUIPMENT: Two-piece lids USE: For safe canning, always use new two-piece lids with metal tops and metal screw bands.
An old lid may not seal properly.
EQUIPMENT: Boiling-water canner USE: A pot deep enough to hold full jars on a rack with an inch of water over the tops and room for the water to boil without spilling over.
It is used to process fruit preserves and acidic foods like pickles.
EQUIPMENT: Pressure canner USE: A sealed pot used to process meats, fish, vegetables and low-acid foods.
EQUIPMENT: Rack USE: The rack should fit into the bottom of the canner.
It can also be used for cooling jars.


ALLIES TO DISCUSS MILITARY SOLUTION TO IRAQ STANDOFF
Iraq's refusal to disclose records of its weapons programs prompted more calls for military confrontation today.
United Nations inspectors left Baghdad empty-handed, and the Bush Administration hinted at a renewed bombing campaign against Iraqi targets.
But both the scope of any action and the breadth of international support for it remained in question.
Administration officials said they expected to press through the weekend at the United Nations for a consensus on a military response among the world's major powers.


Need a License? Join the Crowd
By the time the Department of Motor Vehicles here opened at 8 A.M., the line to get in snaked down the length of the building and across the parking lot.
Still, the office manager, Marc Pinkus, considered this a good day.
"We've had as many as three or four hundred people waiting when we opened," Mr.
Pinkus said.
"We've heard of people camping out at three in the morning."


Corrections
A headline in some editions of Business Day yesterday about the loss reported by Delta Air Lines Inc. for its fourth quarter misstated the amount.
It was $180.2 million.


A Library's Last Measure to Retrieve Costly Late Books


Corrections
An article yesterday about fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina misidentified a Spanish freelance photographer who was killed there in May.
He was Jordi Pujol.


Montana Wilderness Battle: Apportioning Pristine Acres
Beneath a sky bruised by thunderstorms, the Crazy Mountains rise from the high plains of central Montana, a battleground without landmark status.
To the Crow Indians, who live on a reservation just southeast of here, the Crazy Mountains are a sacred place for feasting and spiritual journeys.
To the Brand S Lumber Company, the largest employer in Livingston, 30 miles to the west, the Crazies hold valleys brimming with potential 2 by 4's.
And to weekend warriors from places like Bozeman and Billings, these mountains are a backyard playground.


Accounts For Estates Were False
The official in charge of administering court-supervised estates in Manhattan has opened bank accounts normally reserved for the assets of dead people in the names of three lawyers working in her office, a practice that bank officials and law enforcement authorities describe as highly unusual, if not improper.
Two of the lawyers say the accounts were opened without their knowledge and one has charged that his name was repeatedly forged on transactions.
The official said the accounts were intended to hold money claimed by the lawyers, who are paid on a commission basis, for their work on estate cases.
But records show that she disbursed money from the accounts to other lawyers doing estate work.


Lower Earnings Sink Royal Appliance Stock
The Royal Appliance Manufacturing Company, which became a Wall Street favorite on the strength of its fast-selling Dirt Devil hand-held vacuum, saw its stock price plunge 59 percent yesterday after reporting sharply lower earnings.
The company said sales, which had been doubling every year, were lower in May and June than they had been in March and April, a fact that surprised the company.
With advertising costs soaring, profits almost vanished.
Royal reported earnings of $902,000, or 4 cents a share, on revenues of $77.6 million for the second quarter.


Cranston Journal; New Condom Shop Sets Off Clash With Old Values
The opening of a drive-through condom shop has residents reeling in a predominantly Italian neighborhood here, where statues of the Madonna and various saints adorn many well-kept lawns.
Condom Hut, Rhode Island's first drive-through condom shop, has been the target of vandalism and the subject of sermons since its opening last week, which coincided with the festival of the city's patron saint, Madonna Della Civita.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Lendl in Final Again  For the eighth time, Ivan Lendl will be in the final of the Players International tournament in Toronto.
The third-seeded Lendl easily dismissed Wally Masur, 6-1, 6-2, in a semifinal last night.
Lendl will go for his seventh title in the hard-court tournament against the winner of later semifinal between Andre Agassi and MaliVai Washington.
Masur reached the semifinals by beating top-seeded Petr Korda on Thursday, but Lendl's overpowering ground strokes were no match for the Australian. (AP) Sampras Wins: Second-seeded Pete Sampras beat Gabriel Markus, 6-3, 7-6 (7-4), to advance to the semifinals of the Philips Head Cup in Kitzbuhel, Austria.
Thomas Muster, the fourth-seeded player from Austria, scored a 7-6 (7-5), 6-4 victory over Martin Strelba in the quarterfinals of the clay-court tournament.
In today's semifinals, Sampras will face Marcelo Filippini, who upset No. 5 Emilio Sanchez, 3-6, 7-6 (8-6), 6-4.
Muster will play No. 7 Alberto Mancini, who defeated Diego Perez, 6-3, 6-4. (AP) Wild Card Advances: A wild-card entry, Mikael Tillstrom of Sweden, moved into the semifinals of the Dutch Open with another surprise victory yesterday, beating a local favorite, Mark Koevermans, 2-6, 6-3, 6-4, in the clay-court tournament in Hilversum.
Second-seeded Jordi Arrese will next face Tillstrom.
Arrese beat Bart Wuijts, 6-7 (5-7), 6-3, 6-2. (AP) GOLF  Maltbie Leads by Two  Roger Maltbie reached the midway point of the New England Classic with a two-stroke lead as he seeks to win the event he captured 17 years ago.
Maltbie, 41, a part-time roving golf announcer for NBC, followed Thursday's six-under 65 with a 66 yesterday in the Sutton, Mass., tournament.
Robert Friend, the first-round leader and a tour rookie, weaved five consecutive birdies into a roller-coaster round of two-under 69.
Friend, a two-year veteran of the Hogan tour, had nine straight pars on his first nine and then had five birdies and three bogeys coming in.
The round put Friend into a three-way tie for second place at nine-under 133, along with Brad Faxon and Kelly Gibson, another Hogan Tour player. (AP) Rodgers Shoots 66: Phil Rodgers shot a six-under-par 66 for a one-shot lead after the first round of the $400,000 Newport Cup, a Rhode Island stop on the Senior PGA Tour.
Rodgers, 54, fashioned 33's on each nine of the par-72, 6,722-yard links layout.
Jim O'Hern, Jim Dent, Tommy Aycock and Bert Yancey were a stroke back at 67 in the 54-hole event at the Newport Country Club.
Rodgers, who won five times on the PGA Tour, is seeking his first Senior PGA Tour title since becoming eligible in 1988. (AP)


SOUTH KOREA AND UNISYS IN COMPUTER VENTURE
South Korea yesterday announced a $74 million five-year project to develop computers with the Unisys Corporation.
A trade and industry ministry official said the project involves the joint creation and development of a new generation of large computer systems.
Several of the nation's prominent electronics producers, including Samsung Electronics and a university research team, would participate in the project, which is to start next year.
In the first two years, Korean developers would remodel the newly developed Unisys A16 and A19 systems to cater better to Korean customers, the official said.


Brooklyn Grocer Is Slain, and 3 Teen-Agers Are Sought
Calvin Chestnut's friends say an extraordinary man died yesterday, a person who came from nothing, eked out a living in a rundown section of Brooklyn and still had an extra dollar or two for anyone unluckier than he was.
Mr.
Chestnut, 34 years old and the father of four, was shot to death yesterday afternoon behind the counter of the small grocery store he operated for a decade at 737 Myrtle Avenue, in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
The police said he died almost instantly from a gunshot wound to the chest.


Accounting Proposal Softened, Pleasing Museums
Much to their relief, museum officials will not be compelled by their accountants to place monetary values on everything from moon rocks to Archie Bunker's armchair.
For two years, the museums have been involved in a nasty dispute with the Financial Accounting Standards Board, the private body that sets most of the nation's accounting rules, over how they account for the treasures in their collections.
It now appears that the museums have won.


Atlanta Too Hot, Pirates Discover
It's a weekend series in late July, a matchup of division leaders more than two months from season's end.
But to the Atlanta Braves and their fans, the three-game set that opened with the Pirates tonight at Fulton-County Stadium did so at a fevered pitch long before the first one of the game.
"In reality, every game since opening day has been like a pennant game for me," said Braves Manager Bobby Cox before his team went out to post a 4-3 victory, its 12th in a row and one short of the Braves' mark for consecutive victories, set in 1982.


CHRONICLE
It would have been logical for the party celebrating the Lincoln Center Out-of-Doors Festival to have been -- where else? -- out of doors.
But on Thursday evening, it rained, so the 200 guests at the reception for MARTIN and AUDREY GRUSS, the major benefactors of the festival, found themselves in the Kaplan Penthouse of the Samuel B. and David Rose Building at Lincoln Center.
Once inside, it was almost pastoral because ANTHONY SERRAZ, the floral designer for the Washington Street Cafe, which did the catering, happened to have a large mural of an outdoor scene on hand and quickly hung it up.
The guests included many of the performers in the 75 events of the festival, scheduled Aug. 4-30, representatives of 12 consulates and Lincoln Center board members.


Wayne McLaren, 51, Rodeo Rider and Model
Wayne McLaren, a former rodeo rider, movie stunt man, model and actor, died on Wednesday at Hoag Hospital in Newport Beach, Calif.
He was 51 years old and lived in Corona del Mar.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.
Mr.
McLaren, who said he had modelled occasionally for the "Marlboro Man" advertising campaign, attributed his illness to 30 years of smoking.
When he was found to have cancer two years ago, he became a critic of the tobacco industry and spoke at the stockholders' meeting of Philip Morris, which makes Marlboro.


INSIDE
Lawmakers Spurn Subpoena
The Ways and Means chairman and two other Democrats said they would refuse to testify before a grand jury on the House post office.
Page 6.
A Trade Battle Over Beer
The United States and Canada imposed import duties on each other's beer shipments as a long-running trade dispute heated up.
Page 35.
Protecting Disabled Workers
Some companies are already complying with the new law banning discrimination against the disabled that takes effect this weekend.
Page 35.
Iran-Contra Trial Under Way
The Government opened its case against Clair E. George by portraying him as a brilliant spy who had lied smoothly to Congress.
Page 9.
Chess Legends to Play
Bobby Fischer will end two decades of seclusion by playing an exhibition match in Yugoslavia against his former rival, Boris Spassky.
Page 3.


BARCELONA: Notebook; U.S. Swimming Wins A Change in the Rules
United States Swimming will halt its costly trust-fund system by January 1993, forcing athletes to handle their own finances, whether their income is from swimming subsidies or outside earnings.
The organization, the governing body for swimming in the United States, sponsored a successful resolution this week in Barcelona before FINA, the world governing body, that made trust funds optional for each member group beginning next year.
In the past, trust funds were mandated for all members, and were viewed as a last, shaky link to amateurism.


Going for the Gold -- and Real Money
So many athletes.
So many nations.
So much money.
The Olympic Games in Barcelona will be unlike any that have gone before.
For the next 16 days, 10,000 athletes from 172 nations will test themselves and each other in the first boycott-free Games in 20 years.
There will be Lithuanians who haven't competed under Lithuania's flag since 1928; Croatians, Slovenians and Namibians competing as citizens of new nations, and a multiracial contingent of South Africans who weren't born yet when their homeland's all-white entry was banned in the 1960's.


Review/Pop; Intimations Of Yesterday In Manhattan
For the last four months the Tavern on the Green, off Central Park West at 67th Street, has featured instrumental jazz in a new walled-off space called the Chestnut Room.
And this week, in an engagement that extends through tonight, the club finally booked its first vocalist, Daryl Sherman, who also plays the piano, along with Gray Sargent on guitar and Boots Meleson on bass.
At the moment the hope is to build up recognition of the Chestnut Room slowly, so that it may one day compete with the Algonquin Hotel's Oak Room and other leading Manhattan cabarets in booking big-name talent on the jazzier side of pop.
Ms.
Sherman certainly fits the bill.
A singer and pianist who writes some of her own material, she exemplifies a sort of old-style Manhattan sophistication that exists more in legend nowadays than in reality.
Her song "Welcome to Manhattan," which she performed on Wednesday evening, wistfully evokes the city's romantic allure with its references to the Cafe Pierre and other rendezvous.


Classical Music in Review
Joshua Rifkin The Bach Ensemble Mostly Mozart Avery Fisher Hall
The further back early-music players retreat into history, the less knowledge survives and the more conjecture can turn to fantasy.
The 18th century is another matter, however, being music's first true age of musical information.
We have tons of knowledge, with many contradictions running through it.
As practiced today, faithfulness to originals offers so many diverging possibilities that to choose, another kind of faith is in order.
One message -- "think small" -- has been taken very much to heart by Joshua Rifkin in recent years, and his choral and instrumental groups have brought us Bach performed either one on a part or very close to it.
Mr.
Rifkin and his eight-member Bach Ensemble visited Avery Fisher Hall and the Mostly Mozart series on Thursday night in performances of the B-minor Suite, the D-minor Violin and Oboe Concerto, the "Wedding" Cantata and the Fifth Brandenburg Concerto, in which Mr.
Rifkin himself played the intricate harpsichord solos.


Amsterdam AIDS Talks End
The eighth international AIDS meeting closed here today with memorials to the more than one million people who have died of the disease and without the disruptions that have marred recent meetings.
It was the first such meeting in which AIDS activists officially took part, and at the speaker's platform and in discussions in the hallways, activists and scientists share their knowledge and experience of the disease.


Gray-Water Systems Recycle Nondrinking Water to Cut Sludge
To the Editor:
Your June 29 report on New York City's discontinuation of the dumping of sludge in the Atlantic Ocean underscores the simple truth that sludge hasn't been eliminated.
We must reduce the amount we produce.
One partial solution is gray-water recycling in commercial buildings.
Gray-water systems are based on the on-site treatment (filtration, chlorination) of waste water from tubs, sinks and other fixtures and its reuse within the building for nonpotable purposes (flushing toilets and urinals, watering down sidewalks).
Gray water systems reuse all waste water except from toilets and urinals (black-water systems reuse this waste, too) and can even capture and reuse rainwater.
The recycled nonpotable water is often marked with blue dye to assure building occupants that the water they are drinking is safe.


Jordan &amp; Co. Not Only Business in Town
On the eve of the 1992 Olympic Summer Games, Magic Johnson called a news conference this week in Monte Carlo, Monaco, to announce that he was quitting his basketball shoe contract with Converse because he believed the company hadn't invested heavily enough in him during a 12-year association.
We may have all winced at his timing, but that's Olympic show biz, folks.
With the handsomely paid professionals from the National Basketball Association having touched down in Spain yesterday, it is important for all angst-ridden Americans lamenting the presence here of Michael Jordan and Company to remember that the Olympics are a worldwide business, not merely our tall mercenaries against everyone else's noble competitors who seek the thrill of international brotherhood through sport.


John Baker Dies at 89; Wall Street Executive
John D. Baker, a former vice chairman and director of the investment firm of Dean Witter Reynolds, died yesterday at his home in Bush Hill Falls, Pa.
He was 89 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


No New Plan Set by Tokyo On Stock Fall
The Government announced late Friday after an emergency meeting of top officials that any new measures to help the flagging economy and the stock market would have to wait until September.
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa announced on Thursday that he was planning an emergency gathering of his top ministers to come up with a package to rescue the plunging stock market and to give the economy some fresh stimulus.


Canada Beer Dispute Flares on Eve of Trade Talks
On the eve of top-level talks on a North American free-trade agreement, a long-running dispute flared anew today as the United States and Canada imposed taxes on each other's beer shipments.
The United States this morning imposed a duty of $2.60 to $3 on each 24-bottle case of beer from the province of Ontario, which in May doubled its tax on aluminum beer cans.
Canada responded within hours by imposing a similar duty on shipments of Heileman and Stroh's beer from the United States to Ontario.


No Headline
It's difficult to mention the Yankees without thinking of Steinbrenner.
I'm sure that most people don't know the names of anyone else who owns the team or even the name of the general manager.
But everyone knows George Steinbrenner. -- BETH BURBAGE, on the decision to let the owner return next March.  [ 31:6. ]


Orders for Durable Goods Rose 2.3% in a June Rebound
Factory orders for cars, computers and other durable goods recovered in June from a late-spring slump -- just as Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, predicted in testimony to Congress a few days ago.
Orders, which zig-zag from month to month, rebounded 2.3 percent, to $122.5 billion, after a 2.2 percent drop in May, the Commerce Department reported yesterday.
The rise -- the fourth in the last six months -- suggests that the May decline in industrial production is not apt to continue.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press in some editions on Thursday about the dropping of assault charges against Peter Martins, the ballet master in chief of the New York City Ballet, misstated the nature of the action.
The charges were withdrawn "with prejudice," meaning they cannot be filed again.


Richard Karfunkle, Economist, Lecturer And Consultant, 59
Richard D. Karfunkle, an economist, died on Monday at his home in Kennett Square, Pa.
He was 59 years old.
Mr. Karfunkle, who had leukemia, died of pneumonia, his son Jeffrey said.


COMPANY NEWS
ACCUSONICS INC., entered into a letter of intent to merge a newly formed subsidiary with Clean America Corp., a privately held Oklahoma corporation, pursuant to which 1,850,000 shares of Accusonics will be issued.
ESSEX HOLDING MS INC., entered into a definitive merger agreement providing for its acquisition by a group led by Bessemer Capital Partners, an affiliate of Bessemer Securities Corporation, for an aggregate consideration of approximately $525 million, including debt assumed or refinanced.


Bridge
For thousands of bridge players today was the beginning of the American Contract Bridge League's Summer National Championships here, but for 100 or so it was the ending of the Grand National Teams, which began at grass-roots level eight months ago.
In Flight A, one semifinal will match Florida with New England and the District of Columbia with Nevada.
Two teams from the New York metropolitan area are among eight survivors in the Flight B event.
One is a Long Island foursome consisting of Otto Rothenberg of Merrick, Arthur Haley of Centereach, Bert Kulic of Nesconset and Richard Baumer of Holbrook.
The other is a Westchester squad composed of Nielih Cheng and Peter Kalat, both of Scarsdale; Jeffrey Allen and Pat Calahan, both of Hastings-on-Hudson, and Bruce Platt of Dobbs Ferry with Carlos Munoz of Stamford, Conn.
How to Lose a Loser
On the diagramed deal from the Flight A Grand National Teams, Walter Johnson of Columbus, Ohio, played skillfully to bring home four hearts after the opening lead of the spade ten.
This was covered by the jack and the queen and won with the ace.
Faced with a possible loser in each suit, South began by leading a trump to the king.
East won with the ace and returned a club.


Israel Plans New Measures to Discourage Settlers
Israeli Government officials said today that the freeze announced this week on new construction in the occupied territories was a first step that will be followed by other measures to discourage Jewish settlers from moving into those areas.
They argued that their commitment to a sharp cutback in future settlement building was more important than their simultaneous decision on Thursday to permit the completion of thousands of apartments and houses already started in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Hopes of Cable Industry Ride on a Veto by Bush
Stung by an overwhelming vote on Thursday night by the House of Representatives to reregulate cable television prices, cable television companies held out hope today that President Bush would rescue them with a veto.
But Democrats in Congress and consumer groups said they were confident they had the votes to override the expected veto, noting that rural Republicans defected from the Administration in significant numbers.


A Lovers' Guide to Flea Market Passions
A flea market is like a high school dance.
You go there hoping to fall in love and you do, over and over, always with the same type.
This idea dawns on you in time, and you tell yourself to stop ogling, say, bakelite radios.
And then, from a pile of flea market junk, another bakelite radio begins singing to you like Circe.
Buy it and consider yourself a collector.
Or don't buy it.
Just walk away.
But resist the impulse to walk back later.
Your own true radio may have run off with another.
To console yourself, you may rush to buy another thing, a better thing, you tell yourself.
It's probably not your type.
Never buy on the rebound.
This is one of the rules of flea marketing.


20 Years in Check
In the 20 years since Mr.
Fischer defeated Mr.
Spassky in their world championship match in Reykjavik, Iceland, Mr.
Fischer has not played a single game in public.
From time to time, fragmentary reports from other grandmasters have suggested that Mr.
Fischer still possesses his old domination of the game.
Most grandmasters agree, however, that there is no substitute for practice against top-flight chess opposition.


Perot Spent $3 Million in June
Billionaire Ross Perot spent $3.7 million, most of it his own money, in June to prepare the independent Presidential campaign he abandoned weeks later, a report showed today.
Mr.
Perot kicked in $3.12 million of his own money in June, bringing to $6.36 million the amount he had given to his campaign since first mentioning in March that he might run, his report to the Federal Election Commission shows.
He also reported the receipt of nearly $1 million in private contributions in June.
Mr.
Perot, who once vowed to spend $100 million of his money to seek the White House, estimated that he had spent $10 million of his own money by the time he ended the bid on July 16.


Price Tag: Pampering Yourself
Average costs of ordinary pampering, including selected spa and salon treatments intended to beautify, invigorate and relax the recipient; and the cost of extreme pampering, a week at an exclusive resort in northern Italy.


Johnson's Ex-Coach in Town
The Canadian Olympic team consists of 311 athletes, but only one has captured anyone's fancy as the opening ceremonies of the Barcelona Games approach on Saturday.
That would be Ben Johnson, the sprinter who did more to make the 1988 Seoul Games memorable than any of the other thousands of athletes who competed.
Johnson set a world record in the 100 meters, then proved himself a cheat two days later by failing a drug test.
He was later stripped of the gold medal.


Fans Have Their Own Dreams As U.S. Team Rolls Into Town
Outside the glossy Hotel Ambassador, the two Spanish teen-agers had been among the first to gather for tonight's arrival of the Dream Team at the players' $900-a-night Olympic rooms.
Clutching a large color photo of Michael Jordan in full flight, 15-year-old Javier Roig was wearing a black Chicago Bulls cap, a Jordan sweatshirt, black Jordan pants, black-and-red Jordan socks and black-and-red Air Jordan sneakers.


Helen Knubel, 91; Organized Archives Of Lutheran Church
Helen M. Knubel, archivist of the Lutheran Church, died on Thursday at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y.
She was 91 years old.
She lived in New Rochelle, N.Y., until she recently entered the Wartburg Nursing Home, in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
Miss Knubel died of respiratory failure, said her nephew, Frederick H. Knubel.


Peru Military to Try Suspects
Responding to Shining Path attacks that disrupted the capital for last two days, the Peruvian President, Alberto K. Fujimori, decreed today that suspects of deadly terrorist crimes will be tried in military courts.
Mr.
Fujimori also declared strict controls on ammonia nitrate fertilizer.
Soaked with gasoline, this fertilizer has been used in car bombs that in the last week killed more than 25 people and wounded hundreds.


The Future Is Now for the Unified Team
This is the eve of the 25th Summer Olympic Games.
The buzz has been growing for weeks, intensifying in the last few days.
In a multicultured city of 1.7 million and a metropolitan area of more than twice that number, so many people seem eager to start celebrating 16 days of athletic achievement and themselves.
Yet, as always, the sharper reality of life beyond the moment intrudes.
The leader of the Unified Team of the Commonwealth of Independent States today painted a bleak picture for the future of sports in what was once the Soviet Union, the mightiest of Olympic powers.


Correction Official, Rebuked Over Possible Irregularities, Resigns
Allison Lewis-Smith, the former head of the New York City Correction Department's legal division, has resigned, two months after she was rebuked for a possible conflict of interest in the awarding of a $1.9 million contract to electronically monitor released prisoners.
She resigned her post as a deputy commissioner on July 17, a department spokesman, Thomas Antenen, said yesterday.
In a letter to Correction Commissioner Catherine M. Abate, Ms.
Lewis-Smith said she was resigning "to attend graduate school and for personal reasons," Mr.
Antenen said.


Space's Toll on Body Tends to Linger
Astronauts go through rapid physical changes in space and take a surprisingly long time to return to normal once they return to Earth, scientists said today.
Researchers looking at human adaptation to the low-gravity conditions of space said that space travel had pronounced effects on many body functions, including the regulation of blood pressure, balance and orientation; the maintenance of muscle mass, and the production of key cells.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The U.S. and Canada imposed duties on each other's beer shipments, fanning a long-standing dispute on the eve of top-level talks on a North American free-trade agreement.  [ Page 35. ]
The Economy
Factory orders for durable goods rebounded 2.3 percent, to $122.5 billion, in June after dropping 2.2 percent in May.
The rise was the fourth in the last six months.  [ 35. ]


Coslet Sure Of Nagle And Now It Shows
Coach Bruce Coslet conceded today that heading into training camp he had contemplated scaling back the Jets' offense to suit Browning Nagle's talents, but that the second-year quarterback had convinced him otherwise during the first week of practice.
It was the first indication from Coslet that he might have had some doubts about Nagle's ability to pick up the complex system.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days: Gov.
Bill Clinton SUNDAY: 9:30 P.M., C-Span, interview.
Senator Al Gore SUNDAY: 10 P.M., C-Span, interview.


Brooklyn Leaders Back Beaten Woman
Police officials in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, met with more than two dozen angry and concerned community leaders yesterday, a day after a member of the 81st Precinct's Community Council accused several officers and a sergeant of beating her and her three grown children.
The officials called the meeting to address community outrage and defended the officers, saying they were simply responding to a fight between two sons of the council member, Ann B. Dodds.
They added that all of the officers were injured in the dispute and that one had a broken shoulder.


Italian Senate Moves Haltingly on Anti-Mafia Bill
As the slain anti-Mafia crusader Paolo Borsellino was buried in Palermo, Parliament in Rome took a first step today toward enacting laws that will give the police and investigators stronger powers to search for, interrogate and entrap organized-crime suspects.
But the difficulties confronting the authorities in breaking the mob's hold on Sicily were illuminated by news reports today that a Mafia fugitive managed to slip away by power-boat on Thursday even as the island's greatly reinforced law enforcement agencies closed in on his villa.


Help Thailand's Quiet Revolution
Prime Minister Anand Panyarachun's delicate moves to trim the political and economic power of the Thai military lack the melodrama of May's bloody street confrontations in Bangkok.
But should he succeed, the effects would be beneficial and widely felt.
Refocusing the armed forces on legitimate defense concerns would simplify peacekeeping tasks in Cambodia, cut a key lifeline to Myanmar's tyrannical military dictatorship and complicate life for international narcotics traffickers.
With such substantial dividends at stake, Mr.
Anand's efforts deserve wholehearted U.S. support.


Review/Film; Deconstructing His Own Construction
Lotti Huber, the subject of Rosa von Praunheim's eccentric documentary film "Affengeil," exudes a remarkable vitality for a woman in her late 70's.
A German equivalent of one of Andy Warhol's superstars, she was discovered more than a decade ago by Mr. von Praunheim, a well-regarded experimental film maker who cast her in his movie "Our Corpses Are Still Alive." More recently, she portrayed Anita Berber, a nude dancer who scandalized Weimar Germany, in his film "Anita, Dances of Vice."
A flamboyant figure in large hoop earrings, dramatic makeup and hair worn in huge unkempt shocks, Miss Huber bears a striking resemblance to the transvestite actor Divine.
Although she expresses a sunny, live-and-let-live attitude, she is also clearly someone who is used to being in control, and "Affengeil" includes scenes of a fight between the film maker and his subject, in which he accuses her of trying to take over his movie.
She, in turn, argues that since it is her life that is being shown, she is entitled to that control.


Subway Samaritan
To the Editor:
Three weeks ago my son and I rode the C train from Rockaway Park.
I was reading a book borrowed from the Midtown Manhattan branch of the New York Public Library.
I placed it beside me to take papers from my briefcase to show my son.
We got off at Rockaway Boulevard, but I forgot to pick up my book.


Reaching New Heights


Smoking, Kids and Mr. Marino
Ralph Marino, the majority leader of New York State's Senate, has a chance to save a lot of young lives next Wednesday.
All he has to do is give a number to a bill called the Adolescent Tobacco-Use Prevention Act and put it on the calendar.
Why he hasn't boggles the mind.
The bill is not controversial.
It would significantly reduce youngsters' free and easy access to a habit that might eventually kill them: cigarette smoking.
Furthermore, it has the support of the Governor, his Commission on Smoking or Health and 120 state and local health, education, public interest and community organizations.


Review/Opera; At Glyndebourne, Changes in Body and in Soul
An era came to an end here tonight with the fireworks that lighted up the sky above the Sussex downs, the flares and rockets revealing for the last time at the Glyndebourne Festival the outline of its opera house, which is scheduled to be demolished next week.
The light show followed an evening of musical fireworks -- a gala concert at which distinguished alumni of the opera festival, including Ruggero Raimondi, Montserrat Caballe, Bernard Haitink and Benjamin Luxon, paid tribute to the old opera house in the presence of the Prince of Wales.
The theater was built as an addition to the country mansion here in 1934, and has since been the host of a privately financed series of performances and productions that have had a remarkable influence on world taste.


Taylor Will Keep Up His Number of Downs
Lawrence Taylor reported to work today after missing the first four days of the Giants' training camp and incurring $6,000 in fines.
He promptly dismissed the notion that at 33 years old he would be a part-time player this season, perhaps as an extra pass-rusher on third-down plays.
"No way," he said.
"If I'm only a third-down player, I wouldn't be here. If it's just third down, they can get someone off the street to play that. I'm smart enough to know my limitations. I'm not 22 or 25. I know what I can do.


Patents; Prism Aids Computing With Light
HOPING to accelerate the creation of computers that use light, rather than electricity, scientists at City College in New York have invented a tiny prism they believe could become a key component in high-speed optical switches.
Optical computing is still a fledgling technology, but many scientists say it could permit enormous increases in processing power in years to come.
An optical computer processes data as a stream of light and dark signals that are analogous to Morse code and represent the ones and zeroes of computer code.
By contrast, electronic computers represent this digital stream as a series of on-off electrical pulses.


Indurain Steps Up Degree of His Rout in Tour
Miguel Indurain rode away from nearly everybody again today in the final time trial of the 1992 Tour de France and more than doubled his lead with two days to go in the three-week bicycle race.
"It's nice to win stages, but my goal is to win the Tour de France," Indurain said in careful tones.
Barring catastrophe, he will mount the podium in Paris on Sunday for a second consecutive year as the victor.


Army General Is Implicated In Colombian Prison Escape
Senior Government officials here say they are increasingly convinced that a decorated army general entrusted with the prison transfer of Colombia's most notorious drug baron, Pablo Escobar, was either bought off or intimidated into cooperating in his escape Wednesday.
In an interview, an official involved in Colombia's anti-drug operations today gave the first detailed description of the the 22 hours that elapsed between a presidential order to transfer Mr.
Escobar and the confirmation of his escape.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  LESS PAROLE FOR THE VIOLENT
Daniel Joyner, a broad-shouldered murderer, was among the convicts who went before the parole board recently.
Had the 42-year-old Mr.
Joyner served his minimum 15 years ago, his chances would have been better than one in two at making parole for his crime; nowadays they are less than one in three as the parole boards, exercising what is called their "just deserts" leeway, mirror society's intensified fear and loathing of violent criminals.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  ANGER OVER POLICE BRUTALITY CHARGES
More than two dozen community leaders met with police officials in Bedford-Stuyvesant yesterday, saying they were angered and concerned over allegations of police brutality by a member of the precinct's Community Council.
The leaders said they were inclined to believe the account of the council member, Ann B. Dodds, that officers attacked her and her family without provocation after they were called to break up a fight between her sons.
Page 25.
THOUSANDS OF NEWSPAPERS STOLEN
A two-year investigation of organized crime's penetration of New York newspaper deliveries has found evidence of the theft of about 20,000 newspapers a day at The Daily News last year, state prosecutors said in Manhattan.
They said the thefts mirrored those at The New York Post by a different mob family last year.
Page 25.
SAMPLE BALLOTS IN CHINESE
In a pilot program for the September primary election, the New York City Board of Elections has agreed to print sample ballots in Chinese, as well as to provide Chinese interpreters and Chinese voting instructions in parts of lower Manhattan, Queens and Brooklyn.
Page 25.
ANIMALS SLAIN AT PRIVATE SCHOOL
The mutilated bodies of nine farm animals were found outside a barn at the Fieldston Country Day School in the Riverdale section of the Bronx yesterday, just before 250 children were to arrive for a summer day camp, the police said.
Officials said the killings did not appear to be related to any religious cult.
Page 25.
A grocer in Brooklyn is fatally shot.
Page 24.
A jails official quits amid conflict-of-interest questions.
Page 25.
REGION  EDUCATING NEWCOMERS
The school district in Huntington, L.I., may take some comfort in one education expert's assertion that it is far from the only suburban school systems struggling to adapt as its student body includes ever more newcomers to America.
But that broader view provides little reassurance to parents whose children receive minimal English instruction or are diverted to special-education classes.
Page 27.
DRESS FOR SUCCESS?
A cocktail waitress has sued the Sands Casino, contending that the Atlantic City gambling hall discriminates against female employees by forcing them to dress provocatively in scanty costumes and miserably in 5-inch heels.
Meanwhile, the suit says, waitresses' male counterparts can dress respectably in tuxedos and comfortably in low shoes.
Page 27.
About New York by Douglas Martin Page 24


Miami Residents Dislike Canseco Boulevard
Dade County officials are being petitioned to have the name of Oakland Athletics outfielder JOSE CANSECO taken off a Miami street that had been named after him in 1988.
"What has he done except hit a couple of home runs?" said CARMEN WOODBURY, a member of the Westchester Homeowners Association, upset that Southwest 16th Street from the Palmetto Expressway to Southwest 107th Avenue is known as Jose Canseco Boulevard.


Jud Phillips, 71, Dies; Early Rock Promoter
John William (Jud) Phillips, a music promoter and a record company executive who ran Sun Records in Memphis with his brother Sam, died on Monday at his home in Memphis.
He was 71 years old.
He died of throat cancer, his brother said.


Will Huck Now Be Sold Down the Mississippi?
To the Editor:
As a Mark Twain scholar, I was pleased with the prominence you gave to a piece that Twain published in The Times in 1874, "Sociable Jimmy." The thesis of Prof.
Shelley Fisher Fishkin, drawn from her reading of the piece, that a 10-year-old African-American boy was the source for the voice of Huckleberry Finn, provokes interesting questions, only some of which you touched on.
While "Sociable Jimmy" has been known for some time, whether the boy it describes is actual or fictional has not to my knowledge been determined, which may or may not have bearing on the issue.


Burglars Hit Bronx Borough Chief's Office
Burglars stole electronic equipment from Borough President Fernando Ferrer's office in the Bronx County Courthouse early yesterday, the authorities said.
It was the 12th break-in at the building this year.
Mr.
Ferrer's aides estimated the value of the equipment, including a fax machine, a VCR and a television set, at $1,600.
Only two nights before, burglars stole a fax machine from the Budget Unit; that fax machine was a replacement for one that had been stolen three months before.


New York Hospital Fan
To the Editor:
On April 7, I suffered a severe heart attack and was rushed to New York Hospital.
The cardiovascular support team, headed by Dr.
Benjamin Zola, saved my life by effective and fast action.
Not only do they operate on the cutting edge of cardiovascular procedures, but they also administer their art with compassion and loving care.
The nursing staff responded in the same vein.
I feel fortunate to have been treated at New York Hospital.
Being a New Yorker has its rewards.
STANLEY MIGDOL New York, July 1, 1992


Britain Expels Iranians Tied to Rushdie Threat
Britain today ordered the expulsion of three Iranians for reasons of "national security" that British press reports said were connected with the death threat against the British author Salman Rushdie.
A Foreign Office spokesman refused to comment on the reports, but said that two employees of the Iranian Embassy and a student were being expelled, one for "unacceptable intelligence activities" and the other two for their involvement with "a foreign intelligence service."


Classical Music in Review
Yiddish Music and Theater Festival Damrosch Park Lincoln Center
The Workmen's Circle, an organization devoted to the teaching of Yiddish and the preservation of Yiddish cultural traditions, presents free outdoor variety shows every summer.
On Wednesday evening, it took its Yiddish Music and Theater Festival to Damrosch Park and attracted a crowd large enough to fill every available seat as well as all of the benches between the back of the park and the New York State Theater.
Moishe Rosenfeld, the master of ceremonies, called the concert "the Yiddish Woodstock" and quoted a line from the film about that festival ("the New York State Thruway is closed") that elicited no response from an audience that was mostly too old to have paid much attention to the original Woodstock.
He also described some of his organization's language courses and sealed his sales pitch by telling jokes in which the setups were in English and the punch lines were in Yiddish.


Observer; Pretty Good Read
In his 1,047-pager, "What It Takes," Richard Ben Cramer does for American politics what Marcel Proust did for the cookie.
After dipping his madeleine in tea, you remember, Proust experienced total recall of French social and cultural history from Charlemagne to Maurice Chevalier.
It took him 1.5 million words to get it on paper.
Some say more like 2 million.
Cramer has ambitions to play in Proust's league, but he has handicapped himself by choosing politics for his explorations.
Thus, as of this morning, after just five weeks of reading, I was up to Page 635, Chapter 63.


Realignment? Not So Fast
With the prospects of National League realignment for next season dwindling, lawyers for Commissioner Fay Vincent are very likely to let a Federal judge grant the Chicago Cubs a permanent injunction blocking realignment, then appeal that injunction.
After the lawyers discussed their strategy yesterday, one said they would probably not contest the motion for summary judgment the Cubs will make next Thursday to Judge Suzanne Conlon of United States District Court in Chicago.
Based on her comments this past Thursday, Conlon seemed poised to grant the motion that would give the Cubs a permanent injunction blocking the shift the commissioner has ordered from the Eastern to the Western Division for 1993.


Astros Find an Owner
The sale of the Houston Astros to a Texas millionaire, DRAYTON McLANE Jr., was formally announced yesterday on the floor of the Astrodome.
JOHN McMULLEN, majority stockholder of the team, said an agreement in principle had been reached on the sale, which includes the master lease on the county-owned Astrodome.
The deal, to be worth about $100 million, should be completed by late October, pending approval by league owners.
"I found the perfect owner," said McMullen.
McLane is a native Texan who made his fortune by building a company started by his grandfather into one of the nation's largest wholesale grocery distributorships.
In 1990, he sold the company to Wal-Mart Inc. for stock valued at $275 million. (AP)


Review/Dance; Mona Lisa (Eating Pasta) and Other Muses
John Kelly suggests a waifish East Village version of John-Boy Walton with a penchant for crossdressing.
He is also an extravagant romantic with a tart post-modern sense of humor.
The contradictions between the lost little boy and the urban sophisticate, between the hopeless romantic and self-mocking clown in Mr.
Kelly make him one of New York's most compelling performance artists.
And because he moves with the grace of a classical dancer and sings operatic arias associated with famous divas in a falsetto that is somewhat better than a shrieking drag caricature, his loving imitations of classical performance carry an ambiguous weight.
These crosscurrents pull against each other delightfully in his new solo performance piece, "Divine Promiscue," which had its world premiere at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday evening as part of Lincoln Center's Serious Fun festival.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.29
5.66
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.15
3.14
5.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.22
5.69
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.18
6.15
8.04
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.56
7.53
8.38
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.56
8.53
9.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.13
6.14
7.11
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Amid Controversy, Jerusalem Destroys Church Built Without Permit


Ah, .500! Mets Find Land of Promise
After 43 days in which the $44 million Mets stumbled and searched for victories in the land of defeat, a treacherous area they were not supposed to inhabit, they finally found the .500 mark again last night.
Sid Fernandez carried them across the threshold.
Fernandez spun a three-hitter as the rejuvenated Mets cruised to a 3-0 victory over the San Diego Padres last night at Shea Stadium and evened their record at 48-48.
It was their sixth victory in seven games and marked the first time since June 11 that their triumphs have equaled their losses.


Newspaper Theft Charged at Daily News
A two-year investigation of organized crime's penetration of New York newspaper deliveries has uncovered evidence of the theft of about 20,000 newspapers each day at The Daily News last year, state prosecutors said in Manhattan yesterday.
An Assistant District Attorney, Sean Dwyer, said the investigation showed that the theft was organized by members of the Colombo and Lucchese crime families and that it followed the pattern of similar thefts at The New York Post last year by a third Mafia crime family.


Another Record for Uncovered Nasdaq Short Sales
Pushed along by a growing uneasiness about the stock market, the number of shares sold short and not covered in over-the-counter trading was a record for the fourth month in a row, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
Short interest reached a total of 415 million shares in July, an increase of 6.7 percent from the 389 million shares reported in June.
The number of companies with shares sold short also climbed by a whisker in the month, to 3,641 issues, compared with 3,600 in June.


U.S. Opens Case Against Ex-Spy In Contra Affair
The chief Government prosecutor in the trial of Clair E. George opened his case today by portraying the former high-ranking intelligence official as a brilliant spy who lied smoothly to Congress when it was investigating the sale of arms to Iran and the funneling of the profits to the Nicaraguan rebels.
The prosecutor, Craig E. Gillen, told the jury that on one occasion Mr.
George and his associates at the Central Intelligence Agency deliberately misled Congressional questioners about their knowledge of the people involved in an illegal operation to resupply rebels in the mid-1980's and then went back to the agency and reveled in their deception.


Cuban Leader Is Isolated in Stance on Democracy


Elusive Victories in Iraq; Hussein's Defiance of Demands by U.N. Leaves Allies Wondering How to Prevail
With the flight from Baghdad today of a number of United Nations inspectors, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq has demonstrated to his people that he refused to blink when George Bush and the United Nations sought to face him down in the parking lot outside Iraq's Agriculture Ministry.
The Iraqi leader's victory may be short lived, but the definition of any new and impending allied "victory" over Mr.
Hussein has also become elusive 18 months after the end of the Persian Gulf war.


Dinkins, Respected by Foes, Seeks to Pacify Crucial Friends
Slightly more than a year before the New York mayoral primary, Mayor David N. Dinkins finds himself at a critical, if unexpected, pass.
He has appeased many of his enemies, but now he has to win back his friends.
Mr.
Dinkins in recent months has won the sometimes grudging respect of many of his harshest critics, including business leaders and fiscal experts, for his handling of the city's financial problems.
His political future, though, will depend on how well he can rebuild the coalition that elected him three years ago.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 STERNER TONE TOWARD IRAQ
Iraq's refusal to disclose records of its weapons programs prompted calls for military force.
But the scope of support for confrontation was unclear.  1  NEW STRATEGY FOR HUSSEIN
News analysis: With the departure of some arms inspectors, President Saddam Hussein has shown Iraqis that he refused to blink.  1


A Deal of Real Heroes: Marvel to Acquire Fleer
In a deal that combines two passions of American youth, the Marvel Entertainment Group, the nation's largest publisher of comic books, has agreed to acquire the Fleer Corporation, one of the nation's largest trading-card companies, for $28 a share, or $265 million.
Marvel's portfolio of superheroes includes Spider Man, Captain America, the X-Men and the Invisible Woman.


Durables Report Helps Trim Bonds
A stronger-than-expected report on new orders of durable goods and the introduction of $1 billion worth of securities backed by American Express credit card receipts helped push down prices of Treasury securities yesterday.
Market participants reacted to the 2.3 percent rise in June durable goods orders by selling securities, even though analysts pointed out that the report was not as strong as the rise might suggest.


Perot Spent $3 Million in June
Billionaire Ross Perot spent $3.7 million, most of it his own money, in June to prepare the independent Presidential campaign he abandoned weeks later, a report showed today.
Mr.
Perot kicked in $3.12 million of his own money in June, bringing to $6.36 million the amount he had given to his campaign since first mentioning in March that he might run, his report to the Federal Election Commission shows.
He also reported the receipt of nearly $1 million in private contributions in June.
Mr.
Perot, who once vowed to spend $100 million of his money to seek the White House, estimated that he had spent $10 million of his own money by the time he ended the bid on July 16.


Corrections
The Our Towns column on July 10 misstated the place of President James A. Garfield's assassination.
He was shot on July 2, 1881, in Washington and died on Sept. 19, 1881, in Elberon, N.J.


For Yanks, It's the Calm Before Steinbrenner
The owner is coming back, but so far the news has not been received with alarm by any Yankees here.
No one has expressed regret that George Steinbrenner will be back in charge next season.
When the Yankees arrived at the Kingdome prior to tonight's game with the Mariners, Steinbrenner's return was not a major topic of discussion in the clubhouse.
Players were aware of the news, but not that many reacted.
Those that did, did not appear unhappy.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Black Voters; In 2 Diverse Neighborhoods, Blacks Are Drawn to Clinton
It is 23 miles in distance and a few light years in ambience from the ragged cottages of Atlanta's inner-city Fourth Ward to the $275,000 homes in the all-black Hunters Pace subdivision in this densely wooded suburb at the edge of metropolitan Atlanta.
But when it comes to Presidential politics these days, there is no difference at all.
From McGruder Street in Atlanta, where the only sign of prosperity is the new Cadillacs driven by young crack dealers, to the swimming and tennis club here, black voters seem to be solidly in the Democratic fold.


Skyscraper Douses Its Colorful Lights
The colored lights that bathe the top of the Empire State Building for holidays and other special occasions will be missing for the next four months, as workers make routine repairs on the 71st and 82d floors.
The mast of the 102-story building will be illuminated only with white light during that period.
Color should return to the building on Nov. 25 in time for Thanksgiving's red, orange and yellow holiday glow.


Relief Is Here for Body Builders' Teeth Strain
So your pecs are pumped and your gluts are grand, but is your smile bearing the brunt?
Dr.
Mitchell A. Josephs, a dentist on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, says that if you clench your teeth while you work out, as many people do, the stress is transmitted through the teeth and the ligaments that hold them in place to the jaw, neck and upper back muscles.


America's Virtues Perceived as Faults
To the Editor:
In "Why Don't They Like Us?" (Op-Ed, July 3), Paul Hollander perceptively argues that the United States poses a threat as "the major form and carrier of modernity in the world today." But he errs when he considers the resulting anti-Americanism well founded because our "unqualified openness to change" implies "personal and social instability and moral confusion."


Clemson Aide Quits
A Clemson basketball assistant, LEN GORDY, who has been at the center of a National Collegiate Athletic Association investigation into recruiting violations at the school, resigned yesterday, saying it was "best for all concerned."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Candidates; DOLE ASSERTS GORE TRADED WAR VOTE
Senator Bob Dole charged today that Senator Al Gore, the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee, tried last year to trade his vote on the Iraq war resolution for a prime-time speaking slot during floor debate.
"He was shopping, seeing where he could get the most prime on television if he voted for or against the Gulf," Mr.
Dole, the minority leader, said in a television interview, throwing traditional Senate comity out the political window and sharply escalating the Republican attack on his colleague from Tennessee.


Baker Hails Israeli Freeze; Hints at Approval of Loan
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today hailed Israel's decision to freeze all new settlement building in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, but said more details would be required before the Bush Administration decides whether this action meets its conditions for granting Israel loan guarantees.
Nevertheless, from the general tone of Mr.
Baker's response, there now seemed little question that Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's new approach to settlements will be enough to satisfy Washington to provide Israel with at least some, if not all, of the $10 billion in loan guarantees it is seeking to absorb Russian immigrants.


Forward, March. Backward, April.
It's official, now.
March 1, 1993, will mark the end of the Yankees' brief foray into an age of enlightenment.
George Steinbrenner, for better or worse, is coming back.
It does not matter that even he seemed to agree two years ago that it was time for his era as a domineering Yankee boss to pass into history.


Fischer and Spassky Said to Sign for Chess Rematch in Yugoslavia
Bobby Fischer, who became the first American to win the world championship only to resign it undefended, will play a $5 million exhibition match here against Boris Spassky, the Russian he defeated for the title 20 years ago, a Yugoslav promoter said today.
The match would end nearly two decades of seclusion for Mr.
Fischer since he played Mr.
Spassky in Reykjavik, Iceland, in one of the most celebrated chess matches of all time.
The match would also likely be viewed as a violation of the international sanctions that the United Nations imposed on Yugoslavia in an effort to halt the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


How TV Covered Bush's Hecklers
Was President Bush humiliated today by scores of angry hecklers or was it merely the sort of slight disruption that every politician endures now and then?
It depends on which television network you watched.
All three major networks reported the incident in the first five minutes of their evening broadcasts.


Religion Notes
Bible Politics
The sound of Democrats invoking the Bible at their convention in New York earlier this month heartened many in the party who were looking to recapture some of that old-time religion.
But it drove some Republican stalwarts crazy.
"Misquoting and manipulating the Holy Scripture for political purposes should be offensive to millions of Americans," said the Rev.
Jerry Falwell, the Southern Baptist television evangelist, who has already declared his support for the Republican ticket.
"It is certainly a more significant error than the much publicized misspelling of potato."


Howe Will Undergo Tests
Steve Howe, the former Yankee pitcher who was permanently suspended from baseball last month, said tonight that he will be in New York next week to undergo testing to determine if he has a medical disorder.
But he said he was neither certain what the tests would show or how they would help him get reinstated.
"I'm just jumping through hoops," said the 34-year-old Howe, who watched the Yankees-Mariners game at the Kingdome from the stands.
"I've done what I've been told to do through the whole thing. I've upheld every bargain. I don't look at this one way or the other. I'm just tired of the whole situation."


Hayes's Homer Lifts Yankees in 9th
George Steinbrenner would have liked this game. Not all of it; just the ending.
Perhaps the only thing the once and future managing general partner of the Yankees would have enjoyed was this: a two-out, bases-empty home run by Charlie Hayes in the ninth inning that beat the Seattle Mariners, 8-7, tonight at the Kingdome.


Supercollider Regaining Its Support in Congress
Five weeks after the House voted to scrap the $8.25 billion Superconducting Supercollider, prospects for the Texas particle accelerator are sharply improving as it moves through the Senate.
The Senate Appropriations Committee on Thursday allocated $550 million for the project as part of the appropriations bill for energy and water development, setting the stage for a probable floor fight in the next several days.


Too Much Stress at the U.N.
The crisis switchboard at the United Nations is overloaded.
Once paralyzed by cold war rivalries, the world organization is nowadays asked to do too much: enforce peace in Sarajevo, face down a truculent Saddam Hussein and clean up messes in Cambodia, Central America, Afghanistan and South Africa.
Not surprisingly, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali has lost patience with a Security Council that would add new burdens.
And he is understandably annoyed that the European Community should approve a plan in London calling on the U.N. to send more peacekeepers to Bosnia and then sell that plan to the Security Council without adequate consultation.


Review/Film; A Scruffy Street Hustler In the Corporate World
Sometimes it looks in "Mo' Money" as if Damon Wayans may be picking up where Eddie Murphy left off.
Just as Mr.
Murphy has, he plays a smart, wily interloper in a high-powered world.
The big credit card company where Mr.
Wayans's Johnny Stewart accidentally lands a job is loaded with comical, stereotypical sketches of various climbers.
And Mr.
Wayans, who wrote the screenplay, eagerly exploits them all.
From the bland white personnel officer with nervous tics (which Johnny can't help imitating) to the upwardly mobile black executive who notes that "ain't" is ungrammatical, the film supplies countless caricatures for its star to react against.
And unlike Mr.
Murphy (who put himself in the winner's seat with his own corporate comedy, "Boomerang") Mr.
Wayans appears ready to take chances.
His own character, a scruffy street hustler, can be both good-hearted and dishonest, particularly when faced with the prospect of impressing a pretty co-worker (Stacey Dash) with the help of credit card fraud.
But some of the humor in "Mo' Money" has a mean-spirited edge.
And only in isolated moments is it as funny as its own title.


Major League Heavyweights
If you feel that multimillion dollar salaries for ballplayers have gotten out of line, there is at least one objective measure that confirms your impression.
Remember the old saying, intended as high praise, that someone is "worth his weight in gold?"


Review/Rock; Springsteen, 42, Leans Toward Family Values
"Have we got any moms and pops out there?" Bruce Springsteen asked the audience that packed the Brendan Byrne Arena on Thursday night.
It was an unusual question for a rock concert, but Mr.
Springsteen is proud to be a grown-up.
"You're looking a little older out there," he said to the crowd.
Aging gracefully may be the hardest feat in rock, but Mr.
Springsteen stands a chance of doing just that.
In his first tour since 1988, introducing a new band and playing predominantly new songs, Mr.
Springsteen has changed his role once again.
The voice of hot-wired romance and disillusion in the 1970's and the voice of working folks' struggles in the 1980's has returned as a 42-year-old family man, singing about the healing power and everyday complications of love.


Will Huck Now Be Sold Down the Mississippi?; In Plain English
To the Editor:
I was surprised to see that you considered the apparent discovery by Shelley Fishkin, regarding Mark Twain's use of an African-American dialect in "Huckleberry Finn," important and noteworthy enough to merit your extensive July 7 article.
One does not have to read further the explanatory note at the beginning of any copy of "Huckleberry Finn" to unearth the origins of the dialects in the book.
There in plain English, Twain spells out for his reader the dialects he used and the great pains he went through to insure their authenticity.
To suggest anything more than that he was faithfully attempting to reproduce the accents of his characters shows a poor understanding of him and his works.


Education as a Second Language
The 3-year-old girl from Puerto Rico seemed happily absorbed in her early months at Head Start, her first prolonged exposure to English.
But one morning last November a different school bus came to pick her up.
Only then did her mother learn that the child had been transferred to another school for special education.
"They didn't give me a reason why," the mother said.
"They didn't even notify me, to give me a chance to prepare my daughter for the new school." She worries that the girl's diversion into special education may limit her prospects and she suspects that the move stemmed more from the child's patchy English than from any problems with learning.
The woman said she has still never received an evaluation of her child or any justification for the transfer.


BARCELONA
OLYMPICS OPEN TODAY
The opening ceremonies of the Summer Games in Barcelona will reflect the political and ethnic realities of a new world order in sport.
SOCCER GETS EARLY START
In the first competition, the U.S. soccer team, without its star player, lost to Italy, 2-1.
SportsSaturday, page 29.


Christian Blackwood, Film Maker, Dies at 50
Christian Blackwood, who directed or produced more than 95 documentary and feature films, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 50 years old.
He died of lung cancer, said his wife, Carolyn Marks Blackwood, who noted that he was a heavy smoker.


Your Taxes; Small Businesses Get Easier Form
MILLIONS of entrepreneurs will find filing income tax returns a bit easier next year, thanks to the Internal Revenue Service's introduction of a shorter form for reporting profits from a sole proprietorship.
Schedule C-EZ, as it is known, is for use by only the smallest of small businesses with the simplest of books.
But the I.R.S. estimates that as many as three million people may be able to take advantage of it.


9 Farm Pets Found Mutilated On School Campus in Bronx
The mutilated bodies of nine farm animals were found outside a barn at the Fieldston Country Day School in Riverdale, the Bronx, yesterday, just before 250 children were to arrive for a summer day camp, the police said.
The dead animals -- five rabbits, two goats, a sheep and a pig -- were found under a sprawling oak tree in the penned area near a barn maintained as part of the school's Out of Doors program, said John Clarke, chief financial officer for the Fieldston Schools.


Sports of The Times; Baseball's Jekyll And Hyde
BY midmorning yesterday, the Olympic Village had already become a bustling international minicity of athletes and officials for more than 150 nations.
This was the day that each delegation was officially welcomed to the village by a succession of brief flag-raising ceremonies.
The ceremonies went along with relatively little interest, outside of the participants and their friends and family, until 11 o'clock, when a rush of athletes and officials began to crowd around the reception area.
The United States delegation had arrived.


For Book Borrowers, Be Prompt or Beware
Three years ago, a patron of the Morris County Library signed out a thick stack of home-decorating books and never returned them, ignoring three overdue notices and a bill in the process.
The books' value and the library's loss: $710.
"Those are coffee-table-type books: fancy enough so you might want to display them in your living room," said Diane Goldstein, the library's circulation librarian.


One-Stop Credit Report Covers 3 Bureaus' Data
Congressional hearings, horror stories from consumers about errors in their credit reports and reform efforts by leading credit bureaus have recently made many more people aware of the reports prepared on consumers who apply for loans.
Federal law provides that people who have been refused credit are entitled, upon request, to a free copy of the information the credit bureau furnished their prospective lender.
But there are three national credit-reporting companies, so correcting mistakes in one bureau's reports may not necessarily clear up those in the files of the others.


Companies Prepare for New Law on Disabled
A law banning discrimination against disabled people that takes effect tomorrow finds corporations sharply at odds over what they must do to comply.
Some, like Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc., a seed company in Des Moines, say that holding management training sessions, reviewing the duties of jobs that become open and issuing some explanations over the computer system will just about do it.
Others, like Nike Inc., are developing new recruiting programs and rewriting all their job descriptions -- often changing hours, responsibilities and pay -- to accommodate disabled people.


Baghdad's Scorn of U.N. Singes Relief Workers
The lamb chops had been ordered and the Chianti uncorked in the restaurant of the Rashid Hotel the other evening when the headwaiter asked bluntly: "Do you work for the United Nations? Because we are not serving United Nations people anymore in this hotel."
The customer had other employment and the meal proceeded as arranged.
But the decision by Baghdad's best hotel, on obvious instructions from above, to ban United Nations personnel from eating there is the latest sign of the Iraqi leadership's decision to convey intense hostility toward the world organization and those who serve it.


Vincent Grants March 1 Return To Steinbrenner
Almost two years after George Steinbrenner received a lifetime ban from baseball, Commissioner Fay Vincent said yesterday that the Yankees' owner could return unconditionally to active duty with the club next March 1.
Mr.
Vincent's announcement would appear to end the seemingly ceaseless Steinbrenner saga, but the owner could still stumble.
There have been bizarre twists before.
In late July 1990, the commissioner at first imposed a two-year suspension that would have ended next Wednesday, but Mr.
Steinbrenner negotiated a lifetime ban, a choice he tied to other interests, including his role as an officer for the United States Olympic Committee.


Macedonia's Name
To the Editor:
Your July 4 report that Greece has secured United States and European Community support in refusing to recognize the southernmost former Yugoslav republic as Macedonia creates a false impression of my advice to the Canadian Macedonian Foundation about how Macedonia could best achieve sovereign recognition.


Allison Is Released
DAVEY ALLISON was released from Lehigh Valley Hospital in Allentown, Pa., yesterday and immediately flew by private plane back to his home state of Alabama for the DieHard 500 stock-car race at Talladega Superspeedway tomorrow.
Allison, 31 years old, had been in the hospital since Sunday, after he broke two bones in his right forearm, suffered a dislocation-fracture to his right wrist, cracked his right collarbone and had a bruise over his left eye, the result of a crash at Pocono International Raceway.


A Tip of the Open Hat To Scotland's Wright
Pamela Wright of Scotland emerged from Oakmont's sloggingly long course today with a three-shot lead among players who finished the second round of the 47th United States Women's Open.
Because of lightning, play was suspended late today with 42 players still on the course.
They will complete their rounds Saturday morning, after which the 36-hole cut will be established.


Tougher Parole Boards Seek Quality in Mercy
Daniel Joyner, a broad-shouldered murderer, had only a few minutes to speak his plea to the parole board.
He had minutes to either stave off decades more behind bars or steep further in maximum-security despair at all the lost time and might-have-beens of his violent, and now explicitly sorry, life.
The odds have been growing longer against such pleas as the parole process has come to reflect society's repugnance at violent crime.
But Mr.
Joyner rose to the occasion, proudly describing the bachelor of arts degree he acquired in prison as well as his dungeon epiphany that "the whole violent concept is not for me."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Candidates; DOLE ASSERTS GORE TRADED WAR VOTE
Senator Bob Dole charged today that Senator Al Gore, the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee, tried last year to trade his vote on the Iraq war resolution for a prime-time speaking slot during floor debate.
"He was shopping, seeing where he could get the most prime on television if he voted for or against the Gulf," Mr.
Dole, the minority leader, said in a television interview, throwing traditional Senate comity out the political window and sharply escalating the Republican attack on his colleague from Tennessee.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about Opportunity to Learn, an English-language program for outstanding high school students who are immigrants, named one school incorrectly in a list of participants and omitted another.
The classes are not given at South Shore High School; they are given at Brooklyn College, as well as Queens College and Columbia University.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the Digital Equipment Corporation's earnings misstated the company's operating loss.
Excluding special charges, the company lost $188 million in its fourth quarter, not for the full year.
For the year its operating loss was $617 million.
In some copies, the headline misstated Digital's total loss for the quarter; it was $1.85 billion.


Revco Names a New Head; Seeks to Restructure Debt
Revco D.S.
Inc. announced yesterday that D. Dwayne Hoven had been named president and chief operating officer.
He had been executive vice president of marketing and stores.
Mr.
Hoven, 50 years old, has been a member of the Revco executive committee since joining the company, based in Twinsburg, Ohio, in 1987.
As executive vice president of marketing and stores, he has overseen all of Revco's marketing and merchandising and all aspects of store and pharmacy operations and loss prevention for its 1,143 drugstores.


The Cemetery Has Now Become Sarajevo's Center
The July rains that come to Sarajevo were kind today.
They began around noon, just as the mourners from the day's last funeral in the Lion Cemetery filed back up the hill to their cars.
Within minutes, rivers of mud were coursing through the serried mounds of earth, making a scene that was already bleak still bleaker.
The gravediggers at the cemetery gather at daybreak to take their orders for the morning.
Today, the 111th day of the Sarajevo siege, 20 new graves were needed, and with spades and a steam shovel the work was done by 9 A.M.
Then, in what has become part of the day's ritual, the motley group of men put their spades aside, lit cigarettes and waited for the day's visitors -- first the reporters and then, about 10 A.M., mourners for the newest victims of the siege.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; KIN OF MISSING G.I.'S HECKLE PRESIDENT
Capping a fractious week in which Republican fears about the stagnant Bush campaign spilled into the open, President Bush lost his temper today in an angry session with relatives of Americans lost in Southeast Asia, snapping at one heckler to "shut up."
On the defensive already from the new Democratic ticket's surge in the polls, Mr.
Bush was jeered into silence today during a speech at the annual convention of the National League of Families of P.O.W./M.I.A.'s in a Virginia suburb of Washington.
Quayle to Stay on Ticket
Adding to the tension within the White House, there have been demands by some in Mr.
Bush's own party to replace Vice President Dan Quayle and other top officials.
But a White House official said tonight that the two men had discussed the ticket in recent weeks and that they had decided that it should not be changed.


Begone to Sags and Zits At Wonderland of Skin
TODAY, at the Waldorf-Astoria, the Summit of Skin Care begins.
Experts from around the world will discuss the care and coddling of the human body's largest organ, the one that would cover some 20 square feet if it were spread flat.
Arguably, this is not the most important summit meeting at the Park Avenue hotel where heads of states often stay.
But to people with sagging skin, wrinkles, facial scars and pimples, it is a tad more immediate.
It is also of some interest to folks in the beauty trade, which claims $17 billion in annual sales and shows no sign of slowing down -- particularly with new products for men and even babies.


Navy Scandal Forces Admiral to Retire
In another setback for the scandal-weary Navy, the chief of naval education and training is retiring at reduced rank amid accusations that he used his influence to protect an aide under investigation for homosexual advances, the Navy said today.
Navy officials said the forced retirement of Vice Adm.
John H. Fetterman Jr. resulted from an internal Navy investigation into accusations that the aide, an enlisted man who is a close friend of Admiral Fetterman's family in Pensacola, Fla., made homosexual advances toward other enlisted men.


More Help With Voting To Be Given To Chinese
In a pilot program for the September primary election, the New York City Board of Elections has agreed to print sample ballots in Chinese, as well as provide Chinese interpreters and Chinese voting instructions in parts of lower Manhattan, Queens and Brooklyn.
The move has long been sought by those trying to increase voting by one of the city's fastest-growing immigrant groups.
It makes New York the second city in the country, after San Francisco, to provide a Chinese ballot, according to Jon R. Del Giorno, administrative manager of the Board of Elections.
The city, however, is still appealing a court order last year that would require Chinese ballots to be used even more widely.


INSIDE
Italian Troops to Fight Mafia
Under pressure after the killings of two leading anti-Mafia crusaders in Sicily, the Italian Government announced that it was sending 7,000 troops to the island.
Page 7.
Perot's Economic Remedy
A plan offered by Ross Perot proposes to erase the Federal deficit in five years, partly by raising taxes on high incomes and on the Social Security benefits of many.
Page 23.
Salute to 'Buffalo Soldiers'
The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff went to Fort Leavenworth, Kan., to dedicate a monument to the first all-black regiments that ever served the nation in peacetime.
Page 16.
Revising Trenton's Budget
Just weeks after approving $1.1 billion in cuts, G.O.P. lawmakers are scrambling to put money back into New Jersey's state budget.
Page 25.
Graffiti: The Final Battle?
New York's transit agency is spending $24.3 million on new subway and bus windows to thwart vandals who scratch the Plexiglas.
Page 25.
Alfred Drake Dies
The performer who created the lead role of Curly in "Oklahoma!" and sang many of Broadway's most beloved songs was 77.
Page 35.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about a class for diabetics at Northern Westchester Hospital Center misidentified the man with Sherree Sferra.
He was Michael Irish. (Donald Zaffarano was another participant in the class.)


The Executive Computer; List Prices Are the Latest Technology Dinosaur
A few months ago, the NCR 3170 notebook computer had a list price of $5,399.
Today it has a "net" price, and that is just $3,425.
The difference reflects more than just the raging price war affecting the whole industry -- it is a sign that the days of list prices may be drawing to a close.
Like a toaster or a tube of toothpaste, computers have become commodities, bought for function rather than specific characteristics of a brand name.
Recognizing this, several major companies have abandoned or started to move away from list prices.


Alyse K. Richter, Mitchell Reiffman
September wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Barry Richter of Port Washington, L.I., for their daughter Alyse Kim Richter and Mitchell Roy Reiffman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Reiffman of North Woodmere, L.I.
Miss Richter, 26 years old, graduated from Brandeis University and is studying for an M.B.A. at Hofstra University.
Her father is the executive vice president of Gruntal &amp; Company, a New York securities brokerage.


His Mailing List
To the Editor:
Perhaps this is just a paranoid thought, but Ross Perot's withdrawal from the 1992 Presidential sweepstakes has deprived millions of organized, highly committed Americans of a powerful, business-oriented candidate, who reflected their hopes and beliefs.
But that isn't the point.


Betsy Blumenthal, Jonathan Root
Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Blumenthal of West Hartford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Betsy Blumenthal, to Dr.
Jonathan Root, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Allen W. Root of Tampa, Fla.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Blumenthal, 33 years old, is an associate managing director of Kroll Associates, an investigations concern in New York.
She graduated from American University.
Her father is a senior vice president of Advest Inc., a brokerage and banking concern in Hartford.
Her mother, Frances Blumenthal, is the founder and president of Accent Inc., a language and translation concern in West Hartford.


Margaret Roberts, Richard Lincoln
Margaret Simonds Roberts, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Lester O. Simonds of Cambridge, Mass., plans to marry Richard Kimball Lincoln, a son of Mrs.
Carl K. Lincoln of Nonquitt, Mass., and the late Mr.
Lincoln in October.
Ms.
Roberts is a reading specialist at the Brimmer and May School in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
The future bride's father was a vice president of Chase, Whiteside and Winslow, a municipal bond underwriting firm in Boston.


Horatio Alger With Deep Pockets
SPANNING THE CENTURY
The Life of W. Averell Harriman, 1891-1986.
By Rudy Abramson.
Illustrated. 779 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $25.


Amy Lynn Capute, Michael Borruso
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Capute 3d of Fairfield, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Lynn Capute to Michael Borruso, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Borruso of Holbrook, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Capute, 24 years old, is a manager of Structure, a men's clothing store in Boston.
She graduated from Cornell University, as did her fiance.
Her father is the senior vice president and chief financial officer of Service America Corporation, a food service company in Stamford, Conn.


BUSH AND ADVISERS DISCUSS RESPONSES TO IRAQ'S DEFIANCE
President Bush met for two hours today with his national security advisers to discuss "the full range of options" to force Iraq to comply with United Nations resolutions.
A brief White House statement indicated that no final decisions had been made, but an official with an allied Government who was interviewed during the day said he expected an ultimatum to be issued on Sunday or Monday to President Saddam Hussein, demanding immediate cooperation with United Nations inspectors in Iraq.


Linda Eve Sedloff and Graham Orton
Linda Eve Sedloff, the business development officer in New York for the London law firm of Clifford Chance, and Graham Stewart Orton, a corporate recovery analyst for Standard Charter Bank in London, have announced September wedding plans.
Ms.
Sedloff, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Chicago.
She is the daughter of Rhoda Sedloff of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Harold Sedloff.


Capturing Broadway, Minus the Trappings
When Faith Prince belts out "Adelaide's Lament" on the cast album of the hit revival of "Guys and Dolls" (RCA Victor 09026-61317-2; CD and cassette), her piercing, kewpie-doll delivery projects such an exuberant mixture of playfulness and defiance it hardly matters that it is just a recording.
Her voice by itself conjures a vivid image of a 1940's showgirl from the seedier side of Broadway determined to marry her evasive, less-than-gallant fiance of 14 years.
And the song's use of common colds, coughs and flu as metaphors for her frustration offers hilarious evidence of how Adelaide's sense of humor has kept her afloat.
With a voice that suggests a frilly pillow lined with steel, and squeaking out adorable little "eeks," Ms.
Prince is such a compelling personality that the record comes close to realizing the goal of every Broadway cast album.
That dream is to be an aural distillation of a show, despite the absence of dancing, scenery, lights and costumes.


July 19-25: 40 Killed; Shining Path Guerrillas Shut Down Much of Lima
Surveying a swath of broken glass and broken bodies left by Shining Path car bombs in Lima, Bishop Miguel Cabrejos Vidarte consoled his flock early last week, saying they were living through "the most difficult moment in all of Peru's history." The next day the Maoist guerrillas shut down most activity in Peru's capital, calling a two-day "armed strike."
Shining Path enforced its strike call with more violence: car bombs, attacks on the police and the burning of taxis and buses.
At least 40 were killed and hundreds were wounded.
Damage included the destruction of Bolivia's Embassy, the shattering of windows at Peru's archeological museum and heavy harm to the Institute of Freedom and Democracy, a world-renowned free-market study center run by Hernando de Soto, a former adviser to President Alberto K. Fujimori.


If Water Floods Basement, A Sump Pump May Help
WHEN a basement is flooded because of water rising from beneath the floor, one solution is to install a sump pump.
Aside from requiring modest excavation, including breaking through the basement floor, the task is not difficult.
But before starting, call the building inspector to ask about the requirements for installing sumps.
Find out whether the pump may discharge into a municipal storm sewer.
In many localities that is strictly forbidden, because sewers can be overloaded during heavy rains.
The inspector will probably say the pump has to discharge onto the ground on the property, where it can soak into the soil.
Never connect a discharge line to an ordinary sewer or a septic tank.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Murray Hill
IT is fitting that the Empire State Building, a symbol of high-rise commercial development in Manhattan, casts its long shadow over the small East Midtown neighborhood of Murray Hill, which has been an unwilling target for the expansion of Manhattan's business district for a century and a half.
In 1847, the descendants of Robert and Mary Murray, who settled in the area in the 1750's, drew up the Murray Hill Restrictive Agreement.
Deeds to some properties in the neighborhood still include restrictions imposed under the agreement, which ban their use for slaughterhouses, glue factories or circuses.


Neighborhood Shaken After a Leader Says Police Beat Her and Family
In the quiet Brooklyn neighborhood where a 57-year-old woman says police officers beat her and her three adult children on Thursday, residents said yesterday that the incident had confirmed and intensified their longstanding fear and resentment of the police.
Some accused the police of racism, while others blamed the badge itself, saying officers took it as a license to break the law.
Almost all said they would be less likely to turn to the police for help in the future.


Open Isn't Word for Oakmont, Say Some
Although the United States Women's Open is the foremost women's golf event in the world, the prestigious club where the championship is being held this year is under fire for not giving women equal treatment.
Oakmont Country Club, which since it was founded in 1903 has held more major championships -- 14 -- than any other club in America, currently has no women among its more than 360 members with full voting privileges.
Moreover, any woman who gains that status would have to agree to accept limited access to the golf course.


Mystical Eskimo Antiquities and the Tales They Tell
THE EARLIEST, MOST mystical American artifacts -- the ancient walrus carvings of Alaska -- remain enshrouded in mystery.
As finds are unearthed each year, art historians are discovering fresh clues to the myths and images depicted.
The snow goggles, fertility figures, harpoon weights and carvings of polar bears in "Prehistoric Eskimo Ivories," an exhibition at Daedalus Ancient Art in Manhattan, were all uncovered in the last three years on the Alaskan mainland and on St.
Lawrence Island in the Bering Sea.
Some of these expressionistic works by seafaring hunters were unknown until recently.


Cynthia Dorsey, Scott Lukas
Dr.
Cynthia Margot Dorsey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George K. Dorsey of Purchase, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Scott Edward Lukas, a son of Capt. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Lukas of McLean, Va.
The Rev.
Edward Johnston performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ's Church in Rye, N.Y.


July 19-25: Sky Rights; The United States Weighs A British Partner for USAir
Airlines have long been considered essential to national security, there to ferry troops in time of war.
Thus laws have kept foreign airlines from offering domestic service or taking over the nation's carriers.
Last week, however, Government offficials applauded a plan by British Airways to acquire substantial control over USAir, forming the largest airline partnership in the world.
British Airways P.L.C. would invest $750 million to buy as much as 44 percent of the USAir Group, with veto power over any major actions.
The agreement was carefully crafted to meet the letter of a law whose spirit has come into question.
Secretary of Transportation Andrew H. Card Jr. said that such foreign investments promise customers the benefits of increased competition.
USAir, like several other airlines, has been badly in need of more money and a stronger partner to survive in an airline market where the number of healthy competitors has diminished.


Onward and Upward, a Real Summer Trouper
WHAT did gardeners ever do before impatiens?
This ubiquitous flowering plant is a boon to the summertime landscape.
The impatiens is truly a stick-it-in-the-ground-and-forget-about-it annual.
The happy flower colors: red, coral, orange, rose, almost blue and white (just about every shade but clear yellow) can be seen in borders, along drives, outlining shrub beds, in window boxes, along walls or tucked in just about any place a little spot of flower color is needed.


Solutions on Welfare: They All Cost Money
The court official who supervises child support in Grand Rapids, Mich., described a 26-year-old local man who had fathered eight children with five mothers.
"Before you condemn him for moral laxity," said the official, William D. Camden, "look what he did for these women."
"He gave each one of them a safety net," Mr.
Camden said, referring to the welfare the women and children can receive.
"They will have a steady income and full medical coverage until their kids are 18.


Technology; New Guards Against Infection
A polymer impregnated with antiseptic agents is finding its first use in the United States in catheters that doctors hope will prevent many thousands of already-ill patients from getting additional infections.
Similar polymers will soon be used in such products as bodily implants, and could eventually be used for other external applications, like latex condoms.
The impregnated polymer catheter, inserted in "central" veins located near the heart to infuse and withdraw fluids for treatment and monitoring for the critically ill, entered the market in limited quantities late last year and became available in volume this past March.
Its manufacturer, Arrow International Inc. of Reading, Pa., licensed the technology from Daltex Medical Sciences Inc. of Fairfield, N.J.
Daltex had purchased exclusive rights to all applications of the polymer technology from Columbia University, where it was developed in the late 1980's.


Awash in Imports, the Oil Business Dwindles
The Soviet Union's collapse is claiming yet another victim: the American oil industry.
Like the defense industry, oil is no longer as strategic as it had been, and in a time of fiscal stringency, Washington is no longer as enthusiastic about preserving the domestic supply.
The signs appear everywhere in the last few weeks: the number of exploratory drilling rigs hit a record low a few weeks ago, at 596; the oil companies announced another round of layoffs, and domestic production briefly fell to below the level of imports.
Yet these indicators caused hardly a blip on the national political horizon.


Margaret Binder, Clive H. Bock
Margaret Lawrence Binder, the daughter of Brooks W. Binder Jr. of New York and the late Margaret Lawrence Binder, was married yesterday to Clive Howard Bock, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Kenneth R. Bock of Mombasa, Kenya.
The Rev.
Mark Robertson performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Savannah, Ga.
Mrs. Bock is 30 years old and graduated from the University of North Carolina.


A Little Nectar To Lure New Collectors
THE United States Postal Service issued a sheet of 50 wildflower stamps on Friday in Columbus, Ohio.
In its effort to attract new collectors, it will also market a special album for the stamps.
The 29-cent stamps, each with a different flower, are likely to prove as popular with the public as several similar series: the 1976 State Flags, the 1982 State Birds and Flowers and the 1987 American Wildlife.
But there are differences that will interest specialist collectors: the stamps have been printed on two presses that yield slightly different configurations of the plate numbers on the margins, and the Postal Service promotes the sale of the wildflower album in a message on the margins.


Peruvian Strike Called a Big Victory for Shining Path
As this coastal capital noisily surged back to life this weekend, experts on terrorism agreed that the Shining Path guerrilla movement had scored a significant victory by shutting down most commerce, public transportation and schools during a 48-hour "armed strike."
"It was the first dress rehearsal for a final insurrection," said Gustavo Gorriti, a historian of the Maoist movement's 12-year revolt.
"The Shining Path military command showed that they can bring hundreds, if not thousands, of activists in from all over the country, house them, feed them, organize and execute their actions."


Enhancing a Bread Pudding With Seasonal Fruit
AMONG the simplest of desserts to make with the abundant fresh fruit and berries now in the market is bread pudding.
It depends more on leftover bread than on expertise.
Usually the leftover bread is drenched with sweetened milk and eggs to bind it and make it light, then the pudding is baked in a casserole dish.
Baking takes the major part of an hour.
The pudding can be served warm or cold.
It can be made early in the day and reheated.


Tracy L. Pyper, Peter M. Swiderski
Tracy Lynn Pyper, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Pyper of Riverside, Conn., was married in New York yesterday to Peter Mark Swiderski, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Swiderski of Mount Vernon, N.Y.
The Rev.
Ellen B. McKinley, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Burden Mansion.
Ms.
Pyper, who is 28 years old and will keep her name, teaches at the Buckley School in New York.
She graduated from Dickinson College and received a master's degree in elementary education from Manhattanville College.
Her father, who is retired, was a newspaper service representative for The New York Times.
Her mother, Joan Pyper, is an administrative assistant at Greenwich (Conn.) Academy.


Wall Street; The C.E.O. as Investing Sucker
Securities lawyers who gather to schmooze about the latest sexy case against a Wall Street brokerage firm are no longer swapping stories about the proverbial little old lady in tennis shoes who was put into risky stock options.
Instead, they're noting with some surprise that a new breed of investor is bringing arbitration cases against brokers -- and winning.
If the little old lady was the classic wide-eyed sucker, the new sucker is much the opposite: savvy, educated and a player in the business world.
Indeed, among the winners in recent arbitration cases are an M.B.A., the chief executive of a utility company and a law firm's managing partner.


Divorce Logjam Leads to Alternatives
THE increasing number of divorce cases filed in recent years has created a severe backlog in many of the state's family courts despite concerted efforts by court officials to ease the problem.
In some counties, divorce lawyers say, the wait for a trial in a contested divorce can last up to four years, resulting in personal and economic strains on the parties.
Psychologists say that such protracted divorce proceedings often adversely affect the court's ability to make accurate decisions on the issues of child custody and visiting rights.


WASPs, Politics And AIDS
LAST season, the Phoenix Theater Company's first at the State University of New York at Purchase, was but a dry run for this one, which is positively glistening with style.
Following an enriching production of "Morning's at Seven," the company is turning to a lesser play but playing it for immeasurably more than it is worth.
What is important to emphasize is that in years and years, audiences in Westchester have not been offered such splendid acting as the Phoenix is providing these summer weeks.
And it is clear that, at this extraordinary level, the company is the real thing.
The play, this time around, is not.
A.
R.
Gurney's "Old Boy," revised after an Off Broadway premiere at Playwrights Horizons last year, is troubling for the wrong reasons.
It is archaic to the core, but was meant to be the breakthrough work for a playwright who was diverting his attention from the insular crises, the autobiographical ones included, of hollow WASP-dom to the humanization of one of its exemplars, an aspiring super-jock politician.


Croatian Pact Holds Risks for Bosnians
With the Bosnian Government's survival threatened by Serbian nationalists besieging Sarajevo, the President has struck a deal with Croatia that could help relieve military pressures at the cost of shifting Bosnia into a potentially stifling political embrace with its more populous and powerful neighbor.
Accounts circulating here of President Alija Izetbegovic's talks in Zagreb last week with the Croatian President indicate that the Croats suggested moving Bosnian Army headquarters from Sarajevo, the capital, to a place closer to Croatian centers of power in the republic.


Juried Exhibition in Waterbury
"THE Connecticut Vision," an uncommonly smooth juried show at the Mattatuck Museum in Waterbury, is, as indicated by its title, restricted to the works of artists living and working in the state.
And if it features no new geniuses it is not weighed down by those who regularly score in such displays.
Juried shows are useful to artists who, for one reason or another, lack gallery affiliations or are just beginning the long trail upwards, and they are all too frequently chaotic.
Yet this one is remarkably cohesive in both its choices and in the way they are hung.


Family Values?
ONCE again on the cutting edge of social change, Playboy magazine pays a 10-page tribute in its August issue to Family Values, in the persons of 16 American housewives.
Every one, it says, busies herself keeping her home tidy and tending to her husband and children when she is not lying around for a passing photographer.
They'd all be given a Good Housekeeping seal if there were any place nice to put it.
The message of the August Playboy is that Family Values have raced past the politicians in ways that the candidates Bush, Quayle, Clinton and Gore could not have forseen.
Once again marketers have found a way to turn other people's values into profits.


GIVE THIS DOG A JOB
As a Norfolk terrier fancier and dog-show exhibitor residing in New York City, I can identify with many of the points Donald McCaig makes regarding the plight of form versus function of breeds today ("Give This Dog a Job," July 5).


Cheryl L. Kaminski, Richard A. Hurson
Theodore and MaryEllen Kaminski of Lyndhurst, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Cheryl Lynn Kaminski, to Pfc.
Richard Anthony Hurson, U.S.A.F., a son of Eamon and Margaret Hurson of the Bronx.
An April wedding is planned.


Enhancing a Bread Pudding With Seasonal Fruit
AMONG the simplest of desserts to make with the abundant fresh fruit and berries now in the market is bread pudding.
It depends more on leftover bread than on expertise.
Usually the leftover bread is drenched with sweetened milk and eggs to bind it and make it light, then the pudding is baked in a casserole dish.
Baking takes the major part of an hour.
The pudding can be served warm or cold.
It can be made early in the day and reheated.


The Weed That Binds
It is hard to say whether nature is trying to tell us something or is simply following this year's habit of ignoring its normal growing schedules.
But wildflowers along the coast have been blooming noticeably early this summer -- milkweed and black-eyed Susans a week or more ahead of time, butter-and-eggs and bindweed almost as early.
Even goldenrod has been showing some yellow.
Whenever they come, of course, they are all welcome -- all, that is, except bindweed.
Bindweed, a wild morning glory, is as pernicious as a plant can be.
A botanist once listed 10 qualities that qualify a plant to be a weed.
Bindweed made it on all 10 counts, especially on being aggressive.


Data Bank/July 26, 1992


New Weapon in Graffiti War: Scratch-Resistant Glass
Hoping to thwart vandals who cloud subway and bus windows with designs and names they carve into the Plexiglas, the Transit Authority is planning to equip all of its subway cars and buses with harder-to-scratch, shatterproof glass by the middle of August.
The Transit Authority is betting that by installing the glass, at a cost of $24.3 million, it will deal a final blow in the running war it has waged since 1984 against New York City's generally youthful, often intrepid and occasionally artistic scofflaws.


Disney Raises Admission Fee At Two Parks
Walt Disney World in Florida and Disneyland in California have raised their admission prices -- Disney World for the second time this year.
A spokesman for Disney World, John Dryer, said that the increase of about 4 percent last month was due to "continued reinvestment in shows and attractions." Nine have opened in the past year: Splash Mountain, a water park featuring a ride in a log flume, is set to open in early October and the Aladdin Parade, coinciding with the release of the Disney movie "Aladdin," will begin around Thanksgiving.


Tracey Lombino, Dante Brittis Jr.
June M. Lombino of Rye, N.Y., and Robert J. Lombino of Rye Brook, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Tracey Jean Lombino to Dr.
Dante Anthony Brittis Jr., the son of Drs.
Dante and Nance Brittis of Yonkers.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lombino, 32 years old, is an associate with the law firm of Kelly &amp; Flanagan in Elmsford, N.Y.
She graduated from Skidmore College and received her law degree from Emory University.


State's History Reflected in Ceramics
TWO shows at the Newark Museum display the diversity and quality of its collection of New Jersey ceramics.
The exhibition "Three Centuries of New Jersey Clay" includes 73 pieces that span the state's history going back to Colonial times, and the latest vessels and clay sculptures of Ka-Kwong Hui are in the Contemporary Crafts Gallery.
Many of the forms and themes recur in the historical survey, although their origins may be separated by hundreds of years.
The oldest piece is an opaque black stoneware liquor jug from the Colonial period.
The shape is globular and slightly askew.
Although purely utilitarian, this pot possesses a stark but handsome simplicity.


GIVE THIS DOG A JOB
As a cat lover, I found Donald McCaig's article touching.
Perhaps the hapless dog owners should consider living with a cat.
Unlike dogs, cats were never bred to work.
The one job they consent to do -- rid the house of rodents -- they do by instinct.
And if no rodents have been seen in the vicinity for a decade, they are perfectly content to sit and wait until one makes an appearance.
Felines are not lazy, however; they are relentless in the pursuit of good food and amusing play things.
True aristocrats, they know that work is for other, less fortunate, creatures.
ANNE E. REUTER
Fitchburg, Mass.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
EVENINGS WITH HOROWITZ A Personal Portrait.
By David Dubal.
Birch Lane/Carol Publishing, $21.95.


Jennifer P. Shea, Kevin R. Mulcahy
Jennifer Paula Shea, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Shea of Attleboro, Mass., was married yesterday to Kevin Robert Mulcahy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Mulcahy 3d of Mendham, N.J.
Msgr.
John J. Smith performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Pius X Church in South Yarmouth, Mass.
Mrs.
Mulcahy, 28 years old, is a teacher of the deaf at the Lake Drive School in Mountain Lakes, N.J.
She graduated from Villanova University, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in deaf education from Gallaudet University.
Her father is a vice president and the medical director of the Sturdy Memorial Hospital in Attleboro.
Her mother, Paula F. Shea, is an elementary-school teacher in Attleboro.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Polls Seem to Offer Respite, But Clinton Pushes the Pace
The calls to his Little Rock headquarters have tripled in volume, the campaign's advisers are locked in almost round-the-clock planning sessions, and Bill Clinton, the Democratic nominee for President, headed for the West Coast today as if the very devil were at his heels.
In many ways, Governor Clinton and his lieutenants are still reeling from weeks of good news, good polls and the soaring potential of a campaign that, only a few weeks ago, was happy to make it through seven consecutive days without a disaster.


Correction
The Talking column last Sunday, about solar energy, misstated the telephone number of Applied Energy Technology of Swisher, Iowa.
It is (319) 857-4121.


State Reviewing Police Car Pursuits
THE scene is familiar to any fan of heart-pounding action films: police officers radio headquarters that they are in "hot pursuit of the suspect's vehicle." After the blaring sirens and flashing lights are turned off, the scene usually ends with the bad guy in handcuffs and no one the worse for the wear.
That scenario is Hollywood fantasy.
Real high-speed police chases can be harrowing events that end in tragedy, with the officers, the suspect and bystanders frequently injured or killed.


Tech Notes; A Better Test for Blood Sugar
A device that could make the lives of diabetics a bit more comfortable and possibly reduce the incidence of complications from the disease has been developed at the Sandia National Laboratories and the University of New Mexico.
Diabetics have to prick their fingers, sometimes up to four times a day, to draw blood for monitoring their glucose levels.
The new device, a sensor, requires no such pricking.


Hey! Over Here! It's the Women's Basketball Team
The U.S. men's basketball team is a tough act to follow, especially for the U.S. women's basketball team, which was scheduled to meet the press immediately after the Dream Team today.
And when the Dream Team exited stage left, along went about three-quarters of the approximately 1,500 journalists in the audience.
Theresa Grentz, the coach at Rutgers and the U.S. women's coach, took it all in stride.


Gypsy in New Garb


Phoenix Stages a Revised 'Old Boy' at Purchase
LAST season, the Phoenix Theater Company's first at the State University of New York here, was but a dry run for this one, which is positively glistening with style.
After an enriching production of "Morning's at Seven," the company is turning to a lesser play but playing it for immeasurably more than it is worth.
What is important to emphasize is that in years and years, audiences in Westchester have not been offered such splendid acting as the Phoenix is providing these summer weeks.
And it is clear that, at this extraordinary level, the company is the real thing.


Lisa E. Kirmse, John C. Cullen
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen C. Kirmse of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Lisa Edmondson Kirmse, and John Connell Cullen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas W. Cullen Jr. of Manhasset, L.I.
Miss Kirmse, 24 years old, is a sales assistant in New York for Cambridge Dry Goods Company, a women's sportswear manufacturer.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is a managing director of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, Barbara D. Kirmse, is a real-estate saleswoman for Marron &amp; Gildea Realtors in Ho-Ho-Kus.


HOSPITALS HOUSING HEALTHY INFANTS
A new study has found that growing numbers of newborn babies are being kept in hospitals for months because they have no place to go.
The study, by the Child Welfare League of America and the National Association of Public Hospitals, said that those newborns, called boarder babies, are often abandoned by parents who have problems of alcohol- or drug-abuse.
In other cases, the babies are left in hospitals after social workers have decided that parents' use of drugs and alcohol have made their homes too dangerous for the infants.


Randi H. Esbin, Peter C. Leeds
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Esbin of Nanuet, N.Y., have announced January wedding plans for their daughter, Randi Hillary Esbin, and Peter Charles Leeds, a son of Sandra R. Leeds of Hackensack, N.J., and the late Morton Leeds.
Ms.
Esbin, 23 years old, is a public relations assistant with New Line Cinema Corporation, a film distributor in New York.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is a motion picture marketing consultant in New York.


Compassionate?
To the Editor: Your column about compassionate fares (Practical Traveler, May 17) compels me to write about a gratifying experience I had with Qantas Airlines.
To get to California from New Zealand in time for a funeral, I asked Qantas if they could add a flight to Los Angeles to those I had previously booked from Christchurch to Honolulu.
When I explained that there had been a death in the family, Qantas did not question my relationship to the deceased.
Its representative expressed concern, then set about finding for a Saturday flight the one seat available, in business class, for which I was charged a compassionate return fare.


Streetscapes: 129 East 19th Street; A Stable-Studio, With Secrets
ONE of Manhattan's most interesting landmarks, the picturesque stable-studio at 129 East 19th Street, is now being restored, and in the process some of its secrets are being not just lost, but erased.
Charles Moran, an importer, built a town house at 24 Gramercy Park in 1847 on a lot stretching back to the north side of 19th Street between Irving Place and Third Avenue.
Moran still had not built on the 19th Street side of the lot when he sold the house in 1855 to James Couper Lord.
It was Lord, an iron merchant and philanthropist, who built the two-story stable at 129 East 19th Street in 1861.


Grateful Ties
WHAT IT IS: A line of silk neckties just out this month and designed by Jerry Garcia, the Buddhalike lead guitarist of the Grateful Dead.


Sara E. Ross, E. Joseph Knoll 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce R. Ross of Pennington, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sara Elisabeth Ross to E. Joseph Knoll 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Knoll Jr. of Washington.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ross, 25 years old, is a graduate student in health-care policy at George Washington University.
She graduated from the University of Richmond.
Her father is the president of the Bristol-Myers Squibb U.S.
Pharmaceutical Group, in Princeton, N.J.


Miss Smith, Mr. Whiteleather
Margarita Schuyler Smith, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney S. Smith of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday in Geneva, N.Y., to Karl Kristian Whiteleather, a son of Dorothy Tovey of Ashland, Ohio, and the late Robert J. Whiteleather.
The Rev.
Richard A. Norris performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church.


Lisa Eddy, John E. Donnelly 4th
Mr. and Mrs.
William L. Eddy of Simsbury, Conn., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Elizabeth Anne Eddy, and John Emmitt Donnelly 4th, the son of Drs.
John Emmitt and June Donnelly of Bethany, Conn.
Ms.
Eddy, 27 years old and known as Lisa, is a media supervisor at Young &amp; Rubicam in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is the treasurer of Connecticut National Bank and Shawmut National Corporation in Hartford.


Crumpled Bike
To the Editor: A word of nonlegal advice to a fellow attorney and bicycle enthusiast.
On a trip to Cornwall and Devon, I boxed my bike at Kennedy Airport.
For $5 a hotel clerk in Paddington, London, rented me space to store the empty box.
I stayed at the Y.M.C.A. in Geneva on a trip through Switzerland and the desk clerk there held my box until I returned.
In both cases I reboxed the bike for the trip home.
Nary a scratch.
LEON BROWN  Syosset, L.I.


The Case Lor Long
THIS moment in history is shaping up as the decline and fall of the hemline.
When designers on both sides of the Atlantic showed long skirts in their fall-winter collections, stores accepted them warily, welcoming the novelty yet fearing that women might rebel.
Retailers remember anti-midiskirt demonstrations by die-hard miniskirters in 1970, so they have been promoting the long skirt as merely an option and not as the only way to go.
Well, the first wave of long skirts reached the stores this month.
Most of the early arrivals are from high-fashion, high-priced designers, and fashion-conscious women have been snapping them up.


Richard Strauss's 'Four Last Songs' Turn Out to Be Five
ABOUT 40 recordings and countless concert performances attest to the enduring worth and popularity of Richard Strauss's "Four Last Songs." Now, as the result of the research of Timothy Jackson, a professor at Connecticut College, it turns out that the four songs are really five.
From studies of the Strauss notebooks and manuscripts, Dr.
Jackson determined that the composer, before finishing the four new songs he was writing in 1946-48, returned to a song he had created more than half a century before, on a connected text, giving it the same kind of orchestral setting he was providing for the others.
Dr.
Jackson maintains that further musical and text indications make it clear that Strauss intended the cycle to include all five pieces.
"There was unfinished business in the earlier song's lines about overwhelming emotional need that Strauss had to take care of before he met his own death, which he knew was soon to come." The composer died in 1949, however, before any of these orchestral songs had been performed, and it was his editor who decided to strip away the earlier piece, and issue only four "Last Songs."


World Markets; In Japan, the Hearts Still Say 'Sell'
The Japanese stock market's downward spiral continued with new energy last week, making the two-and-a-half-year plunge one of the steepest and longest ever for a major market.
But amid the gloom a number of analysts found reason to take heart: The Japanese market, many now agree, has fallen so far that it looks cheap by any measure.
That judgment created an interesting problem.
Do the technical valuations that are now looking very positive really count?
Should investors follow their hearts and stay out of the market, or follow their heads and heed the call of the more bullish signals?


Faith No More Dispenses Misery for All
Decay. Lies. Apathy. Defeat. Disillusionment. Surgery. Senility. Death.
Laughing yet?


'The Old Boys'
To the Editor:
In his June 14 commentary on my book "The Old Boys: The American Elite and the Origins of the CIA," Loch K. Johnson has managed to raise a continuous lather whaling away in
every
critical direction.
What he has not done is demonstrate to me or anybody else who knows the book that he at any point really took in the material.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League


Summer Movies Sniff the Political Winds
Long before the movie world takes an overtly political turn in September with the arrival of "Bob Roberts," Tim Robbins's hilarious mock documentary about a Pennsylvania Senatorial campaign, politics will have already made its presence felt on the screen.
Even some of this summer's most mindless commercial releases have managed, deliberately or otherwise, to indicate a strong political undercurrent.
Sure, every summer brings us some version of the thrillers and police adventures and fish-out-of-water comedies we've been seeing this year.
But it's not every season that so thoroughly enforces the relatively conservative ideas of mainstream Americana, family values and law and order, L.A.P.D.-style, that are now on the screen.
"Unlawful Entry," the thriller about a Los Angeles policeman who oversteps the law in his pursuit of a great-looking woman he meets on the job, shows him making an unannounced middle-of-the-night raid on the woman's bedroom as she and her husband make love.
This vision, representing the ultimate in police-state paranoia, would seem to indicate the film's liberal bias, but by the end, the story has turned around to advocate vigilante justice.


Pamela K. Heard and Dean E. Dunbar
Pamela Kay Heard, a daughter of Ardath J. Heard of East Elmhurst, Queens, and the late Edward O. Heard, was married yesterday in Westbury, L.I., to Dean Eliot Dunbar, the son of Ernest Dunbar of New York and the late Dorothy M. Dunbar.
The Rev.
Fred Wedemeyer performed the Lutheran ceremony at Westbury Manor, a catering hall.
Ms.
Heard, who is 28 and keeping her name, graduated from Smith College and is a doctoral student in clinical psychology at Yale University.
Her mother is a registered nurse at the City Hospital Center in Elmhurst.


Massachusetts' Shaker Dinners
The Shaker Village in Hancock, Mass., began its Saturday evening candlelight dinners with real Shaker cooking this month, and they will continue through Oct. 17.
The four-hour program includes a tour and Shaker music.
Interpreters in Shaker costume welcome guests at 5 P.M. with herbade, or, in the fall, cider, and lead them through the 1830 Brick Dwelling, where the Shakers slept, ate and worked.
The tour also stops at the 1826 Round Stone Barn and the Victorian Trustees' House and Office.
Dinner is served by candlelight at the long tables in the Believers' Dining Room of the Brick Dwelling, where the Shaker brethren and sisters once ate silently and separately.
Interpreters sing a traditional Shaker grace before the four-course meal.
Varying menus are drawn from fresh, seasonal ingredients such as the Shakers would have used; a number of recipes were recorded by the Shaker sisters in Hancock.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Economy; Perot's Bitter Budget Pill: Higher Taxes to Cure Deficit
Ross Perot has unveiled a far-reaching economic plan that would eliminate the budget deficit in five years by increasing income taxes on the rich, imposing higher taxes on Social Security for upper-income recipients and taking other painful steps that most Presidential candidates have shied from in recent years.
Details of the plan, being reported in the next issue of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, show in far greater detail than previous news accounts the pain that Mr.
Perot's proposals would inflict on Americans of all income levels.
It calls for raising gasoline taxes by 50 cents a gallon, doubling taxes on cigarettes and taxing some employer-paid health insurance plans as if they were income.


Trying to Be Different, in Caribbean Mode
CAYENNE dares to be different.
The new restaurant in Southampton is neither trendy Tuscan nor contemporary American.
Instead it pulsates to a Creole-Caribbean beat.
The change-of-pace place would be a find if the food matched the concept.
We found tough meats, overcooked fish and assertively bitter sauces.
A stop at an ice-cream parlor was plotted even before the desserts arrived.
But the desserts at Cayenne were yummy treats that went a long way toward salvaging a meal that ranged from passable to poor.
A flourless chocolate cake with fudgy frosting and a mound of real whipped cream was a big hit.
Equally fine were a tangy lemon tart atop a mango-papaya sauce and a chocolate-pecan pie served, as it should be, at room temperature.
A custard-texture tropical-fruit tart featuring guanabana and papaya also passed muster.


Chrysler's Mono-Culturalism
To the Editor:
As the target market for Chrysler's L/H, I can give the company very specific ways they can get us to believe that Chrysler has changed. (We owned a clunky Plymouth Scamp 20 years ago.) Break with the other "Big Two" to stop Japan-bashing to deflect your own problems.
And don't just meet government standards on air pollution, safety and gas mileage -- better them.
And while you're at it, have the popular mini-vans meet all passenger-car standards.
NORA L. MANDEL Forest Hills, N.Y., July 13


Latin American Quartet
To the rest of the world, 20th-century Latin American art for a long time meant "los tres grandes" -- the Mexican muralists Orozco, Rivera and Siqueiros.
Lately, one exhibition after another, including a gigantic survey of Latin American art from 1920 to 1970 at the Bronx Museum a few years ago, has set out to broaden that perception.
The latest effort is sharply focused and thoughtful.
As part of the Smithsonian Institution's program to celebrate the cultural legacy of Latin America on the quincentenary of 1492, the Hirshhorn Museum here has organized "Crosscurrents of Modernism: Four Latin American Pioneers" (through Sept. 7).
Of "los tres grandes," only Rivera is included, along with Joaquin Torres-Garcia, Wilfredo Lam and Roberto Matta in a display of nearly 100 paintings.


Mutual Funds; A No-Load Label With Limits
Earlier this month, the Securities and Exchange Commission finally approved a two-year-old proposal by the National Association of Securities Dealers to limit annual 12b-1 fees -- skimmed from fund assets to pay marketing expenses -- to three-quarters of 1 percent and cap total fees at 7.25 percent, or 6.25 percent for funds that also collect a one-quarter of 1 percent shareholder servicing fee.
One big loophole in the new rule, which becomes effective July 7, 1993, is that it permits funds that charge up to one-quarter of 1 percent, or 25 basis points, a year to call themselves "no-load" funds.
That is a term that should mean no sales charges at all.


The Dying City of Sarajevo
AFTER A FOUR-MONTH siege, the people of Sarajevo have exhausted much of their anger.
Now, amid their pain and privations, they seem mostly resigned and astonished -- resigned that their city seems destined for destruction, astonished that the world has stood by and let it happen.
While Europe beyond the Balkans has behaved as though paralyzed, Sarajevo has endured a siege of medieval barbarism mounted by an enemy possessed by nationalist hatreds that most Europeans thought had died with Hitler.
From the hills surrounding this old Alpine city, capital of the newly independent Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbian artillery guns and tanks have pounded the city, sparing neither hospitals nor homes, neither mosques nor churches, neither museums nor theaters nor schools.
In a few months, civic treasures accumulated over 500 years have been destroyed.


Man Is Shot Leaving Scene of Robbery
A man who the police said had just assaulted and robbed two people in lower Manhattan yesterday morning was shot and critically wounded by a transit police officer as the man attempted to flee.
A Transit Authority spokesman, Lieut.
Robert Valentino, said that the officers shot the suspect, Christopher Arthur, as he tried to drive away from the scene of a robbery at William Street and John Street.
A 9-millimeter pistol was recovered from the waistband of Mr.
Arthur, 28 years old, of 180 Troy Avenue in Brooklyn, Lieutenant Valentino said.


Criticism Tied to Ex-Beijing Aide's Sentence
A court document suggests that Bao Tong, the former senior Communist official who was tried this week, was sentenced to seven years in prison partly for criticizing the Government in a private conversation with a colleague.
Mr.
Bao, a 59-year-old former member of the Communist Party Central Committee, is the most senior official to be jailed for political crimes in connection with the Tiananmen Square democracy movement.


Pittsburgh Press Strike Nearing a Confrontation
Earlier this month, civic leaders held a three-day symposium to mark the centennial of the 1892 Homestead Strike, the bloody battle that gave birth to this city's fierce tradition of unionism.
No one planned on a re-enactment.
Yet 100 years after Andrew Carnegie and Henry Clay Frick floated a barge of Pinkerton strike breakers down the Monongahela River, Pittsburgh is poised on the verge of another volatile labor confrontation.


POSTINGS: Multifamily Mortgages; Welcome Back, Freddie Mac
Late in the 80's, when foreclosure rates began to rise on apartment house loans made by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, or Freddie Mac, the agency nervously halted its multifamily loan program.
That made it difficult for many landlords to find the financing they needed to sustain and operate their buildings.
Owners in New York City were particularly affected becausethey had been major users of Freddie Mac financing.


Allison Is Wrapped Up And Back on the Track
The injured DAVEY ALLISON is getting back into a race car at Talladega, Ala., this weekend, at least long enough to earn some Winston Cup points in the DieHard 500 today.
Allison was injured last Sunday in a crash at Pocono International Raceway, spending most of the ensuing week in an Allentown, Pa., hospital.
Allison suffered two broken bones in his right forearm, a dislocation fracture to his right wrist, a cracked right collarbone and a bruise over his left eye.
Allison fell 9 points behind the leader, BILL ELLIOTT, in the race for the series championship standing last weekend, and he must take the green flag today to earn Winston Cup points.
Within hours of his release from the hospital on Friday, Allison was in Talladega, making sure he could handle the physical problems of getting into and out of his Ford Thunderbird.


Making a Difference; Now Mr. Jenrette Can Get Some Sleep
When Richard H. Jenrette set out 19 months ago to take the Equitable Life Assurance Society public in the largest conversion ever of a mutual insurer, he knew a tough selling job awaited him.
He had no idea how tough.
As the economy faltered, investors grew increasingly skittish about commercial real estate, a concern fueled by the widely publicized woes of Olympia &amp; York.
With much of Equitable's portfolio in real estate, Mr.
Jenrette, the insurer's chairman since 1987, found himself waking many mornings at 3, churning over how to make the deal happen.


In Congress, Clinton Is Growing Coattails
Logically, this ought to be the year when Presidential and Congressional campaigns are closely coordinated.
After all, neither a Republican President nor a Democratic Congress has been able to do much more than thwart the other.
Divided government has led to the inaction that has provoked national disdain for Washington; merely 20 percent of the public approves of how Congress is doing its job.
So firm campaign alliances of House and Senate candidates with President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton might make sense.
So might using the Capitol as a stage where Democrats push bills that represent the Clinton agenda, and Republicans respond with Bush alternatives.
The public could look at the contrast and decide which it liked better.


A Right -- No, a Mandate -- to Sing the Blues
Queen Latifah may be singing the blues.
The rap performer, above, is one of at least three recording artists who are being considered for the role of Bessie Smith in a movie about the life of the blues singer, who died in 1937.
Jennifer Holliday, the star of the Broadway musical "Dreamgirls," and Alyson Williams, a rhythm-and-blues singer, are also up for the part.
"There are other people being considered, too," said Gary Daigler, the production executive at the Zanuck Company, which is producing the film for distribution by M-G-M next year.
"It's important that Bessie can sing, but we are looking for people that can handle the role from an acting point of view as well."


Editors' Note
The paperback best-seller list on page 24 of The Times Book Review today includes a description of Ross Perot as "the Texas billionaire who seeks the Presidency." Mr.
Perot withdrew from the race after the section had gone to press.


Julie Starkweather, Todd Halloran
Mr. and Mrs.
James O. Starkweather of Riverside, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Julie Clay Starkweather to Todd William Halloran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald F. Halloran of East Amherst, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Starkweather, 29 years old, is a manager in strategic planning at the American Express Travel Related Services Company in New York.
She graduated from Brown University, and she and her fiance received M.B.A. degrees from Harvard University.
Her father, who is retired, was an engineer at Morrison Knudsen, a consulting firm in Norwalk, Conn.
Her mother, Mary T. Starkweather, retired as a chemistry teacher at Greenwich (Conn.) Academy.


Melissa Card, Joseph Bianco
Dawn Melissa Card, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George Card of Missoula, Mont., was married yesterday in Williston Park, L.I., to Joseph Frank Bianco, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph D. Bianco of Rosyln, L.I.
The Rev.
Ronald Stanley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Aidan's Church.


Spring's Air Deals Mean a Crush in Summer
CLUTCHING their cut-rate tickets and dragging the kids, this summer's vacationers are descending on airports in record-breaking numbers, turning the hubs into hubbubs where an unprepared traveler might get a rude shock at the start of an intended trip to tranquillity.
The result of the half-price fares that the major airlines offered in late May and early June, the crowds are expected to last through mid-September with airlines carrying at least as many people each month as they did in June, when the low fares took effect.
In June, air travel suddenly jumped 10 percent compared with last June, with nearly 39 million boardings, according to the Air Transport Association.
When Edward R. Book, president of the Travel Industry Association of America, recently passed through O'Hare Airport in Chicago on a flight from Washington to Phoenix, he found the nation's busiest airport was "wall to wall people." Airport executives say that O'Hare may well handle a record quarter of a million passengers on its busiest day this summer.
But for bad weather and flight cancellations, that day probably would have been over the Fourth of July weekend.
In the first 12 days of July, American Airlines, which started the summer fare wars and funnels many of its travelers through Chicago, recorded five of the busiest days in its history.
Although the airlines say they aren't making much money with their fire-sale prices, the rest of the travel industry is reaping a bonanza, Mr.
Book said.
But he and other travel experts cautioned that the traveling public had better be aware of the side effects of the crowding, which has meant spot shortages of rental cars, traffic jams in some national parks and a heightened risk of unpleasant surprises for those who don't leave extra time to catch their planes and make connections.
First-Time Fliers
Adding to the confusion is the fact that many of the families packed cheek by jowl in the tourist cabins of jetliners are flying for the first time and may be unfamiliar with even the simplest airport procedures.
Nancy Muller of American Express Travel Related Services said that one of the company's Atlanta offices had questioned every customer ordering plane tickets during the two weeks when the half-price specials were being offered.
Thirty percent of them said they had never traveled by air before.
American, like other airlines, has posted extra service representatives around airports to search out the disoriented and speed them toward their departure gates.
The airline, in a sign of how little some of its fledgling customers know, also published a sheet of a dozen tips for holiday travelers.
"When asked to board the plane, do it!" urges Tip No. 11, pointing out that standby customers will be put into empty seats.
That's good advice, said Ed Perkins of Consumer Reports Travel Letter.
"It isn't just get to the airport early," he said.
"Make sure you get out to the gate early. And get on the plane when your row boards. Even having a boarding pass is no guarantee that someone else doesn't have the same seat assignment." (The airlines say that this is conceivable, but that in fact it almost never happens.)
Another tip: carry as little baggage on the plane as possible.
On many days American's planes are averaging nearly 80 percent full, an extraordinarily high number that means many planes are completely full, with no room for carry-on bags in excess of the two-per-person limit.
And the most obvious tip, but perhaps the most commonly neglected, is to allow oneself plenty of time.
Arriving at the airport an hour ahead for a domestic flight is cutting it close on a busy day.
With parking lots full and traffic heavy, that hour can vanish quickly, especially for those who must pick up tickets at the airport.
It's smarter to get tickets ahead of time, from a travel agent or ticket office, which allows passengers to check luggage at curbside and go directly to the gate.
And don't count on finding a car to rent at the other end.
Travel agents and car rental agencies say that there are spot shortages of cars, and that prices may be unusually high for those who don't reserve vehicles long in advance.
"The industry probably is going to be sold out in July and August," said Brian Kennedy, executive vice president of Hertz.
In almost every city in the country, rentals are up by double-digit percentages, and in some cities rentals are twice as high as usual, he said.
More than a third of the Hertz fleet has been reserved for the rest of the summer, an extraordinarily high percentage given that so many cars are rented not by vacationers but by business travelers who do not reserve long in advance.
Mr.
Kennedy said that because of the tight supply, travelers were likely to pay higher prices this summer.
Marilyn Kessler, manager of Belair Travel-Carlson Travel Network in Olney, Md., said that in Orlando, Fla., during the week of Aug. 9 the big rental companies were charging up to $150 a week for economy-size cars, while smaller companies off the airport premises would charge as little as $75.
Florida's rates are lower than those in other states, she noted.
"If you are planning to rent a car, do it as soon as possible," she said.
Then brace yourself for a traffic jam, especially if your trip is taking you to one of the popular national parks, like Yosemite, Yellowstone or the Grand Canyon.
Logjams at National Parks
The number of visitors to the Grand Canyon is up 35 percent over this time last summer, according to George Berklacy, a spokesman for the National Park Service.
He expects the rate to continue, which would mean as many as 900,000 more visitors this summer than last.
At the more popular parks, it is too late to reserve a campground or lodging within the park, though accommodations may still be available not far from the park's gates, he said.
Back-country campers won't have problems with crowds in the wide open spaces, of course.
But the vast majority of visitors stay firmly on the beaten track -- the paved roads that wind through scenic vistas like those in the central valley of Yosemite, or the Skyline Drive in the Shenandoah.
"If you can time your arrival in the park to sunrise, you're in good shape," he said.
"But if you get there after lunch, you are in serious trouble at Yosemite. It is like a commuter run into any large city, a virtual parking lot."
Mr.
Berklacy said many visitors to the most famous parks were unaware of alternatives that lie a short distance from the logjams.
"At Mount Rushmore, over the years, we have had to close down the parking lots over 50 times in the summer months," he said.
"Yet 10 miles north of Rushmore is the Wind Cave National Park. Outside of Yellowstone, this offers more abundant wildlife than any other national park.
"It is a magnificent, scenic park, with a very adventurous cave, yet we find that less than 10 percent of the people who go to Rushmore make that half-hour drive," he said.
Similarly, travelers interested in seeing the Grand Canyon might be best advised to visit the north rim rather than the hectic south rim.
As in any summer, it's too late now to get lodgings in the biggest national parks.
But hotels are still available not far away.
Indeed, the best news for travelers is that hotels are still not bursting at the seams.
In fact, hotels are heavily promoting package deals to draw tourists who may have already bought plane tickets but not made room reservations.
Many travel agents were so busy during the airplane ticketing boom at the start of the summer that they did not make room reservations for their clients.
In some cases, now that things are quieter, agents are calling their customers back to see if they need hotel rooms.
Randy Smith, whose Smith Travel Research tracks the hotel industry and publishes Lodging Outlook, said that demand for hotel rooms was up about 4 or 5 percent this summer, but not enough to wipe out the bargains, especially for travelers who made reservations.


Victory for Angel Is One for the Ages
Angels 9, Tigers 0
ANAHEIM, Calif., July 25 (AP) -- Tim Fortugno finally knows the feeling of winning in the big leagues.
Fortugno, a 30-year-old left-hander completing his first week in the majors, threw a three-hitter for his first victory as the California Angels beat the Detroit Tigers, 9-0, today.


Clinton Keeps Sprinting
Wasting not a day, Gov.
Bill Clinton carried his campaign to yet another region of the country, the Pacific Northwest.
Page 22.


At Work; Keep the Work Place in Its Place
You know who you are, and you are not alone.
You stay mentally Velcroed to the office long after you leave.
You obsess and stew on the trip home and then replay the day minutia-by-minutia to your spouse or partner.
"Sometimes, I put too many details in. I can see my husband's eyes glaze over," said Gretchen Park, the director of compensation and benefits at Residential Services Corporation, the holding company for the Prudential Home Mortgage.
"I know he doesn't want to hear about the office for two hours."
Caught up in downsizing, streamlining and, in the case of Residential Services, the crush of work brought on by an expanding business, millions of Americans are working more, enjoying it less and experiencing firsthand the stern conclusion that Harvard economist Juliet Schor comes to in her recent book "The Overworked American." She wrote: "Excessive hours are unhealthy and antisocial, and ultimately erode the quality of life."


County Institutes New Recycling Regulations
THE county took decisive action last week to reduce its trash, with the Board of Legislators voting unanimously to require all households and businesses in the county to separate specific items and recycle them, beginning Sept. 1.
Under the new source-separation law, every Westchester household will be required to separate newsprint, glass and metal food and drink containers, plastics and bulk metals.
Car batteries must be returned to stores, and used motor oil delivered to gas stations.
Fall yard waste must be collected by municipal systems.


And What About Satchmo?
To the Editor:
Jon Pareles's "Handicapping the 29 Superstars"  [ July 12 ]  omitted the man without whom the others would not have been possible: Louis Armstrong.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about efforts to promote black-owned businesses in Washington referred incompletely in some editions to a professor who said many black business people were being recruited by white-owned companies.
He is David Abner, a professor of marketing at the Howard University School of Business.


Kristin Simplicio, Robert Treiber 2d
Mrs.
Philip A. Simplicio Jr. of Pittsford, N.Y., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Kristin Jo Simplicio, to Robert Treiber 2d, the son of Mrs.
Treiber of Fairfield, Conn., and the late Mr.
Treiber.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Simplicio, 27 years old, is the controller of ASEC Corporation, an engineering, architectural and land-surveying concern in Boston.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Her mother, Marion M. Simplicio, is the cataloging librarian at Nazareth College of Rochester.
Her late father was a senior executive for Xerox Corporation in Rochester.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
NOTHING much ever used to happen on Alan Street in West Orange.
Anne Kostyak liked it that way.
So did Margaret Beirne.
And Midge Werner.
It was nice.
Then a man from the Government showed up talking about radium, and gamma rays, and hot spots, and picocuries.
Nobody knew much about any of it, except that it probably meant something was going to happen on Alan Street.
And it wouldn't be good.


Choosing 25 Women Who Set the Styles
Who are the most stylish women of the 20th century?
Annette Tapert, who helped Slim Keith write "Slim: Memories of a Rich and Imperfect Life," is attempting to narrow the myriad choices to 25 names.
The women will be profiled in her picture book, tentatively entitled "The Power of Style," which Crown will publish next year.


Catherine of Queens?
Catherine of Braganza, a 17th-century Princess of Portugal who became a Queen of England, just might become a 21st-century Colossus of Queens.
Catherine, the largely forgotten figure in whose honor the borough is named, has a small band of hardy partisans -- an ardent alliance of Portuguese and English admirers and Queens residents seeking to promote their borough's heritage.


'The Graduate' in a 3d Version
A1963 novel that made a dent and a 1967 film that caused a commotion, "The Graduate" is, suddenly, a 1992 play about which there will be hardly a twitter.
In its previous incarnations, the odyssey of the bewildered Benjamin Braddock provoked questions about the effects of shallow grown-up values on disaffected youth.
About its transposition to the stage at Summit/ Stageworks by Robert Pridham, just one question is operative: why?


Mary Beth Navin And Alan S. Wilmit
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Navin of Chittenango, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Elizabeth Navin to Alan Scott Wilmit, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Samuel T. Wilmit of Spring Valley, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended July 11  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village 410,000
3 Sheridan Square (West Fourth St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, fireplace, two 800-sq.-ft. terraces, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,631, 51% tax-deductible (Broker: Betty D. Fox Real Estate)  Greenwich Village 517,500
17 West 10th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining area, 3 fireplaces, dressing room; maintenance $1,475, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Kingman Associates/Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)  NoHo 290,000
7 Bond Street  1,200-sq.-ft. open-loft condo in a cast-iron building; elevator, 1 bath, 12-ft. ceilings, original moldings and details; common charge $500, taxes $5,940 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia/Corcoran Group)  Sutton Place 515,000
50 Sutton Place South  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 2,400-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned-elevator, renovated kitchen and bath; maintenance $2,164, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  TriBeCa 327,000
11 Jay Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building, dining room, fireplace, c/a, renovated kitchen and bath, walk-up, 3 exposures; maintenance $850, 30% tax-deductible (Brokers: Corcoran Group/ Tabak Real Estate)  West Side 410,000
10 West 66th Street  (Park Ten)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, balcony; maintenance $1,466, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn Korn Real Estate)  BRONX  Kingsbridge Heights 185,000
3492 Fort Independence Avenue  2-family, attached, brick townhouse; dining room in primary unit; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath in each; 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,975 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  Wakefield 200,000
640-42 East 239th Street  3-family, detached, frame house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; 5-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Park Slope 682,000
284 Garfield Place  4-story brownstone; 6 bedrooms, 3 baths, dining room, c/a, south garden, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,300 (Broker: Joseph Berman Realty)  Sheepshead Bay 245,000
2524 Voorhies Avenue  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room in primary duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, dinette in rental simplex; 2-car garage, 20- by 110-ft. lot; taxes $1,856 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  Bayside 210,000
2929 Jordan Street  2-family, semi-attached, frame house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dinette in each unit; full basement, private driveway, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Value Lane Realty)  Forest Hills 540,000
16 Slocum Crescent  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, Center-Hall Colonial; dining room, solarium, fireplace, finished basement, 2-car garage, 103-by 62-ft. lot; taxes $3,200 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Grasmere 190,000
23 Whitney Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, colonial; dining room, front porch, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,467 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  West Brighton 117,000
21 Cornell Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, wood-frame house; full basement, hospitality suite on first floor, 37- by 91-ft. lot; taxes $876 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DiSimone Real Estate)


GIVE THIS DOG A JOB
McCaig states in his article: "Pet meant, originally, orphan lamb." My own Oxford English Dictionary (1933) has this definiton: "Pet. . . .  Any animal that is domesticated or tamed and kept as a favorite. . . ." I conclude that a dog can be a favorite without odious comparison to lambs.


Barbara Kreinik and Robert Ehudin
Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Kreinik of Belle Harbor, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Barbara Lynn Kreinik, to Robert Kenneth Ehudin, the son of Irving Ehudin of Baltimore and the late Lee R. Ehudin.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kreinik, 27 years old, is an associate at Kelley Drye &amp; Warren, a New York law firm.
She graduated from Cornell University and received her law degree and a master's degree in public health from Boston University.


Democrats Endorse Dodd For a 3d Term
Connecticut Democrats today nominated Senator Christopher J. Dodd, who is running for his third term, as their candidate for the United States Senate, and basked in the party's new-found optimism after its national convention in New York earlier this month.
The one-day state Democratic convention, attended by more than 1,400 delegates, offered few surprises, as Mr.
Dodd had already declared his candidacy and was unanimously nominated.
The 48-year-old Democrat also received the support of the fledgling party founded by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., A Connecticut Party, which met in Wallingford tonight.


Moroccan Rugs
To the Editor: "But is it art?" is not at issue in the purchase of Moroccan rugs, but rather, is it a "hand-woven" or "folkloric" rug from Morocco?
A letter to the editor on June 28 recounted a customs-tariff tale that has familiar reverberations but, in my case, the outcome was quite different.
It appears that the Moroccan Government has enjoyed preferential treatment by the United States tax authorities since August 1990 in the importation of hand-woven or folkloric Moroccan rugs.
In returning to New York with my used rug (hardly a work of art), I too was shocked to be levied a 10 percent duty, despite protestations to the contrary.


Choosing 25 Women Who Set the Styles
Who are the most stylish women of the 20th century?
Annette Tapert, who helped Slim Keith write "Slim: Memories of a Rich and Imperfect Life," is attempting to narrow the myriad choices to 25 names.
The women will be profiled in her picture book, tentatively entitled "The Power of Style," which Crown will publish next year.


Salvadorans Demobilize, With Verbal Sniping
After several months' delay, the Salvadoran Government and its former guerrilla adversaries have taken the first steps toward demobilization, but each side has accused the other of not complying fully with the Jan. 16 peace accords.
Over several days at the end of June and beginning of July, the Government legislated out of existence two of the security forces -- the Treasury Police and National Guard -- while the former rebels demobilized more than 1,600 people, said to be 20 percent of their force.


Making Millionaires of Carolina Farmers
A visit early last March by a group of BMW executives to rural Flatwood five miles south of here has turned some of its farmers into millionaires.
The German automobile manufacturer was looking for a place to build a $300 million plant that would ultimately employ 2,000 people.
The farmers had just the site.


DISAGREEING TO AGREE
Anne Raver wisely recommends avoiding chemical insect repellents.
I have found that rubbing orange peel on exposed areas, squeezing it to release the oil, is very effective.
A few weeks ago, I had an inadvertent control when I found a bracelet of bites above each ankle where my jeans and socks did not meet.
There were none on my face and arms where the peel had been applied.
ELOINE J. DUNLAP
New Brunswick, N.J.


Sports of The Times; Sir Charles Lets Loose Hot Riffs
ONCE upon a time, nubile teen-agers known as bobby-soxers threw themselves at a skinny singer named Frank Sinatra.
In later days, screams of "We love you, Ringo" were matched by screams of "We love you, Paul" and "We love you, John" and "We love you, George." In recent years, the crowds have surged toward the phenomenon known as Madonna.
Here at the 1992 Summer Games, however, world-level athletes have turned into a clutching, grasping, squalling scrum.
The object of their affection is the first professional United States basketball team ever to play in the Summer Games.


Enhancing a Bread Pudding With Seasonal Fruit
AMONG the simplest of desserts to make with the abundant fresh fruit and berries now in the market is bread pudding.
It depends more on leftover bread than on expertise.
Usually the leftover bread is drenched with sweetened milk and eggs to bind it and make it light, then the pudding is baked in a casserole dish.
Baking takes the major part of an hour.
The pudding can be served warm or cold.
It can be made early in the day and reheated.


A Law to Protect Women and Choice
The Supreme Court's recent refusal to overrule Roe v.
Wade was an honorable moment in judicial history, but the Court still upheld too many state restraints on a woman's choice to have an abortion.
Those could be eased by passage of the Freedom of Choice bill, now ready for floor action in both the Senate and House.
Although the bill was crafted in case the high court overturned Roe entirely, it is still needed to safeguard freedoms that the justices refuse to find in the Constitution.
In last month's case, from Pennsylvania, a 5-to-4 majority refused to turn the constitutional clock back before 1973, when states could make abortion a crime and punish a woman and her doctor.
But the Court did allow states to impose a number of conditions, like an "informed consent" provision that included a lecture slanted against abortion followed by a 24-hour waiting period.


D J Berinstein and Nels P. Nordquist
Jennifer D. Berinstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry W. Berinstein of New York was married in New York yesterday to Nels Peter Nordquist, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Myron Nordquist of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
Luther Kriefall, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls.
Mrs.
Nordquist, 24 years old and known as D J, is the press secretary to Representative William M. Thomas, Republican of California.
She graduated from Stanford University and received a master's in journalism from Northwestern University.
Her father is a stockbroker in New York with Louis Nicoud &amp; Associates.


Enhancing a Bread Pudding With Seasonal Fruit
AMONG the simplest of desserts to make with the abundant fresh fruit and berries now in the market is bread pudding.
It depends more on leftover bread than on expertise.
Usually the leftover bread is drenched with sweetened milk and eggs to bind it and make it light, then the pudding is baked in a casserole dish.
Baking takes the major part of an hour.
The pudding can be served warm or cold.
It can be made early in the day and reheated.


Mr. Baker's World
Just one Presidential election cycle ago, some foreign policy professionals found it hard to imagine James A. Baker 3d as Secretary of State.
Now some of those former skeptics worry about what will happen to important Baker initiatives like the Middle East peace talks should the Secretary leave, as expected, to try to salvage the Bush-Quayle campaign.
Mr.
Baker has made his share of errors and squandered more than one major diplomatic opportunity.
Yet on balance he has been a particularly effective Secretary of State, capably safeguarding American interests during a period of tumultuous global change.


Susan E. Carlton, Lawton M. Camp
Susan Elizabeth Carlton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Carlton of Bedford, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Lawton Mortimer Camp, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert V. Camp Jr. of Ridgefield, Conn.
The Rev.
Heather Cook officiated at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church.
The couple, both 25 years old, are law students at Boston University.
Mrs.
Camp graduated from Smith College, Mr.
Camp from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.


Denver Journal; Prairie Dogs Holding Own in Face-Off With Pope
On a sloping hill framed by distant mountaintops, the Cherry Creek Reservoir seemed to be an ideal setting for followers of Pope John Paul II to celebrate Mass when he visits here next summer.
But people here worry that the Pope and his following of 300,000 or more would displace the inhabitants of the state park surrounding the Denver reservoir.
No, not the homeless.
The rodents.


A Rally in the Bronx Against Drugs


QUAYLE'S MOMENT
Perhaps the most troubling aspect of Dan Quayle's attack on "cultural elites" is that it seeks to make a virtue of his own lack of intellectual curiosity and academic achievement ("Quayle's Moment," by Andrew Rosenthal, July 5).
That we have a "cultural elite" -- a highly educated group responsible for many of society's ideas (both liberal and conservative) -- is no tragedy.
If our society insures that individual merit, not wealth, is the ticket to educational attainment and membership in the cultural elite, we have little to fear.


The Scene Stealers
Alaia likes to do things his own way and in his own time.
This week, when the world fashion press is in Paris for the haute couture collections, Alaia will be introducing his fall ready-to-wear -- months after his fellow designers have shown theirs.
Because of this lateness, Alaia's clothes will arrive, as always, in American stores well after the regular selling season.
But the Alaia customer doesn't seem to care.
The fact is, this designer is a towering talent who is worth waiting for.
He is an originator who is often the first to craft and present a fashion idea that later becomes a worldwide trend.
Alaia is photographed here in his Paris atelier.
At left are examples of a few of his recent visionary styles.


Picturesque May Be Pleasant, But Is It Drama?
IN THE SHAW SHOP, THE OFFICIAL gift and souvenir boutique of the Shaw Festival, you can purchase the usual assortment of coffee mugs, T-shirts, trinkets and posters.
I'm not against this.
In these days of penury, a theater troupe needs every source of revenue it can get.
You can also buy postcards depicting scenes from past productions.
And I guess I shouldn't be against that, either.
But after seeing six of the nine offerings that make up the 31st season, I somehow find the postcards indicative of a worrisome development.
The picturesque seems to have gained the upper hand in the three theaters the festival operates in this admittedly picturesque town on the no less picturesque shores of Lake Ontario.
Little that's troublesome or unsavory makes its way onto the stages here.


It's Beetle Time. How Goes the War?
THE Japanese beetles are back on the rose bushes, and the beetle war gets entomologists pretty fired up.
"Anything I can do to kick the Japanese beetle in the head, I enjoy doing," said T. L. Ladd, an entomologist at the United States Department of Agriculture and one of the patent holders for the original beetle trap.


Bonnies Coach Let Go
TOM CHAPMAN, the head men's basketball coach at St.
Bonaventure for the last three years, was dismissed Friday.
Chapman, 43 years old, compiled a 22-62 record during his tenure, including a 6-46 regular season mark in the Atlantic 10 Conference.


Mary Beth Love, Michael Russom
THEY met in a coffee house nine years ago.
He was a waiter; she was a graduate student.
"When I met Mary Beth," Michael Russom recalled, "I knew this was a woman who didn't have a man in her life and didn't need one, and I found that very attractive."
Mary Beth Love, 38, and Mr.
Russom, 47, live in San Francisco, but they chose to to marry at 6 P.M. last Saturday in the town where they courted: Northampton, Mass.
One guest described their wedding as "the best of the 60's blended with the 90's."


Messinger Is Urging Change In Trump's West Side Plan
Having inherited Donald J. Trump's Riverside South proposal with an almost unanimous rejection from the Upper West Side community board, Borough President Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan said last week that she would not support the project in its current state.
"There are many issues pending," she said Friday.
"It's my expectation that we'll begin negotiating on those issues in the next 30 days, because unless I see real progress in several different areas, I won't be able to help the project move forward."


A Historic Theater Regains an Audience
ABOUT six years ago, it appeared that the Ivoryton Playhouse -- which describes itself as the oldest self-supporting summer theater in the country -- was about to take its final curtain call.
The cottage-like theater in the Ivoryton section of Essex was dilapidated enough to be a candidate for the wrecker's ball.
The roof leaked so badly that if it was raining outside during a performance an extra sound effect was likely to be the sound of water dripping on the actors on the stage.


Mexico Says It Won't Accept Drug Aid From U.S.
The Government of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari says that the country will no longer accept United States aid in its fight against narcotics trafficking.
The Mexican Attorney General, Ignacio Morales Lechuga, said in an interview on Friday that the Government had no intention of relaxing its efforts to stop illegal drugs.
But he said Mexico would bear the costs because it was no longer willing to tolerate what it considered the unwarranted interference that comes with American aid.


Games Begin With a Shot of Catalonian Spirit
In a sense, they waited 72 years for this moment.
The city of Barcelona and the province of Catalonia first bid to stage the Summer Olympics in 1920 but lost out then and three times later as other cities and world wars conspired to deny them.
Then the most glorious moment arrived: Oct. 17, 1986.
In a tribute to the region as well as the president of the International Olympic Committee, Juan Antonio Samaranch, a native son born the year of the first failed bid, the I.O.C. awarded the 25th Games to this proud second city of Spain.


Can Falcons Afford a Season Minus Sanders?
The Atlanta Falcons opened training camp this evening with plenty of questions and with answers hard to come by.
How will the team replace Brian Jordan, a safety long among the team leaders in tackles and leadership who is now signed to an air-tight three-year deal with baseball's St.
Louis Cardinals?
Should the team appease receiver Andre Rison, who wants a revamped contract and threatens to make pro basketball his future?


Just Folks; What's Meant and What's Mean In the 'Family Values' Battle
Here is a pop quiz on the 1992 campaign. (TelePrompters are not allowed, but you may call your mother in Smalltown, U.S.A.)


Not Quite at Home on the Via Colombare
ITALIAN NEIGHBORS
Or, a Lapsed Anglo-Saxon in Verona.
By Tim Parks.  272 pp.
New York: Grove Weidenfeld. $19.95.


Onward and Upward, a Real Summer Trouper
WHAT did gardeners ever do before impatiens?
This ubiquitous flowering plant is a boon to the summertime landscape.
The impatiens is truly a stick-it-in-the-ground-and-forget-about-it annual.
The happy flower colors: red, coral, orange, rose, almost blue and white (just about every shade but clear yellow) can be seen in borders, along drives, outlining shrub beds, in window boxes, along walls or tucked in just about any place a little spot of flower color is needed.


Amanda E. Rose, David B. Campbell
Mr. and Mrs.
Irving M. Rose of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Amanda Esther Rose to David Barrington Campbell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert B. Campbell of the Bronx.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Rose, 25 years old, is a marketing consultant at Lubin Lawrence Inc., a market-strategy consulting company in Manhattan.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is the owner of I. M. Rose Associates, a management-consulting company in Princeton.
Her mother, Merle E. Rose, is an English teacher at Princeton High School.


Watching Wimbledon
To the Editor:
Re "Tennis Speaks for Itself" (Topics of The Times, July 6), on the high quality commentary supplied by the BBC on the televised doubles match at Wimbledon on NBC's "Today" show: for years I have watched Wimbledon tennis matches with a soundless television and my radio tuned to a short-wave BBC station.
Moreover, the commercials are also silent.
AVICE R. WILSON  New Brunswick, N.J., July 7,1992


Karen Bradford and Jeffrey Gopen
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Bradford of Montville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Denise Bradford to Jeffrey Alan Gopen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry S. Gopen of Marblehead, Mass.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bradford, 24 years old, owns A la Main, a women's clothing and accessories manufacturer in Marblehead.
She and her fiance are graduates of Boston University.
Her father is a vice president of UBS Securities in New York.


At AIDS Talks, Reality Weighs Down Hope
Dr.
Jonathan Mann, the co-chairman of the eighth international AIDS conference, closed the meeting on Friday as he had opened it six days before, speaking of the gathering as one of "hope, not despair."
But the conference here closed in a somber atmosphere generated by a growing recognition that H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, is yielding its secrets slowly and that the full dimensions of the puzzle are not known.


Please Panic
THE play is Howard Korder's 90's satire "Search and Destroy," which was recently on Broadway.
Two anxious yuppies trade intelligence.


Club Class for Canyon Trains
The Grand Canyon Railway has introduced two new cars on its 65-mile trip from Williams, Ariz. (34 miles west of Flagstaff) to the South Rim.
They are likely to attract plenty of passengers since the discounted summer air fares have increased the number of vacationers in the area.
An authentic 1923 Harriman Coach offers club class service every Friday and Sunday, with only 60 seats (compared to 90 in the regular coach cars) and a mahogany bar where passengers can buy beer, wine and liquor.
Both club and coach cars have attendants and offer free soft drinks and snacks, live entertainment and Old West performers.
The train trip itself takes two and a half hours each way; there is a four-hour stop at the Canyon.


Crazy Cats
DO CATS NEED SHRINKS?
Cat Behavior Explained. By Peter Neville. 201 pp. Chicago: Contemporary Books. $13.95.


If Water Floods Basement, A Sump Pump May Help
WHEN a basement is flooded because of water rising from beneath the floor, one solution is to install a sump pump.
Aside from requiring modest excavation, including breaking through the basement floor, the task is not difficult.
But before starting, call the building inspector to ask about the requirements for installing sumps.
Find out whether the pump may discharge into a municipal storm sewer.
In many localities that is strictly forbidden, because sewers can be overloaded during heavy rains.
The inspector will probably say the pump has to discharge onto the ground on the property, where it can soak into the soil.
Never connect a discharge line to an ordinary sewer or a septic tank.


Olympic Opening Ceremony Is a Celebration of a Region


Small Businesses Find Networking Pays
TURNING the recession into recovery is the hope of the small-business entrepreneurs who have joined organizations designed primarily to generate referrals for their members.
For George Berman, head of the Berman Associates public relations firm in Yonkers, membership in one such organization has paid off.
Mr.
Berman said his company has already generated $8,000 worth of business through contacts supplied by members of the Southern Westchester chapter of the Network, a national organization formed to provide a forum for its members to exchange business referrals.


Water Those Roots
If your area has received little rain, don't forget to soak shrubs and trees that were planted this spring.
It takes a long time for these plants to re-establish their root systems, and soil should be drenched to a depth of eight inches.
Just put a hose next to the plant and let it trickle for hours.
Mulch plants with crushed leaves, clean hay, wood chips or other organic materials to conserve moisture.


The Dream Begins Rising to the Top
Angola, a feisty, inoffensive bunch, just happens to be the unfortunate first opponent for the United States men's Olympic basketball team.
Consider Sunday's meeting of the best team in Pool A and the worst as an opening-statement game.
"I don't know anything about Angola but Angola's in trouble," said Charles Barkley.


Perot Didn't Trifle
To the Editor:
An individual may choose to persist in a lost cause.
When a leader of a cause decides he has lost, however, common decency requires that he communicate this belief to his followers.
Ross Perot did not trifle with the loyalty of his volunteers, as you suggest in "Captain Perot Jumps Ship" (editorial, July 17).
Harsh honesty is not the same as trifling.
To continue to let his volunteers hope, work and lose would have shown callousness.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THRASHIN' TIME
Harvest Days in the Dakotas.
Written and illustrated by David Weitzman.  77 pp.
Boston: David R. Godine.


Simms Gets Cheers and the Score in Scrimmage
Phil Simms, Dave Meggett and Jarrod Bunch gave strong performances on offense today in the Giants' 75-minute, 75-snap scrimmage, their first of training camp.
The only touchdown came on Simms's 1-yard pass to Ed McCaffrey.
Jeff Carlson (7 of 13 passes for 83 yards) started at quarterback.
He was followed by Jeff Hostetler (5 of 7 for 71 yards, including a 40-yarder to Stephen Baker), rookie Kent Graham (3 of 5 for 24 yards), Simms (4 of 5 for 43 yards) and Graham again.
The biggest cheers from the crowd of 3,500 came when the 36-year-old Simms, now Hostetler's backup, took the field.
Praise From Handley
On his third play, Simms hit tight end Howard Cross, who was unchecked at the line of scrimmage, over the middle for a 30-yard gain.
Meggett was involved in the next three plays: a 6-yard pass from Simms and and two 6-yard runs.
Three plays later, on first down from the 1-yard line, Simms faked a handoff to Meggett, then passed to the flat, where McCaffrey circled back and caught the ball for a touchdown.


Working From Home Draws Reprimands From Neighbors
WHEN Amalia Lee and Patrick Molt moved from Manhattan to a gracious white brick house in the expensive Ardsley Park section of this village seven years ago, they were pleased to find not only the home of their dreams but also a place within commuting distance of both of their offices.
Dr.
Lee, a psychiatrist, practiced in Manhattan, and Dr.
Molt, a surgeon, worked at the Westchester Medical Center in Valhalla.
Since they moved here, their family has grown, and Dr.
Lee recently converted the garage to an office and put in a tree-lined circular driveway to accommodate parking for patients.
She no longer wanted to commute every day and preferred to work at home at least part of the week, close to her 5-year-old daughter and her 15-month-old son.


Beyond Writer's Block
To the Editor:
In the course of his essay " 'The Price' Is Right for These Days"  [ June 28 ] , David Richards reviews Peter Parnell's play "Flaubert's Latest" with a verve Flaubert himself would probably have savored.


Janet M. Taber, David C. Hurley
Janet Marie Taber, a daughter of John E. Taber of Rolling Hills Estates, Calif., and Louise Allison of Torrance, Calif., was married yesterday at Point O'Woods, L.I., to David Charles Hurley, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Horace W. Hurley of New York.
The Rev.
Daniel M. Young, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the Church at Point O'Woods.
Mrs.
Hurley, 35 years old, is a tax lawyer with Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of California at Los Angeles and received her law degree from Stanford University.
Her father is a retired electrical engineer.
Her mother retired as a social worker for Los Angeles County.


Jamine Shechter, Daniel Sterman
Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Shechter of Columbus, Ohio, have announced November wedding plans for their daughter, Dr.
Jamine Lee Shechter, and Dr.
Daniel H. Sterman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Irving Sterman of Williamsville, N.Y.
Dr.
Shechter, 29 years old, is an ophthalmologist in Valley Forge, Pa.
She graduated magna cum laude from Haverford College and received her M.D. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a professor emeritus of chemistry at Ohio State University.


Corrections
A report in Styles of The Times last Sunday about the engagement of Allyson Maria Kossow to Dr.
Alan David Felix referred incorrectly to King World Productions, where she is a vice president.
It is a television production company.


Robin S. Strauss and Ira G. Rashbaum
Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Strauss of Laurel Hollow, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Robin Suzanne Strauss to Dr.
Ira Glenn Rashbaum, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Rashbaum of South Huntington, L.I.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Strauss, 24 years old, is the brokerage manager at the Strauss Agency, a life insurance brokerage in New York.
Her father is the agency's president, and her mother, Sheila Strauss, is its director of administration.


Ex-Coach Sues Team
DON MONSON, the dismissed University of Oregon basketball coach, has sued the state, seeking reinstatement to the job or $425,788 in compensation for the two years remaining on his contract.
Monson was released on March 17 after the Ducks' worst season in 21 years.
The team was 2-16 in the Pacific 10 Conference and 6-21 over all.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  BUSH WEIGHS OPTIONS ON IRAQ


And So, Gentle Reader, This Is How It's Done
A self-proclaimed authority on good manners recently made a serious faux pas herself.
Kitty Mountain, the publisher of Victoria magazine, which last month released a reader survey on etiquette, has, of late, been offering her services as a talk-show guest to discuss the subject.
Last Monday, she was scheduled to do a live telephone interview on the morning show on KRXO-FM in Oklahoma City.
At the appointed time, Mark Shannon, the show's host, called Mrs.
Mountain's office in New York, but she was nowhere to be found.


Paddling Above the Arctic Circle
SIXTEEN rivers traverse the northern tier of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in northeast Alaska, with faraway names like Sadlerochit, Jago and Okpilak.
I chose the Aichilik for a kayak trip last summer almost at random, drawn by the hard softness of its Inupiaq name and its location as the boundary between protected wilderness and the coastal plain that is a nesting and breeding ground for many species and the calving area for the porcupine caribou herd.
Unlike the choice of river, the timing was deliberate -- the last two weeks of June when the chances were best (in the highly unpredictable Arctic) for several events to coalesce: high water from melting snow, few mosquitoes, blooming wildflowers, warming weather, nesting birds and thousands of caribou.


New Jersey G.O.P. Rushes to Restore Budget Cuts
Spurred by the sight of angry motorists waiting hours to have their vehicles inspected and worried about Wall Street's concern over the state's low surplus fund, Republicans are scrambling to put money back into the state budget only weeks after approving a plan that included a record $1.1 billion in cuts.
The remodeling of the $14.6 billion budget by the Republican leadership in both the Senate and Assembly has ranged from tinkering -- like a proposal to restore $424,000 for day-care inspection -- to major overhauls, like a bill that would shift $79 million into the state budget surplus in an effort to protect New Jersey's credit rating.


Pentagon Data Show Mismanagement on Missing
Pentagon investigations into its own handling of the issue of Americans unaccounted for from the Vietnam War found a pattern of mismanaged files and overworked officials more often motivated to dispose of cases than to pursue and analyze them, newly released documents show.
Documents released Thursday under an executive order from President Bush generally called into question the Pentagon's commitment to investigate thoroughly all reports of "live sightings" of Americans who may have been left behind in captivity in Vietnam, Laos or Cambodia when American forces were withdrawn in 1973.


Newman in a Crash
PAUL NEWMAN walked unhurt from his car after crashing yesterday during the Sports Car Club of America Pro Racing World Challenge in Lakeville, Conn.
Newman was running second 12 laps into the race when his left rear tire went in the dirt.
He lost control, the car spun, and the back of his car rammed a tire barrier, track officials said.


Beyond Organic Architecture: The Office as Oasis
Recessions are hard times for architects, but they can be enriching times for architecture.
In the early 1970's, a lull in real estate development offered a chance to absorb new ways of thinking about urban context.
When building resumed toward the end of the decade, architects had largely abandoned the modernist view of the city as a messy slate to be rubbed clean.
They had come to value the mess as history: a rich heritage of ideas.
Yesterday history, today biology.
Now we've got a real mess on our hands: the environmental crisis that summoned the world's leaders to Rio last month.
It's time architects were summoned to address this issue as well.
Cars and factories aren't the only big polluters.
Homes and office buildings consume energy, release toxic fumes, send mountains of garbage out into a world that is short on dumps -- or fast becoming one.
How can design protect the environment from the impact of urban growth?
There may be no more pressing question for architects to ponder.


An Olympian Who Trained In Sarajevo
IN the hours before the opening ceremony, the flow in the Olympic Village never stopped.
Tall basketball players and tiny gymnasts moved to and from lunch.
Muscular wrestlers and willowy swimmers shopped in the arcade.
Soon they would return to their rooms, put on their team gladrags and board buses for the Estadi Olimpic and the parade of the athletes.
One of those athletes was Mirsada Buric, a 3,000-meter runner from Sarajevo who wondered if she would be here.


Show Serves as a Cosmopolitan Clearinghouse for New Talent
THE Bronx Museum of the Arts serves both the interests of its own polyglot community and those of the larger art world.
This would be no small accomplishment in the best of settings but at 165th Street and the Grand Concourse -- beyond the nerve center of Manhattan but not yet in the green hills of suburbia -- it borders on magic.
Generally, the museum's approach is to show a wide range of artists, native and foreign born, some of whom are seasoned, others relative beginners.
A magnum opus was the huge "Latin-American Spirit" roundup of 1988; but as important in its own way has been the "Artist in the Marketplace" seminars.


New &amp; Noteworthy
DARCY'S UTOPIA, by Fay Weldon. (Penguin, $9.) John Irving gave us the Ellen Jamesians in "The World According to Garp"; now Fay Weldon has created the Darcian movement, whose leader, Eleanor Darcy, proposes a kind of new-age feminist utopia.
Last year our reviewer, Gary Krist, observed that Ms.
Weldon is "more interested in telling the truth than in making it believable. And in this, one of her most ambitious books, she tells it without flinching."
THE SLOPES OF LEBANON, by Amos Oz.
Translated by Maurie Goldberg-Bartura. (Vintage International, $11.) In this collection of essays, speeches and newspaper columns written between 1982 and 1988, Amos Oz examines the heart of his native Israel.
He cautions against allowing territorial concerns to undermine the moral integrity of the Zionist movement, a danger he sees exemplified by the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in 1982.
" 'The Slopes of Lebanon' is an interesting, troubling, embittered, passionate, almost -- but not quite -- disheartened book," Lisa Anderson said here in 1990.
Vintage International has also reissued Mr.
Oz's 1968 novel MY MICHAEL, translated by Nicholas de Lange in collaboration with the author ($11).
The book traces the psychological unraveling of its narrator, an Israeli woman.
In 1972 our reviewer, Robert Alter, praised its "imaginatively wrought prose."


Mutual Funds; A Commission Break From Brokers
As their stock and bond business shrinks, brokerage firms are trying to grab a share of the lucrative mutual fund market.
Their most recent experiment: offering some no-load funds without charging brokerage commissions.
The no-transaction-fee programs, offered by two discount brokers so far, may represent the biggest shift in how no-load fund shares are sold since the no-load concept, under which funds levy no upfront sales charges, first caught on in the mid-1960's.
Instead of a broker collecting a commission from the investor for dealing in the shares, the broker in the new program will receive a fee from the fund itself.


Aqui Se Habla English: A Talk-Show Twist
She is already the biggest draw on daytime Spanish-language television, with an audience of five million in the United States and millions more in 15 Latin American nations.
Now Cristina Saralegui is hoping to find herself on a first-name basis with the rest of America -- just like Oprah, Geraldo, Phil and all the other talk-show hosts her new English-language program is challenging.
"Cristina" went on the air late last month on 25 English-language American stations, including WCBS in New York (9 to 10 A.M. weekdays), for an 11-week trial run.


Getting Misty
IT HASN'T QUITE superseded the compact and lipstick touch-up, but the cooling spritz may be the most visible public beauty ritual of the summer.
It started with those mini-atomizers of Evian water.
Now you can surround yourself with a rain forest of floral waters, herbal mists, fruit tonics and other infusions.
They feel good, they smell good and they're supposed to be good for you.
Toting a little spray bottle is convenient, especially if you're walking down Broadway and are close to meltdown or you're on an airplane and can't get up to wash your face.
Spraying has even become fashionable.
But what, exactly, does it do?


Drama on Baymen Inaugurates Theater
SOME plays reflect the news.
"Men's Lives" is diving headlong into events that are happening right outside the theater where it is to open on Friday.
And that brand-new showplace is newsworthy itself, the first professional theater, by the standards of Actors Equity, on the East End in more than 60 years.
Joe Pintauro, the playwright and a longtime resident of Sag Harbor, concurred: "One of the hottest political issues here is happening at the same time a play about it is inaugurating what looks like a major new American regional theater."


Q and A
Private Use of Space Question: I live in a rent-stabilized apartment in the parlor floor of a brownstone.
Access is through two locked doors and a short hallway.
The hallway includes a staircase to the ground level, which serves as an emergency exit for the apartment below mine.
I have always assumed that this hall area was private since I am the only tenant with a key to the door leading to it and the door has both my apartment number and a peephole.
The superintendent cleans the common areas but not this hallway.
I keep this area clean.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Providence, R.I.; A 'Medical Inn' For a Hospital
THE 52-acre Rhode Island Hospital in South Providence, this city's poorest neighborhood, has a $50 million children's hospital under construction and will break ground in September on a $13.2 million "medical inn."
The 87-bed structure now rising will be called the Hasbro Children's Hospital, after Hasbro, a Rhode Island toy manufacturer that contributed substantially towards its construction.
The hospital plans to get $20 million in its current fund-raising drive.
It will provide an additional amount -- undisclosed because Hasbro will not disclose the size of its contribution -- through reserves and bonding.


Community Bands And Community Spirit
Saturday night band concerts, described in the July 12 article "Brass Band Brings the 1890's Back to Life," brought back memories of such concerts when I was a boy in Juneau, Wis., in the early 1900's.
The big blue bandwagon stood in the town square across from the stores where farmers and town folk from far and near did their weekly shopping.
The concerts created a grand community spirit, so lacking now.
My brother played clarinet in the volunteer band.
I operated a large electric popcorn machine.
When the band played Sousa's stirring "Stars and Stripes Forever," one knew it was time to go home.


Public &amp; Private; Suffer the Little Children
Remember 13?
Remember waking up in the morning never certain of exactly who you'd be?
Remember being self-conscious about everything from your hair to your feet?
Remember wild crushes, endless self-examination, stormy silences?
Corinne Quayle is 13. And she should be left in peace.


Theater Beyond The West End
Many visitors to London assume that its theater scene is confined to the West End, within walking distance of Piccadilly Circus.
But there are several other performing arts venues -- a few stops on the Underground from the center -- that produce first-class theater at prices well below those of the West End.
The London Tourist Board has produced a guide listing 24 of them called "Beyond the West End Theater."
Among them are the Almeida and the King's Head in Islington, north of central London, which have attracted such artists as Glenda Jackson, Claire Bloom and Kenneth Branagh.
Many of the theaters listed produce new plays by new writers.
Most offer a more informal atmosphere than West End theaters; some are in or above pubs where visitors can take drinks into performances.
Tickets are generally around $15 to $20, about half the cost of seats in major theaters.


How Fresh Can You Get? Ask the Devotees of the Fish Farm
LINDA DRASHEFF and Abby Bluestone sat on an empty lobster box, dipping jumbo shrimp into a paper cup filled with cocktail sauce.
Behind them, in rows of round concrete tanks filled with water, thousands of lobsters, crabs, shrimp and oysters quietly waited for the moment when they, too, would be plucked from their tanks.


Talking: Resort Condos; Making The Right Decisions
BUYING a condominium unit in a resort complex has long been a practical alternative for those hesitant about caring for a vacation house.
But although a condominium owner does not have to personally maintain the unit, the management of the condo should still be treated as a serious concern.
Issues include the kind of rental programs that work best, the rules governing the conduct of transient rental guests, insuring timely payment of monthly charges and bylaws that make it easy to achieve a legal quorum when decisions are needed.


BEST SELLERS: July 26, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman chained to a bedpost after her husband has a heart attack.
2
2
20
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
3
3
9
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
4
4
5
SCRUPLES TWO, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $22.) Continuing the story of the crowd that frequents an ultrachic Beverly Hills store. (LP)
5
5
8
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) An insane Jedi threatens Luke Skywalker in the second volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
6
6
6
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
7
1
IMZADI, by Peter David. (Pocket, $20.) The U.S.S.
Enterprise's Comdr.
William Riker discovers a new form of love in a "Star Trek" adventure.
8
9
10
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) On a mission to Africa, Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
9
8
3
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Random House, $21.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
10
14
2
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $20.) A 90-year-old South Carolina woman recalls what she saw while becoming the doyenne of a Maine summer retreat.
11
7
11
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones. (LP)
12 *
13
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) A couple in the Harlem of the 1920's learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
13
12
14
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
14
11
118
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
15
13
2
EYE OF THE STORM, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) An American is hired by the British to thwart an Iraqi agent's attempt to kill Margaret Thatcher during the gulf war.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
2
2
9
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
3
3
6
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
4
5
SAM WALTON: MADE IN AMERICA, by Sam Walton with John Huey. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who became the richest American by creating the Wal-Mart store chain.
5
7
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save it.
6
5
9
DIANA IN PRIVATE, by Lady Colin Campbell. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
7
6
4
A BRILLIANT MADNESS, by Patty Duke and Gloria Hochman. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress tells how she learned to live with manic-depressive illness.
8
7
12
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
9
10
2
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The address delivered on Nov. 19, 1863, and how it has affected American life.
10
8
8
PEROT, by Todd Mason. (Business One Irwin, $16.95.) An unauthorized biography of Ross Perot.
11
9
6
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $20.) Essays on the pleasures of living extravagantly during the high-flying 1980's.
12
13
26
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
13
14
14
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.95.) Satirical essays on recent social and political developments.
14 *
34
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
15 *
12
2
THE HAPPY ISLES OF OCEANIA, by Paul Theroux. (Putnam, $24.95.) An 18-month exploration of the South Pacific in a kayak.
16 *
15
10
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) The first 49 years of a pre-eminent First Lady.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
23
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
2
34
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
3
3
6
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
4
2
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
5
33
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE LAST TSAR: The Life and Death of Nicholas II, by Edvard Radzinsky. (Doubleday, $25.) A convoluted, utterly absorbing tale by a popular Russian playwright, trained as an archivist, who has pursued the assassination of the Russian royals since the 1970's and struck gushers of information in the glasnost era.
One of many conclusions: Lenin was consulted and approved.
SACRED HUNGER, by Barry Unsworth. (Nan A. Talese/ Doubleday, $25.) A heartbreaking novel that dramatizes the 18th-century European and African experiences of slave trading; it also pokes a stick into the notion of human perfectibility.
MARINE LIFE, by Linda Svendsen. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $17.) Short stories, all about the same unwieldy family, all narrated by a tough-minded, laconic young girl who sees a lot.
FRONTIERS: The Epic of South Africa's Creation and the Tragedy of the Xhosa People, by Noel Mostert. (Knopf, $35.) A thorough account of the clash, generations long, between the Cape colonists and the first big, powerful African nation they encountered.
THE DEVIL'S DREAM, by Lee Smith. (Putnam, $21.95.) Ms.
Smith's novel, charming and bold, pursues country music and the people who make it from Virginia in the 1830's, when the Devil may have invented fiddle tunes, to Opryland in the 1970's.
LETTERS TO SARTRE, by Simone de Beauvoir, edited by Quintin Hoare (Arcade/Little, Brown, $24.95), and WITNESS TO MY LIFE: The Letters of Jean-Paul Sartre to Simone de Beauvoir, 1926-1939, edited by Simone de Beauvoir. (Scribners, $27.50.) The pact -- no exclusivity and no deceit -- between Sartre and de Beauvoir was a model for thousands of advanced couples.
In their letters, both seem to have had less pleasure in intimacy with various partners than in betraying personal details thus acquired.


Go Ahead, Knot It
The classic white shirt has an offhand new look, with its tails pulled up and knotted at the waistline to bare the midriff, its front unbuttoned and its sleeves rolled up.
The shirt can be new, old or borrowed from a boyfriend.
The point is to have that unpressed weekend style.
Stripes are allowed.


Audience Gets Giggles From 'Oil City Symphony'
AFTER they graduated from high school in Oil City -- wherever that is -- Mary (violin), Debbie (drums), Mark (piano) and Mike (synthesizer) drifted apart because of career and family obligations, they tell us.
But here they are, back together, "in this time of renewed fellowship after so many years," in a concert of "easy listening," although they're likely to erupt in uncontrolled fits of impassioned virtuosity, or just let go.
Watch out for Mary.


Update; Mount Trashmore May Exist for a While Longer
Mount Trashmore, Connecticut's largest illegal dump, could be around a little longer.
The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation has refused to allow the pile of construction and demolition debris to be transferred to Maston Lake Landfill in Mamakating, N.Y., saying it is just too much, said Frank Ricco, a lawyer for the hauler, D &amp; L Enterprises of Bridgeport.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
June home sales, in millions
3.43
3.30
Tuesday
July consumer confidence
71.7
71.3
Thursday
June gross domestic product, percent
2.4
1.7
G.D.P. deflator, percent
3.1
2.5
June new-home sales, percent change
-5.6
2.5
Mid-July jobless claims, thousands
422
415
Friday
July personal income, percent change
0.3
0.0
June personal spending, percent change
0.5
0.4
June factory orders, percent change
0.8
0.7
Monday: Greece begins debate on Maastricht Treaty on European unity  Wednesday: Treasury auctions new five-year notes *
Senate Finance Committee hearing on trade policy  Thursday: Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan testifies before House Banking Committee


Where Is Compassion In the Legislature?
The interesting article "Legislators Beset by New Public Anger" (July 5) told how nastiness was replacing civil behavior in the New Jersey Legislature.
It noted that the public has also turned nasty and uncivil when communicating with the legislators.
This tale reminded me of the old adage that you reap what you sow.
For the last decade, many politicians have played upon the base instincts of people: greed, prejudice, finger pointing, self-righteousness, selfishness, living for today instead of preparing for tomorrow, etc. -- all those things that children are told are wrong.
Compassion for the aged, the sick and the needy and even for children has been derided.


Nancy Huggins and Thomas Ogletree
Nancy June Huggins, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Hubert Huggins of Corinth, Miss., was married yesterday in Dallas to Thomas Ogletree, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence V. Ogletree of Orlando, Fla.
The Rev.
Tray Hammond performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Dallas Arboretum.
Ms.
Huggins, who is retaining her name, is a managing director in the Dallas office of First Boston Corporation.
She graduated from Rhodes College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.


Pamela Gill and Thomas Alabaster
October wedding plans have been announced by Raymond and Joan Gill of Upper Saddle River, N.J., for their daughter, Pamela Ann Gill, and Thomas Richard Alabaster, a son of Alfred and Charlotte Alabaster of Jensen Beach, Fla.
Ms.
Gill, 31 years old, is to join the L'Oreal cosmetic and fragrances division of Cosmair Inc. in August as a marketing manager in New York.
She graduated fom Pepperdine University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the chairman and CEO of ITT Fluid Technology Corporation, a manufacturer of pumps and controls in Midland Park, N.J.


Compassionate?
To the Editor: The article updating information on compassionate fares did not mention whether any of the airlines recognize domestic partners as relationships qualifying for these special fares.
I find it deplorable that unmarried partners -- whether heterosexual or homosexual -- continually have to fight for recognition.
We buy airline tickets, rent hotel rooms and cars and go on cruises.
If an airline stated that compassionate fares were restricted only to a certain race, sex or religion, you certainly would say so and most likely deplore such policies.


Admiral Defends Actions
The Navy's chief of education and training today denied assertions that he had used his influence to protect a staff aide accused of homosexual advances toward other enlisted men.
The officer, Vice Adm.
John H. Fetterman Jr., is being censured and forced to retire at reduced rank for his handling of the incident.


Parading Athletes Break Ranks And Join Forces Around Magic
There was a king, and at least a dozen heads of state. And Magic.
So while nearly 10,000 of the world's great athletes passed in review tonight, in a glorious opening ceremony to the Olympic Games, one after another stopped suddenly where Magic Johnson was standing along with the United States men's basketball team.
Athletes from Puerto Rico, from China, from the Netherlands broke ranks, running over to Johnson, asking him to smile for their cameras.
Some hugged him.


Double Duty


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SILHOUETTES AT BOSCOBEL
For more than 35 years Sally Newcomb has been traveling around the country with her scissors and acid-free paper, cutting silhouettes.
She will make her seventh yearly appearance at Boscobel in Garrison-on-Hudson Thursday through Sunday from 9:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.


Birthday Bash


24,000 Miles Alone Is One Sailor's Dream Voyage
The world-class solo sailor, Mike Plant, was taking an early morning jog one day last week, sprinting quietly past the gracious wood cottages that ring the Narragansett Bay shoreline.
On his right was the shingled Conanicut Yacht Club, a quaint waterfront site that houses a club that is celebrating its 100th birthday this summer.
But Plant doesn't belong to the club, nor does he belong to any of yachting's established havens.
He is as close as yachting gets to a James Dean character, going his own way, in his own time, but always with an eye to the sea.


Fresh Air Fund Adds a New 'Village'
They came for lunch, marching single file out of the forest, a group of city-kids-turned-campers, shouting their call-and-answer rap into the sunny afternoon:
I said a-boom-a-chica-boom. I said a-boom-a-chica-boom. A-boom-a-
chica-rocka-chica-rocka-chica-boom.
Uh huh. Oh yeah. One more time. Pass it on.


Harriet Hubbard, Peter McKendry
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Hubbard of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Harriet Ford Hubbard, to Peter J. McKendry, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James R. McKendry of Manchester, Me.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Hubbard is a graphics designer in Boothbay Harbor, Me.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father, chairman of the New York Botanical Garden and the Metropolitan Opera Guild, is a partner in Decker Hubbard &amp; Welden, a New York law firm.


On Sunday; Trying to Hold The Anchovies And Awnings
The problem is as old as suburbia itself.
How do you stem the surging tide of pizzerias?
"Unbelievable," said Kenneth Porro, the town planning board attorney.
"The people of Lyndhurst are just being bombarded. I've never seen it so bad."


Anne D. Yoder, R. C. Blankenship
Anne Daphne Yoder, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin M. Yoder of Alexandria, Va., was married in Chapel Hill, N.C., yesterday to Robert Charles Blankenship, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
C.
Blankenship of Beaufort, N.C.
The Rev.
David Williams performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Chapel of the Cross.
Ms.
Blankenship, who is 32 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and received a doctorate in biological sciences from Duke University.
Her father is a professor of journalism at Washington and Lee University in Lexington, Va..
Her mother, Mary Jane Yoder, is a social worker with the Institute of Mental Health in Washington.


Andrea Tullo, Matthew Cunningham
Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas V. Tullo of Glen Cove, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Andrea Thomasina Tullo, to Matthew John Cunningham, the son of Carol Ann Tenerowicz of Livonia, Mich., and David N. Cunningham of Canton, Mich.
Ms.
Tullo, 23 years old, is a legal assistant at the New York law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is a retired business consultant in Old Westbury, L.I.
Her mother is an accountant in Floral Park, Queens.


Cabaret Law Would Aid Neighbors of Nightclubs
In the wake of complaints by residents who live near noisy, crowded nightclubs, New York City's Commissioner of consumer affairs plans to introduce a bill that would ban large clubs from opening in or near residential buildings.
"Disorderly discos have become a major quality-of-life issue," the Commissioner, Mark Green, said in a recent interview.
He said the legislation, which is to be introduced in the City Council on Wednesday, is intended to resolve the long-standing conflict between "people who want to sleep at night and those who want to dance."


POSTINGS: On the Hudson; Cold Spring Restoration
So poor is the condition of the waterfront park in the Hudson River village of Cold Spring, N.Y., that in recent years the public has been able to see its historic dock and bandstand only through a fence.
Until now, efforts by the mayor, Roger Chirico, and others to bring the park back to life have been derailed by the lack of funds.


Corrections
An article on June 14 about the Great Sand Dunes Country Club and Inn in Colorado included a club spokesman's erroneous account of the ownership of the Zapata Ranch in the late 1800's.
The ranch, now on the club's grounds, was never owned by the Trujillo family.


Olympic Overload: Frisbee, er, Flying Disk, Anyone?
If synchronized swimming isn't your idea of an Olympic sport, hold that wince.
As the Summer Games unfold this week, keep in mind: More and weirder may be coming.


POSTINGS: New Phase on Jersey Shore; 78 Oceanfront Condos
By the time it is completed in 1994, the Seapointe Village oceanfront development in Diamond Beach, N. J., is expected to have 500 homes.
Construction began in 1986, and since then 300 condominium apartments, one-family houses and town homes have been built and sold.
Last month, a new phase of the development opened, a 78-unit six-story complex called the Pinnacle Residences.
About 75 percent of the units have already been sold.
The starting date for the next phase of construction has not yet been determined.


Defying Jinx, McGovern Backs the Ticket
To the Editor:
"Democratic Platform Shows Shift in Party's Focus" (news article, July 14) contains this paragraph: "Mr. McGovern thinks the Clinton-Gore approach is a Trojan horse. 'I have a hunch,' he said, 'that they're much more liberal underneath and will prove it when they're elected.' "


Racial Clashes Push 'Distant Fires' Closer to Home
One day in early 1985, entering the faculty lounge of the prep school where he taught drama, Kevin Heelan heard the uncommon sound of confrontation.
Angry debate, he had always noticed, seemed to be considered bad manners around Phillips Academy, and besides, a liberal consensus governed the place.
The talk in the lounge was typically of, oh, whether to brew regular coffee or decaf.
"Lackey," he heard someone say, "Uncle Tom." Another voice answered, "He's doing a job he thinks is right." Instantly, Mr.
Heelan knew the topic -- a recent speech at the school by a State Department official who espoused "constructive engagement" with South Africa, and who happened to be black.


Alfred Drake, Baritone Star of 'Oklahoma!' and 'Kismet,' Dies at 77
Alfred C. Drake, the award-winning performer who created the lead role in "Oklahoma!" and other stage hits and sang many of Broadway's most beloved songs, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure after a long fight with cancer, his family said.


Braves Win 13th Straight As Sole Hit Beats Pirates
Braves 1, Pirates 0
ATLANTA, July 25 (AP) -- The Braves tied a franchise record with their 13th straight victory as Charlie Leibrandt pitched four-hit ball over eight innings and David Justice homered for Atlanta's only hit in a 1-0 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates tonight.


Cristine Meredith, Shawn Miele
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Rollyn Meredith of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Cristine Rollyn Meredith to Shawn Patrick Miele, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Patrick Miele of Falmouth, Me.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Meredith, 23 years old, graduated from Middlebury College, as did her fiance.
She is to begin graduate studies in January at Columbia University's School of International and Public Affairs.
Her father is the chairman of Meredith, Martin &amp; Kaye, New York investment advisers.


QUAYLE'S MOMENT
Your article on Quayle mentions the White House Council on Competitiveness and its legacy of gutted environmental, health and safety regulations.
But the piece neglects to explain why Congress and public-interest groups are furious.
Quite simply, the Quayle council breaks the law.
It sidesteps open-Government laws designed to protect the process of regulation writing from unfair influence by affected businesses and other outside groups.


Study Faults New York Slice of Federal Pie
Taxpayers in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut paid $35.3 billion more in Federal taxes than they received in goods and services in 1991, according to a report released recently by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
The deficit averaged $2,028 for each resident in New Jersey, $1,373 in Connecticut and $838 in New York.
In the report, prepared this year with the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard, New Jersey, New York and Connecticut were at the top of the 1991 deficit list.
New Jersey paid $15.7 billion more than it received in Federal outlays, the highest in the nation.
New Yorkers paid $91.9 billion in Federal taxes but received only $76.8 billion in Federal outlays, for a $15.1 billion deficit, the report said.
Connecticut ran a deficit of $4.5 billion, third highest.


Tribal War? Bosnians Don't See It That Way
Like the 15 weeks of the Sarajevo siege that preceded it, the week just past was full of stark images.
But the most compelling moment was not difficult to identify for anybody who is here as a sojourner from the Western countries that are the only ones in a position to help the otherwise helpless victims of the siege.
It was late Monday morning, in the first 12 hours of what was to have been a cease-fire, after a mortar fired from Serbian positions on the hills fell among people outside a bakery in a narrow side street.
Two people were killed and 12 wounded; one survivor was a middle-aged woman whose 9-year-old son was one of those who died.
Amid the bedlam of the hospital emergency room, she cried out two words again and again: "Fascists! Fascists!" and "Bush! Bush!"
Sarajevo under siege has been bound together by common convictions that it is the Serbian forces who bear the overriding responsibility for the catastrophe that has befallen the city, and that it is only the United States that has the power to confront those forces.
This virtual unanimity has evolved despite deep natural fault lines that run through this society, and that would have presented major problems even without the war: three distinct national and religious groups, a politics deeply impressed by recriminations over the Communist past, and still-painful wounds from World War II, when the Nazis set Muslim and Croat fascists to killing Serbs, Jews and others with ferocious intensity.


Marketing Monroe: Still Big Box Office
There is no eternal rest for Marilyn Monroe.
Her legend will not permit it.
Neither will her marketing potential.
Monroe has proved to have so much shelf life in the afterlife that a virtual cottage industry has sprung up around her.
In license fees alone, for the use of her name and likeness, the Monroe estate earns well over $1 million annually (benefiting the Strasberg Institute, founded by her acting coach, Lee Strasberg, as well as a London-based training center for child therapists).
That's more than her entire estate was worth when she died, on Aug. 5, 1962, at age 36.


U.S. Champion Puts Spin on Positional Battle
THE United States team took fourth place in the Olympiad in Manila June 7-25, and these were individual results of the players, in board order.
FINAL STANDINGS
Player
W
L
D
Score
Gata Kamsky
4
2
7
7 1/2-5 1/2
Alexsey Yermolinsky
4
2
4
6-4
Yasser Seirawan
1
3
3
2 1/2-4 1/2
Larry Christiansen
3
1
5
5 1/2-3 1/2
Boris Gulko
5
0
4
7-2
Joel Benjamin
4
1
3
5 1/2-2 1/2
The most difficult job, of course, is that of the Board 1 player, in this case, the United States champion, Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn.
He had to face the world champion, Gary Kasparov, in the United States-Russia match and struggled gamely before going down to a scintillating gambit.
But he did not let that destroy his competitive zeal and turned in a very respectable tally.
In the 13th round, he threw a drop of poison into a positional battle against the Grandmaster Valery Loginov of Uzbekistan and scored a point that contributed to the United States's 2 1/2-1 1/2 victory.
In the last several years, 9 Nd2 has far surpassed 9 Ne1 in popularity in the Classical Variation of the King's Indian Defense.
Its motif is that once White achieves the standard attacking formation on the queen's wing with b4 and c5, the knight can be powerfully posted at c4, from which it bears on the targeted d6 pawn.
A round-10 game between Rafael Vaganian of Armenia and Gary Kasparov of Russia went 13 Qc2 ab 14 ab Nf6 15 f3 g5 16 c5 Ng6 17 Nc4 Nf4 and ended in a hard-fought draw.
Since Kamsky probably had thought up a new approach to this, Loginov switched to a blockade with 13 . . . c5.
After 14 bc Nc5 15 Nb3 b6 16 Nc5 bc 17 Qb3, Kamsky switched to the theme of penetrating the black position on the b file.
The perspective of the game was thus radically altered: White can pursue his initiative with a timely Qb6, virtually forcing the exchange of queens, so it is useless for Black to try for a mating attack; passive defense becomes paramount.
But Loginov should not have exchanged with 17 . . . fe?! 18 fe because White's maneuvering room was increased.
Loginov could not play 21 . . .
Bg5? because 22 Bg5 Qg5 23 Qd6 Qe3 24 Kh1 Qd3 25 Qe5 wins for White.
On 22 Bd2, he could play 22 . . .
Bg5, but after 23 Be1!, Black would not have gotten any real counterplay.
After 22 . . .
Nh6, Kamsky landed a powerful blow with 23 Qc6!, relying on the clever point that 23 . . .
Ra6? drops a piece to 24 Rb7!
Loginov desperately tried 23 . . .
Ba6 (23 . . . Bd7 24 Rb7 is even worse) 24 Rb6 Bg5, but Kamsky foiled any chance for counterattack by 25 Be1.
Loginov could have saved his QB by 25 . . .
Qc8, but the pawn-down end game after 26 Qc8 Bc8 27 Rd6 would have been lost.
He flailed about for a few moves, realized after 30 Qe2 that Kamsky's position was impregnable and gave up.
KING'S INDIAN DEFENSE
White
Black
Kamsky
Loginov
1
d4
Nf6
2
c4
g6
3
Nc3
Bg7
4
e4
d6
5
Nf3
O-O
6
Be2
e5
7
O-O
Nc6
8
d5
Ne7
9
Nd2
a5
10
a3
Nd7
11
Rb1
f5
12
b4
Kh8
13
f3
c5
14
bc
Nc5
15
Nb3
b6
16
Nc5
bc
17
Qb3
fe
18
fe
Rf1
19
Bf1
Ng8
20
Qb6
Bf6
21
Bd3
Kg7
22
Bd2
Nh6
23
Qc6
Ba6
24
Rb6
Bg5
25
Be1
Nf7
26
Ra6
Be3
27
Kh1
Rc8
28
Qa4
Rb8
29
Qc2
Qf6
30
Qe2
Resigns


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Jesse Jackson; On Sidelines of the Presidential Race, Jackson Turns to Local Campaigns
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson set off today on a two-day campaign tour, partly to drum up voter interest in primary elections in Mississippi, but also to foreshadow just what his role will be in supporting the Democratic Presidential ticket.
"Today I leave for Mississippi where they will be having a primary on Aug. 4," Mr.
Jackson said here before departing.
"In many ways it is not about Jesse Jackson or Bill Clinton but the county supervisors, the state legislators, the less glorious infrastructure of politics."


When the Mob Delivered the Goods
ON A COOL MORNING IN JUNE, AS TRUCKS CHURNED through the parked-up side streets of New York City's garment district, a taxicab pulled to a stop on West 35th Street, across from Macy's.
Stepping out into a maelstrom of rolling racks of dresses and hampers piled with cutwork and piece goods, the three passengers made their way across the busy sidewalk and into the maw of a trucking warehouse.
One of the visitors -- tall, gaunt and impeccably tailored -- was Robert J. McGuire, a former Federal prosecutor and New York City Police Commissioner.
President of Kroll Associates, one of the nation's most sought-after private investigative firms, he was accompanied by Alice T. McGillion, a former First Deputy Police Commissioner who was Kroll's director of communications, and Michael Slattery, a former agent of the F.B.I. and one of the firm's managing directors.


Aimee M. Jennings, Michael J. Grant
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles L. Jennings of Rockville, Md., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Aimee Michele Jennings, and Michael Joseph Grant, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. Grant of Fairfield, Conn.
Miss Jennings, 26 years old, is a corporate accounts manager in Washington for Special Olympics International, a nonprofit organizer of sporting events for the handicapped.
She graduated from the University of Maryland at College Park.
Her father is the assistant controller of Home Owner's Warranty Corporation, a home insurer in Arlington, Va.


Users Still Outsmart Testing
To the Sports Editor:
Dr.
Donald Catlin, a member of the International Olympic Committee's anti-doping commission, concludes ("Sophisticated Doping Begets More Drug Testing," The Times, July 19) that "we're making real progress. Drug use is down." While I wish I could share his optimism, I cannot.
Today's athletes have access to a variety of strategies with which to circumvent the testing process, regardless of its timing or sophistication.


Teen-Age Fantasy Fills Comic-Book Musical
EVEN as theaters like the Long Island Stage Company are closing their doors because of economic troubles and others are cutting back production costs and personnel for the same reasons, a new theater, the Victory Theater in Farmingville, has just opened.
Its premier production is a rousing rendition of "Starmites," a musical comic book about a trip through inner space.
Inner space?
Yes.
Inner space, for those who do not know, is the outer region of imagination, and it is the place where an awkward, lonely teen-age girl named Eleanor hides in order to avoid painful issues of adolescence like the opposite sex.
Eleanor has built a fantasy world around the characters in the science fiction comic books she collects.
In real life, Eleanor does not fit in with her peers.
Much to the distress of her mother, she has learned to avoid the pains of growing up by reading comic books and imagining herself to be an unrecognized superheroine.


Notes With Pleasure
The Beauty of the Necessary
One of the most visible results of the machine age has been the decline of the genuinely graceful in our arts, our labors, even our gestures, as Christopher Dawson said as early as 1929 in "Progress and Religion" (Sherwood Sugden &amp; Company, paper).


Chrysler's Mono-Culturalism
To the Editor:
What are Chrysler's 1950's plain-vanilla demographic profiles supposed to accomplish? ("Chrysler's New L/H, as in Last Hope," July 12.) I guess it has kissed off African Americans, Asians, Hispanics, Westerners, Midwesterners, Southerners, yankees, farmers, ranchers, etc., etc.


Budget Cuts Crimp War on Mosquitoes
BEING surrounded by water on three sides and with an abundance of marshes, wetlands and water ditches, Suffolk County provides an excellent opportunity for mosquito breeding and the accompanying threat of mosquito-borne diseases.
Forty-one species of mosquitoes have been identified in the county, making it one of the most infested areas in the Northeast.
Of those, 18 mosquitoes can transmit encephalitis, a flulike illness that can progress to fatal brain inflammation.


Shaggy-Dog Dept.
To the Editor:
Rabid reviews and esthetic skulldoggery aside, may I suggest that Jeff Koons's paradogmatic pet "Poodle" would be no match for a true pedogreed Duchampion  [ "How Much Is That Doggy in the Courtyard?," July 5 ] .


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the case of William Andrews, who is scheduled to be executed in Utah on Thursday for his part in three 1974 murders, misstated the execution date of his accomplice, Dale Selby Pierre.
It was 1987, not 1977.


Groan Heaven
HEY, it's the 90's: Sometimes you have to brace for the worst.
"Whooooo-a-a-a . . . aph." Over at the new World Gym near Lincoln Center, where the earth-tone locker rooms are still under construction and the steam room is but a stack of tiles and exposed piping, Billy Billitzer, a 28-year-old gemologist, was working out last week on exercise machinery that looked like so many helicopter parts.


Mets Are Doomed Again by the Old Instant Misplay
The ball rocketed off Darrin Jackson's bat, and Howard Johnson saw it sailing his way.
Johnson drifted to the left-field warning track, reached out and the liner darted past his glove and caromed off the fence.
He missed it by inches, but he missed it.
On another night, the second-inning triple might have been rendered meaningless.
With another left fielder, the misplay might not have been so glaring.
But not last night when runs were so rare and not with a left fielder named Johnson who grudgingly became a left fielder this month.


Younger Than Kennedy
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen, in "The Standard Bearers" (column, July 12) perpetuates the popular fallacy that John F. Kennedy was the youngest President of the United States.
Kennedy, 43 at the time he took office, was indeed the youngest to be elected to the Presidency.
However, the distinction of being the youngest chief executive belongs to Theodore Roosevelt, who was 42 when he became President upon the assassination of William McKinley in 1901.
ERIC NEWMAN  Hackensack, N.J., July 15, 1992


A Kayaking Expedition in the Baltic
SOMETIME after midnight, our four kayaks rolled off the smooth gray flanks of rock on the nameless island that had been our day's resting place.
The water was illuminated by the perpetual summer sunset of what passes for night in the Baltic Sea.
To the west, the sky was a mix of dawn and dusk, with alternating shades of colored light and darkness.
The bow of my kayak split the reflection of a paling moon just over the horizon, slicing through the water to the rhythm of my paddling.
On the horizons were islands of the Aland archipelago, a chain draped in the Baltic Sea between Sweden and Finland.
The evening air was moist and electric, as after a rain, though it had been dry for some days now.
The constant headwind that beat against us during the day had vanished, leaving the water flat and heavy.


One Bloody Family Feud
THE FAMILY ROMANCE OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION
By Lynn Hunt. Illustrated. 213 pp. Berkeley: University of California Press.


Hostel Visits
To the Editor: I was delighted to read Katherine Bishop's article on our northern California youth hostels ("Not for the Young Only," May 17) but dismayed to hear she had such a negative experience at the Eel River Hostel in Leggett.
I'm a hostel fan from way back, even though I'm long past the youth stage.
I've been going to Eel River every year since they opened, but not in February!
The couples' cabins are Spartan at best and having to traipse to the bathroom by flashlight can be a drag.
But this doesn't seem to matter in summer when you can smell the pine trees, admire the flowers, float down the river on inner tubes and relax in the sauna.


Anthony W. Jong, 53, Dental-Care Advocate
Anthony Westwater Jong, associate dean of the school of dentistry at Boston University, died at his home in Bolton, Mass., on Wednesday.
He was 53 years old.
Dr.
Jong died after a long battle with cancer, said Dorene Dzuiba, a spokeswoman for the university.


The All-Devouring Restaurant
PLACE: Isola, 485 Columbus Avenue (83d Street).
IDENTITY: Back-to-basics Italian restaurant.


Income Gains Seen for Minorities in the New York Region
Despite the deep recession that has engulfed the New York region since the end of the 1980's, the boom that preceded it raised incomes faster than in most of the rest of nation and pared down the huge disparities in earnings among whites, blacks and Hispanic residents, new census data show.
The data, released last week by the U.S.
Census Bureau, did little to dispel the broad belief that the 1980's, more than most decades that preceded it, was one in which the gap between rich and poor widened.
But it provided a fresh demographic snapshot that suggests that wealth and poverty no longer conform to traditional patterns of race or ethnicity, and that more minorities have ascended the economic order in the New York region.


Going Once, Going Twice. Forget It. It's Yours.
To be blunt, the bottom line at the Keeneland horse auction in Kentucky last week hit bottom.
The average price per horse was down 19 percent from last year's July sale and the gross was down 35 percent.
And nobody in the Bluegrass forgets that last year's prices were already 11 percent lower than in 1990.
The auction has been touted for years as the world's most prestigious horse sale.
But in recent years, it has served as a warning signal to the horse world that the market is still plunging after a wild decade of soaring out of control in the 1980's.


Embassy Tour In Washington
Private homes and embassies on Washington's Embassy Row will be open to visitors during the eighth annual Kalorama House and Embassy Tour on Sunday, Sept. 13.
The Brazilian Embassy and the Pakistan Ambassador's residence will be among the 10 or so stops, along with the Woodrow Wilson House, Washington's only Presidential museum.
Other embassies and homes will be confirmed later.
The program is sponsored by the Friends of Wilson House and benefits the 1915 Georgian Revival townhouse, a property of the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
Kalorama, derived from the Greek word meaning "fine view", was bestowed on the area in the early 1800's.


Lizzie Borden Took an Ax
TODAY THE narrow clapboard house is painted pale gray trimmed with deep green.
A small print shop is shoved into one side of it, and a big air-conditioner pokes incongruously from a parlor window.
I know it is a parlor window because, like a lot of people who grew up near Fall River, Mass., I am conversant with the floor plan of this house.
It is a house with no corridors and rooms that open awkwardly off one another.
Because its former residents were much given to locking their bedroom doors, half the rooms on the second floor were once accessible only by the front staircase.
The other half were accessible only by the back staircase.
The maid slept in the attic; there were no bathtubs, and the water closet in the basement was seldom visited.
It was easier to empty the morning slop pails in the backyard.


It Isn't the Super Bowl, But Jets Dent Redskins
Jets quarterbacks Browning Nagle and Jeff Blake had impressive showings and the Jets' defense racked up seven sacks as the team took on the Washington Redskins in a full-scale scrimmage here this afternoon.
The scrimmage, at Lehigh University's Goodman Stadium, ended in a 23-23 tie.


'Sally and Marsha' Tests Friendship
IT'S the Upper West Side but the manically, depressingly cheerful Sally in apartment 12F (two children, three rooms) is not the city type.
She bakes apple pies, doesn't know what a bagel is and goes on about South Dakota cheese puff balls.
Folding laundry is her relaxation technique.
She can do a sheet in 10 seconds.
Sally paints with lard, makes puppets out of peanuts and has never read Chekov.
She is married to a salesman who's a loser but a great lover.


Adjusting the Volume
FREE SPEECH IN AN OPEN SOCIETY
By Rodney A. Smolla. 429 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $27.50.


In a Dusty Kansas Theater, Buried Treasure From the 1890's
In a wonderful way, time has stood still in this rural town in the heart of Kansas.
People still leave their doors unlocked, the drugstore has a soda fountain and the four-block downtown has no traffic lights.
The 4,000 residents are proud of their community -- the $6 million junior high school, the working Dutch-style windmill and the 2-month-old McDonald's.
And now they point to a vacant, century-old theater.


Perspectives: Regional Planning; A New Chief, With an Rx in the Wings
REGIONAL planners must think globally these days.
H.
Claude Shostal, the new president of the Regional Plan Association, is in the mold.
"For the first time people are beginning to question whether this region is going to manage competitively on a global scale," said Mr.
Shostal, a 52-year-old alumnus of Nelson A. Rockefeller's gubernatorial administration who has worked on development issues in and out of government.
"They are beginning to question whether we'll lose out to Paris or Tokyo or some other region."


A City Drunk on Design
The late-night drinkers at Las Torres de Avila know full well that they are mere bit players in an artistic happening.
From its sloping Gothic-style entrance to its half-space-age-half-new-age suede, steel and wood interior, the bar overlooking Barcelona from the hill of Montjuic is itself the main event, and the young wealthy come to experience it.
At Tragaluz in the Eixample district of the city, by contrast, the mood is more serious.
Downstairs, a bar with reproductions of chairs by Antoni Gaudi leads to a restaurant in the back where everything from the light fixtures to the cutlery has a designer imprimatur.
Upstairs, other diners sit in what could almost pass for an Italian furniture store.


Ms. Phair, Mr. Fortenbaugh
Mr. and Mrs.
Montgomery F. Phair of Baltimore have announced the engagement of their daughter Sharon Lynn Phair and Michael Wall Fortenbaugh, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William W. Fortenbaugh of Highland Park, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Phair, 32 years old, is an independent advertising and marketing consultant in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was the field maintenance supervisor for the 135th Tactical Airlift Group of the Maryland National Guard.


Linda Adams, Gil Troy
Mr. and Mrs.
Marcel Adams of Westmount, Quebec, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Linda Adams, to Gilad E. Troy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard D. Troy of Hollis, Queens.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Adams, 31 years old, is an associate in the Montreal law firm of Heenan Blaikie.
She graduated from Hebrew University at Rehovot, Israel, and received law degrees from McGill University.
Her father is the president of Iberville Development, a real estate company in Westmount.
Her mother, Annie A. Adams, is a retired psychologist.


To Yanks, It's All In a Day's Mayhem
Sometimes, the Yankees are anything but baseball.
Sometimes, they are George Steinbrenner, faxes from the commissioner's office, news conferences in hotel rooms, Steve Howe and trade rumors.


Katherine Cole, Scott J. Liotta
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Cole Jr. of Owings Mills, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Katherine Riggs Cole to Scott John Liotta, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carmine Liotta of Elizabeth, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Cole, 26 years old, graduated from Brown University.
She is a master's candidate in education at Simmons College.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the First National Bank of Maryland and its holding company, First Maryland Bancorp, in Baltimore.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Interstate Trash: Vote on passage of a bill that would give states new authority to restrict imports of garbage from other states.
Approved 89 to 2, July 23.
1
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
Y
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
House
1.
Cable TV: Vote on an amendment to a bill to re-regulate prices for cable television that would prevent cable company affiliates that produce programs from denying their programming to cable industry competitors.
Approved 338 to 68, July 23.
2.
Cable TV: Vote on adoption of a Republican substitute measure favored by the Bush Administration.
Rejected 266 to 144, July 23.
3.
Cable TV: Vote on passage of a bill that would require cable companies to offer basic service under a price formula set by the Federal Communications Commission.
Approved 340 to 73, July 23.
1
2
3
Connecticutz
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
N
Y
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
3. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
N
Y
N
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
8. Roe (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
13. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
14. Guarini (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
2. Downey (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
4. Lent (R) . . .
N
Y
N
5. McGrath (R) . . .
N
N
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
9. Manton (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
10. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
11. Towns (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
12. Owens (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
13. Solarz (D) . . .
A
A
A
14. Molinari (R) . . .
N
Y
N
15. Green (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
16. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
17. Weiss (D) . . .
P
N
Y
18. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
19. Engel (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
20. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
21. Fish (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
22. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
23. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
24. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
26. Martin (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
27. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
28. McHugh (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
29. Horton (R) . . .
N
Y
N
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
31. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
33. Nowak (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
34. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Networking; The Zip's in Communications
Now that local area networks have been installed just about everywhere, communications software is the new growth area.
Communications applications include electronic mail (E-mail), sending and receiving facsimiles, and routing messages to and from other networks.
Forrester Research, a Cambridge, Mass., market research firm, predicts that the number of new network servers dedicated to communications will double this year to nearly 90,000, worth nearly $2.7 billion.
The software for communications alone will generate about $148 million and that figure is expected to more than double by 1994.


Life in This Global Village: Sand and Subtle Security
The two Lubavitcher Jews came from England and Brazil to make sure the athletes have the time to pray.
They stopped a visitor in the athletes' village.
"Can you come to services Saturday?"


Sarah T. Vaden, S. S. Reynolds 2d
Mr. and Mrs.
Donald B. Vaden of Williamsburg, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah Taylor Vaden to Sheldon Sickles Reynolds 2d, a son of Cary S. Reynolds of Cleveland and Sherrill H. Lemieux of Rocky River, Ohio.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Vaden, 26 years old, is an advertising sales representative with New York magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the president of Mortgage Credit Corporation in Newport News, Va.
Her mother, Sally R. Vaden, who is retired, was a schoolteacher in Richmond.


Is This A Joke?
To the Editor:


Four Bells, And All's Well
A 'Midsummer Regatta' doesn't leave dry land, but it has its share of swells.


Servicewomen's Families Speak Out on Abuse
An American flag stirs in the breeze outside Bill Baxter's house and a National Rifle Association sticker decorates his car.
He flies planes for a living, now as a commercial pilot after starting as a hard-boiled naval aviator, and attends Plymouth Haven Baptist Church, talks about "family values" and counts himself a rock-rib Republican.
His father-in-law, Dan Thomas, is cut from the same cloth.
He is a retired Air Force major who flew B-52 bombers for a quarter of a century and then retired to the safe military haven of Pensacola, Fla., where he sells tractors and lawn mowers to young fellows in smart uniforms.
Mr.
Thomas is the sort of man who calls women "ladies," would not swear in front of them and blanches when anyone else does.


Business Diary/July 19-24
THE ECONOMY A Fed Chairman in Search of His Economic Leviathan


White House Fights Ban on Selling Nuclear Materials to Iraq
To the Editor:
William Safire and Leslie H. Gelb, in their July 9 columns about Iraqgate, tell a sad tale of failed policy making in the Bush White House.
But they leave out a revealing sequel to the story.


Ms. Maloney, P. L. Quillen
Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Maloney of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Bronwyn Thomas Maloney, to Parker Loomis Quillen, a son of Parker S. Quillen of Palm Beach, Fla., and Jacqueline L. Quillen of Washington.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Maloney, 28 years old, is a specialist in old master paintings in New York for Christie's, the auction house.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is an author and a freelance graphic designer in New York.


Having It All
READING ELLEN CHESLER'S new biography of the birth-control crusader Margaret Sanger ("Woman of Valor," Simon &amp; Schuster) makes one wish that the dead -- and not just the living dead -- could run for public office.
How wholeheartedly one could support a candidate like the passionate, vital Sanger.
Jailed for her beliefs in 1917 and by mid-century hailed for her pioneering work on behalf of reproductive rights, Sanger had more than today's women have in mind (or dare hope for) when we talk about having it all: courage, notoriety, moral fervor, sexual independence, husbands, children, friends -- and a nearly nonstop succession of smitten lovers, including H. G. Wells and Havelock Ellis.


SURFACING
MARKETING --
"Beverly Hills 90210" cosmetics:
fragrance, lipsticks and nail polishes for fans of the TV show. FASHION --
Striped denim:
jeans, jackets and shorts in colors and in basic black and white.


Marnie Kurzrok, Robert Keane
Mr. and Mrs.
Morton David Kurzrok of Great Neck, L.I., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Marna Ilene Kurzrok and Robert Sean Keane, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Keane of Boonton, N.J.


City of Lights and Cameras
Henri Cartier-Bresson often viewed his photographs upside down, to see if they stood the test of form.
The war photographer Robert Capa believed in shots taken purely on impulse.
Brassai made his name photographing the low life of Paris at night; Lee Miller, an American photographer for Vogue, made her reputation for her scenes of the blitz in London.
These well-known facts pepper the less than revelatory text of PARIS: The City and Its Photographers (Bulfinch/Little, Brown, $35), an illustrated history of photography that begins with the invention of the daguerreotype in Paris in 1839 and closes with the fashion photographers of the late 1950's and 60's.
It is Paris and its pivotal role in the development of photography, however, that Patrick Deedes-Vincke, a photographers' agent, attempts to make the central focus of his story -- a guiding theme that at times seems forced.
Happily, the 100 handsome duotone photographs more than compensate for the uninspired text.
Early daguerreotypes of medieval Paris are followed by marvelous turn-of-the-century shots of public baths, the races at Auteuil and a varied cast of street vendors, shopkeepers and anglers on the Seine.
Grainy photographs of griffins and gargoyles taken from the heights of the Cathedral of Notre Dame precede lonely scenes of the Champs-Elysees, a particularly startling shot of the Rue de Rivoli hung with Nazi flags, and graphically bold billboards from the late 40's -- all of which make the book a wonderful nostalgic tour of the city.


When Skinflintery Is a Way of Life
To the Editor:
"Bidding the Wage Wars Goodbye" (At Work, July 5) was written for me.
The article about Ron and Melodie Moore's venture into publishing Skinflint News could not have been appreciated more by any reader.
It was not so much the intriguing new career the Moores have fashioned from their "career discontent" and from opportunity that attracted me as the underlying philosophy and sense that frugality is a way of life.
There is indeed more to it than mere economizing or seeking bargains.


Martha S. Jones, Mark F. Patricof
Martha Shelburne Jones, a daughter of Bishop and Mrs.
Edward Jones of Indianapolis, was married there yesterday to Mark F. Patricof, the son of Alan J. Patricof and Bette Holender, both of New York.
The bride's father, the Episcopal Bishop of Indianapolis, performed the ceremony at Christ Church Cathedral.
Mrs.
Patricof, 27 years old, is a mathematics teacher at the Oakwood School in North Hollywood, Calif.
She graduated from Kenyon College.


Talks on Inspection by U.N. Await Final Answer by Iraq
As the United States and its allies contemplated military action against Iraq, talks aimed at ending the impasse over the role of United Nations inspectors there failed to resolve what has become the most serious confrontation since the end of the gulf war last year.
Rolf Ekeus, the United Nations negotiator, said his daylong meeting with Iraq's Ambassador to the United Nations, Abdul Amir al-Anbari, had failed to yield an agreement.
But he added that he was expecting a final answer from Baghdad by Sunday morning.


Lauren E. Dunn, Scott F. Rockart
Lauren Eileen Dunn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Dunn of Mahwah, N.J., was married yesterday at Averill, Vt., to Scott Fralick Rockart, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Rockart of Weston, Mass.
The Rev.
Louise Kingston performed the Episcopal ceremony on the shore of Lake Averill.
Mrs.
Rockart, 23 years old, graduated from Princeton University and is a graduate student of architecture at Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Beattie &amp; Padovano in Montvale, N.J.
Her mother, Joan Rockart, is the business administrator at the Northvale (N.J.) School District.


Virtuosity in Variety


Winning Isn't Everything, Especially If You're Last
The last shall be first, they say, and for a brief moment in the 1992 Tour de France, Henri Manders was.
First, that is.
He has been last, or very near it, most of the rest of the time in the three-week race.
As the Tour neared its end Sunday in Paris, Manders ranked 129th among the 130 riders remaining of the 198 who set out July 4 in San Sebastian, Spain.
He was nearly 15 minutes ahead of -- or behind, depending on outlook -- Fernando Quevedo in the battle to become the 79th Tour's lanterne rouge, the red lantern that used to hang on the back of every French train to signify the end.


Ellen G. Rainis, Michael J. Peters
Ellen Gerardine Rainis, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene C. Rainis of Mendham, N.J., was married yesterday in White House, N.J., to the Rev.
Michael Jay Peters, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles R. Peters of Bethlehem, Pa.
The Rev.
William H. Weiser performed the Lutheran service at the Ryland Inn.
Mrs.
Peters, 26 years old, graduated from Bryn Mawr College and is a graduate student in education at East Stroudsburg University.
Her father is a partner in Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company, the investment concern, in New York.


Amid a Heritage of Graft, a Taxi Bribery Scandal Seems Shocking to Few
In 1653, the Dutch settlers of Manhattan hired a retired pirate to build a wall at the north end of what was then New Amsterdam to ward off Indians who, perhaps, had soured on the original $24 land deal.
Within two years, the wall -- which later gave Wall Street its name -- was crumbling.
Citizens had pilfered pieces for firewood.
And the pirate, one Tomas Bacxter, was accused of using low-grade lumber and pocketing half of the colonial equivalent of $1,300 that had been appropriated for the project. (The Indians, by the way, never attacked.)


Thuringia, a Land of Long Ago
THURINGIA, the smallest of the new states of Germany, was until a few years ago strictly off-limits to Western tourists, the kind of place East Germans had in mind when they talked of fruher, a time in the past when things were less complicated.
Here, from a distance, were the old hometowns of West German dreams, remembered from before the days of the economic miracle.
Indeed, some of Thuringia's cities look as if they had been caught in a time warp, preserving their pre-World War II character.
The war, incidentally, inflicted relatively less damage on Thuringia than other parts of Germany.
Driving down the Saale valley last autumn, my husband, Karl, and I came upon the outlines of the region's "castles brave and bold," as a local folk song describes them.
Once the homes of the kings and knights who launched their raids from behind crenelated walls, these medieval keeps have become museums, restaurants and, occasionally, youth hostels.


DOWN TO EARTH
Like Pat Buckley, I garden in my bare feet (Fashion: "Down to Earth," by Carrie Donovan; Beauty: "Tending the Gardener," by Anne Raver, June 21).
At first, I just enjoyed feeling the soft mud or fibrous grass underfoot, theorizing about the deprivations that feet confined to shoes in offices must suffer.
Then I discovered how effective it was to "heel in" tender transplants.
By heeling in a new transplant, my weight presses the soil evenly down around the roots, and I can nimbly avoid damaging other plants nearby.
I was especially grateful for your report on dirty fingernails.
I love to garden with my bare hands, but am always feeling guilty around 5 P.M. on Fridays, thinking about my friends' elegant and immaculate nails, and, later, trying to eat with my fingers curled under.
Perhaps I should practice eating with gloves on.


Onward and Upward, a Real Summer Trouper
WHAT did gardeners ever do before impatiens?
This ubiquitous flowering plant is a boon to the summertime landscape.
The impatiens is truly a stick-it-in-the-ground-and-forget-about-it annual.
The happy flower colors: red, coral, orange, rose, almost blue and white (just about every shade but clear yellow) can be seen in borders, along drives, outlining shrub beds, in window boxes, along walls or tucked in just about any place a little spot of flower color is needed.


July 19-25: X-Ray Laser Zapped; After $1 Billion in Research, A 'Star Wars' Project Ends
A gaping pit in the Nevada desert, 10 feet wide and 2,100 feet deep, has become a bleak memorial to a dream pursued by legions of Federal scientists at a cost of more than $1 billion.
The X-ray laser, powered by a nuclear blast, was a top-secret proposal that in the early 1980's first aroused White House interest in "Star Wars" defenses.
In theory, its powerful beams would zap enemy missiles.
The program was zealously promoted by Edward Teller, architect of the H-bomb, but in 10 underground tests of the rudimentary idea in Nevada over as many years, the wonder weapon failed to materialize, embarrassing Mr.
Teller and his Lawrence Livermore weapons laboratory in California and generating much controversy in Washington.


July 19-25: An Osprey Crashes; Congress Favors a Plane The Pentagon Chief Doesn't
Despite the crash last week of a prototype of the V-22 Osprey, a tilt-rotor aircraft that takes off and lands like a helicopter but flies like a plane, members of Congress insisted that the Pentagon's Osprey program may survive.
The investigation has yet to yield the cause of the crash, which occurred as the aircraft was preparing to land at the Marine Corps air station at Quantico, Va., killing seven men on board.
For three years, Congress has been in a dispute with Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, who has been trying to kill the aircraft on the ground that it is too costly.
Pentagon officials cite his efforts as evidence of their political will to eliminate some weapons systems at a time when the military budget is declining.
But Marine Corps officials and the Pentagon's special forces say they like the Osprey because they believe it will help them insert commando units into combat from the air.


A Sense of the Miraculous
THE PATRON SAINT OF LIARS
By Ann Patchett. 336 pp. Boston: A Richard Todd Book/ Houghton Mifflin Company. $21.


Can Egypt Bring Israelis and Arabs Together?
In contrast with his two larger-than-life predecessors the mercurial and charismatic Gamal Abdel Nasser and the cunning and bold Anwar el-Sadat -- Hosni Mubarak is a cautious man who takes as little risk as possible.
So much of the world was left wondering last week whether the Egyptian President, after 11 years in power, is ready to take advantage of a new opportunity to play peacemaker between Arabs and Israelis.


Alfred Drake, Baritone Star of 'Oklahoma!' and 'Kismet,' Dies at 77
Alfred C. Drake, the award-winning performer who created the lead role in "Oklahoma!" and other stage hits and sang many of Broadway's most beloved songs, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure after a long fight with cancer, his family said.


A Very Private Legend
HER colleagues rank her with Galileo and Mendel.
Yet few Long Islanders know of the living legend in their midst.
Dr.
Barbara McClintock is the Greta Garbo of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory.
The outside world rarely sees her or hears about her.
That suits her fine.
She may share a place in history with Marie Curie, having won the Nobel Prize single-handedly, but you will not hear the story from her.
This Long Islander shies away from publicity.


Neighbors Stir Bosnia-Herzegovina Strife
To the Editor:
"The Right to Intervene for a Humanitarian Cause," (The Week in Review, July 12), which presents the arguments for United Nations intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina, unfortunately states that "Bosnia and Herzegovina represents a special case since it is unclear who, if anyone, represents the legitimate government of this war-torn and ethnically divided country."


Making a Difference; Turning a Flood of Words Into a Stream of TV Shows
He has under his belt six Emmies, seven Peabodies, four Duponts and two Polk awards.
Av (for Avram) Westin has been in television since 1952 as reporter, editor, producer and executive producer doing news and documentaries and programs like "20/20."
So Mr.
Westin, 62 years old, seemed a natural when the people over at Time Warner Inc. were looking for someone who could take the words and ideas that pour into the Time &amp; Life Building and transform them into on-screen programming.


Once Again, the Disease Confounds Science
For a while, it sounded like the start of the epidemic all over again: a few doctors report treating patients with a mysterious disease that wastes the immune system, but for which they cannot find a cause.
Federal health officials are disbelieving.
Then more doctors speak up, saying they have patients dying the same way.
A public crisis develops -- fear for the blood supply, doubts about tests that reassured the worried.
But this time, it all took a week, not years, and it all happened inside the walls of a conference in Amsterdam that was already studying the disease that rose out of nowhere in the 1980's and now will almost certainly kill tens of millions: AIDS.


POSTINGS: For Owners, Managers and Supers; Free Seminars on Recycling
In preparation for the expansion of recycling in Manhattan in September, the Department of Sanitation will hold free seminars this week and next on recycling for the owners, managers and superintendents of residential and commercial buildings.
Residential recycling seminars will be held tomorrow and Tuesday, from 11 A.M. to 1 P.M., and from 2 to 4 P.M. in the auditorium at the Police Department Headquarters at One Police Plaza in lower Manhattan.


No Headline
Something has got to restore family structure.
The illegitimacy rate is going up every year.
If you expect a government program to change that, you know more about government programs than I do. -- SENATOR DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN.  [ 18:2. ]


Emily Robertson, Greg Smith
Nancy C. Robertson of New York and A. Heaton Robertson 3d of South Hamilton, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Emily Townshend Robertson, and James Gregory Smith, the son of Margaret and James Smith of Tuxedo Park, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Robertson, 24 years old, is an independent location scout in New York for film productions.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College.
Her father is a senior manager in Boston for Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company, the investment-banking firm.
Her mother is an independent financial consultant in Manhattan.
The prospective bride's stepmother, Henrietta Gates Robertson, is the owner of the Moran Travel Company in Boston.


The Rich Get Richer. True or False?
Stung by the assertions that the super-rich did extraordinarily well in the 1980's, the Treasury Department struck back last week.
But its initiative flopped and the exercise turned out to be an embarrassment.
Treasury was taking aim at a calculation -- made by the M.I.T. economist Paul R. Krugman and embraced by Bill Clinton -- that shows that the richest 1 percent reaped 70 percent of the rise in average family income between 1977 and 1989.


Data Update
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
May 92
Apr. 92
May 91
Nation
$ 100,900
$ 103,300
$ 101,300
Northeast
143,000
142,700
144,500
Midwest
80,900
80,900
77,500
South
90,200
91,400
89,300
West
140,800
144,400
152,300
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.34
8.36
9.77
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.58
5.65
7.30
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.18
8.20
9.62
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.34
5.42
7.21
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.19
8.20
9.66
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.26
5.36
7.11
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.41
8.45
9.92
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.06
6.09
7.68
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.53
3.64
6.32
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.20
8.20
9.12
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Attention Moscow Shoppers: Everything's On Sale
With more than 10,000 stores now in private hands, the Russian economy is entering a new stage: Private retail industry is beginning to work, but not in the ways people thought it would.
Given freedom to stock their stores almost as they wish, proprietors are testing consumer preferences with a great variety and, in the process, disregarding a Government edict to maintain a store's old character for the first year.


Barbara Mackay, Robert E. Olsen
Barbara Mackay, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Mackay, was married yesterday to Robert E. Olsen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert T. Olsen of Eastham, Mass.
Susan S. Kraft, a celebrant of the Commonwealth of Virginia, officiated at the nondenominational ceremony at the Bailiwick Inn in Fairfax, Va.
Ms.
Mackay, who is 47 years old and keeping her name, is the executive vice president and director of the communications division of the Denver Center for the Performing Arts.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.A. in creative writing from Johns Hopkins University and a fine-arts doctorate in dramatic literature criticism from Yale University.
Her father was a manager with Marsh &amp; McLennan, an insurance company in New York.


A Tired Old Message
To the Editor:
Obviously, I cannot speak for Madonna, but I believe it is plausible that she withdrew from "Boxing Helena" just as any feminist would do when presented with a story in which a woman is horribly mutilated by a man and then learns to reciprocate his love because of the mutilation.


A New Garden Pest: Pilferers in the Produce
THE way Shin Aizeki, a longtime gardener at the Zinsser Community Gardens here, recalled the incident, a young boy stood, frowning at a cultivated patch, his eyes wandering from the handwritten shopping list to the produce arrayed before him.
Then he squatted and began to pick a zucchini here, a pepper there, then a tomato.
Mr.
Aizeki said he watched the boy for a minute before he casually ambled over.
"Is this your family's garden?" he asked the boy.


A Statisical Portrait of the 'Typical' American; This Is Your Life, Generally Speaking
In an election year, politicians dance to the "Fanfare for the Common Man." President Bush has been trying to separate the "advocates of the liberal agenda" from "you and I and those values of family that we share." Bill Clinton invoked the average Americans "who do the work, pay the taxes, raise the kids and play by the rules." in his acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention.
But who is all this aimed at? Who is the typical American?


Empire Is Gone, But Undershorts Linger On ($10)
May it not be the final indignity for the defunct Soviet empire that its symbols should now be reduced to appearing on pairs of baggy undershorts?
The irreverence recalls Abbie Hoffman's Yippies draping themselves in American flags.


Crumpled Bike
To the Editor: People taking a bicycle on an airline can avoid the problems experienced by Mark B. Williams ("Exhibit A, One Crumpled Bicycle," June 28) by using a specially designed carrier.
These make a bicycle almost invulnerable to damage, and usually allow room for clothing and accessories as well.
Carriers are made by Pedal Pack, Bike Pro, Bike Kase, and others, and can be rented from better bike shops ($35 a week or so) or purchased for $350.
This is expensive, but less so than having one's bicycle and vacation ruined.


The Dance of a Dolphin, Forever Frozen on Film
LOUIS BERNSTEIN cannot swim, but he has spent a lot of time taking pictures of beluga whales, sharks, walruses, seals, sea lions, toadfish, bass, trout and dolphins as they swim underwater.
For the last 26 years, the New York photographer, who is 81 years old, has been taking pictures at the New York Aquarium, working five to six hours a day, sometimes seven days a week.


Making Connections in the Global Village
Wolfgang Staehle, a conceptual sculptor, has a vision of a global computer network devoted to the discussion of art.
Last fall, Mr.
Staehle took his first step toward that goal when he set up a computer bulletin board in New York.
Now, more than 60 local artists, writers and others in the art world can talk to each other 24 hours a day, hooked up by modem.
Recently, Mr.
Staehle helped start a sister network in Cologne, the art capital of Germany.
Every other day, packages of electronic messages are sent across the Atlantic by telephone, linking the two systems.
Within the next year, Mr.
Staehle hopes to have similar connections with Toyko, London and Paris.


Confusion on the Air With Senate Candidates
A Connecticut radio station was rebuffed last week by two Republican challengers for Christopher J. Dodd's United States Senate seat within the same hour -- or so it seemed at the time.
The two candidates, State Representative Christopher B. Burnham of Stamford, the party's endorsed challenger, and Brook Johnson, a wealthy Greenwich businessman who is challenging Mr.
Burnham in a primary race, were both unavailable when the WTIC radio host, Ray Dunaway, called on Tuesday morning, despite what Mr.
Dunaway said were locked-in commitments.


Gayle E. Martin, K. B. Smallwood
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Martin of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Gayle Ellen Martin to Kenneth Brian Smallwood, the son of Howard Smallwood of Tempe, Ariz., and the late Mary Smallwood.
Miss Martin, 28 years old, is an account executive at Smith Greenland Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Adelphi University.
Her father is the president of Universal Maritime Service Corporation, a steamship terminal operator in New York


THE YALE SCHMIDT LEAVES BEHIND
Richard Bernstein does well to begin his story on the rumpus at Yale with the call to Benno C. Schmidt Jr. from George Bush, offering words of cheer and reassurance ("The Yale Schmidt Leaves Behind," June 14).
Yale is only one of the many teapots in the national cupboard in which these tempests are occurring.
Bush's teapot is somewhat larger, yet the administrative styles of the two Yalie presidents are strikingly similar.
Both men tried to govern by a combination of neglect and crisis, using the "crises" created by neglect to justify harsh action, quite out of character with their own naturally light and pleasant personalities.


Allison Hopkins, Jeffrey Arsenault
Allison Kellogg Hopkins, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard O. Hopkins of Snyder, N.Y., was married yesterday in Buffalo to Jeffrey David Arsenault, a son of Mrs.
Harold H. Ferrera of Mashpee, Mass.
The Rev. David A. Rich performed the Episcopal ceremony at St. Paul's Cathedral.


Model Guests
A COLLAPSED orange moon was rising over New Jersey hunt country, where Eileen Ford, matriarch of models, was presiding over Sunday dinner at her new Georgian-style mansion.
Six astonishingly beautiful teen-age girls, who were sequestered at the Ford compound for the weekend before a week of photo sessions in Manhattan, had come down for dinner from their rooms upstairs.
They had been watching Johnny Depp in "Edward Scissorhands" on the VCR, even though Mrs.
Ford had recommended "Roman Holiday" with Audrey Hepburn.


Q and A
Courier Flights to Asia
Q.
I have read about flying on courier services and wonder if any such flights operate out of the West Coast to the Far East? -- Max Lau, Santa Clara, Calif.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Gov.
Bill Clinton


VW Looks to the Good New Days
REMEMBER the old days?
When somebody said "import," you didn't think Honda or BMW or whatever.
You thought instantly of Volkswagen.
That had to do with the Beetle, of course, the early and successful invader that has become the unquestioned world champ in terms of longevity.
Ownership became a statement.
The car itself became a symbol of revolt, and its production continues today in Mexico, where it is still the best-selling vehicle, almost 60 years after its conception as a car to move the German masses.


Hundley's Lack of Success at Plate Is Negated by Heroics Behind It
Todd Hundley calls it his most frustrating experience in baseball, a batting slump he is desperately trying to end while maintaining his concentration defensively and his status as the Mets' regular starting catcher.
It's not easy, considering that his .188 batting average is the lowest among the Mets' regular starters.
And with the Mets batting .235 as a team entering last night's game with the San Diego Padres, the lowest in the National League, Hundley is replaced by Mackey Sasser or Charlie O'Brien when more offense is needed.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Armonk, N.Y. 550,000
4 Cobblers Lane
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, deck, study, dining, family and play rooms, 1 acre; taxes $8,706.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 373,200
1193 Hardscrabble Road
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 64-year-old unique; fireplace, spiral staircase, dining room, screened porch, 1.1 acres; taxes $9,141.
Katonah, N.Y. 265,000
198 North Salem Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 202-year-old farmhouse; parlor, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, family room, w/b stove, office, barn; taxes $5,913.
Bridgeport, Conn. 93,000
715 Lincoln Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old cape cod; 75- by 100-foot lot; taxes $3,202.
Hartford, Conn. 105,000
162 Harold Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 46-year-old cape cod; living room with fireplace, formal dining room, 50- by 114-foot lot; taxes $1,000.
Monroe, Conn. 200,000
111 Bug Hill Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; 3-car garage, whirlpool, deck, 1 acre; taxes not yet available.
OTHER AREAS Islip, L.I. 193,000
21 Harbor Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $6,000.
Levittown, L.I. 147,500
134 Blacksmith Road  6-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car attached garage, deck; taxes $4,700.
Livingston, N.J. 522,500
29 Ross Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; 2-car garage, family room, den, c/a; taxes $8,675.


Race Toward Chaos
From high in the summer sky, Central Park is a great emerald rectangle, impossibly lush with trees and silvery pools of water, stamped into the very heart of the glass, steel and concrete of Manhattan.
But from the ground a different picture emerges.
"It's big trouble here," said Maxim Minin, a recent Russian immigrant who regularly hurls his yellow cab over the park's winding and pitching roads with almost every passenger wanting him to hurry.
"There are too many people, a lot of people, here on Rollerblades and bicycles with the cars."


The Rise and Rise of the Brothers King
The news has been all bullish this month for King World Productions Inc., the nation's dominant seller of game, talk and magazine shows.
First, it had respectable third-quarter earnings.
And then it managed to wrap up deals to sell its hot shows "Jeopardy!" and "Wheel of Fortune" to major TV stations for another two years at higher rates.
Roger King, King World's husky, hard-selling chairman whose third hit -- "The Oprah Winfrey Show" -- is already licensed through 1996, was typically ebullient.
"It's a tremendous thing to get renewed for two years," Mr.
King said enthusiastically in an interview in which he disclosed the completion of the deals rumored for weeks.
"It's like getting an extended lease on life. It shows you the power of television."


Serbs Force An Exodus From Plain
A warning to move out of town, stuck to Julijana Molnar's kitchen table with a knife, has not deterred her from selling her watermelons at a roadside stand or speaking out against the terror that has ripped through her hometown.
"How much for the melons?" asked a Serb who drove up in an out-of-town car just as Mrs.
Molnar was telling two reporters of the threats she is receiving from Serbian militants.


A 'Saxon Switzerland' in Germany
GERMANS used to living on the broad expanse of the northern European plain like to call any protuberance of hills, be it ever so gentle, Schweiz, or Switzerland.
Surrounding Berlin, for example, are the Markische Schweiz and the Ruppiner Schweiz, while farther north lies the Mecklenburgische Schweiz.
Travelers through Poland stumbling upon Szwajcaria Kaszubska, or Kashubian Switzerland, should know that the name stems from an age when those rolling hills were settled by Germans.
The tendency to name hilly areas after Switzerland began with Romantic writers like Carl Heinrich Nicolai, the pastor of Lohmen in Saxony.
His slender "Guidebook Through Saxon Switzerland" first appeared in 1801 and lured travelers out of stately Dresden into the hills to the southeast, uncovering landscapes where the Elbe River cut a swath of rugged mesas and towering buttes in craggy, wooded green.


Shock of Officer's Slaying Spurs Intensive Manhunt
In the windows of the shops and boutiques that line Bell Boulevard in Bayside, Queens, black and white posters hang as harsh reminders of the killings that have stunned the borough's most popular strip of bars and other nightspots.
"Wanted for Double Homicide," the posters read in bold letters above the grainy photograph of a hulking young man with short, curly blond hair, a ruddy face and sunken eyes.


A Coal-Burning Utility That's Trying to Paint Itself Green
Scimitar-horned oryxes browse amid the grass and wildflowers of the valley, as their ancestors have for millennia on the African savannah.
But this is not Africa, it is eastern Ohio.
And the oryxes are here not in their natural niche in the food chain -- eating foliage and falling prey to predators -- but in another role.
They are helping to make coal look green.
The oryxes, a type of antelope, along with Hartmann's mountain zebras and other rare species graze on a reclaimed strip mine donated by the American Electric Power Company.
They will soon be joined by elephants, rhinos and snow leopards, and the company proudly notes that at 9,200 acres the wild-animal preserve is the largest in North America.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 26, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war, and a floundering President may not be able to cope.
2
15
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
3
26
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
4
4
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
5
3
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
6
4
THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A woman insurance investigator probes the murder of a millionaire.
7
5
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $5.99.) Attending a family funeral, a woman lawyer finds new understanding and love.
8
3
THE DECEIVER, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $5.99.) Sam McCready recalls his years in the British secret service.
9
6
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
10 *
26
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
11
36
PATRIOT GAMES, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan battles terrorists.
12
1
THE DUCHESS, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) An American woman, in Scotland to marry a duke, finds a mysterious stranger more attractive.
13
10
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
14
4
RAVISHED, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $4.99.) A British beauty summons a man with a dubious past to stop the looting on her property.
15
8
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
54
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
3 *
14
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
4
10
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series, as recollected by the actor who played Greg.
5 *
5
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
6
7
ROSS PEROT: IN HIS OWN WORDS, by Tony Chiu. (Warner, $4.99.) A compilation of statements about himself and his beliefs by the Texas billionaire who seeks the Presidency.
7
62
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
8
10
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
9
25
ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $5.99.) The rescue of two Americans from an Iranian prison.
10 *
455
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
50
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
98
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
14
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
4
79
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
18
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Lenin et Al. Are Held Over in Brooklyn
ON Brighton Beach Avenue in Brooklyn, a route paved with vendors offering tins of beluga caviar for $14 each, a couple of Russian emigres have invented a store hybrid, the laundromat-gift shop.
In one of them, while washers hum in the background, Yuri Egorov mans a 5-by-5-foot galleria crammed with artifacts of the former Soviet Union in an open window between First and Second streets.
One can hardly imagine more poignant collectibles of the 20th century than pins and medals of Lenin ($1 and up), gold-fringed red banners with Communist slogans ($4), T-shirts made just a couple of years ago with "Perestroika" and "Glasnost" printed on them ($10) and men's undershorts with a hammer-and-sickle motif ($10).


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
MELVILLE MARATHON
The entire 135 chapters of Herman Melville's "Moby Dick" will be read at Mystic Seaport beginning at noon Friday and continuing through the night.
This will mark the seventh year that the readings have taken place on deck and in the forecastle of the Charles W. Morgan whaling ship.


'Sally and Marsha' Tests Friendship
IT'S the Upper West Side but the manically, depressingly cheerful Sally in apartment 12F (two children, three rooms) is not the city type.
She bakes apple pies, doesn't know what a bagel is and goes on about South Dakota cheese puff balls.
Folding laundry is her relaxation technique.
She can do a sheet in 10 seconds.
Sally paints with lard, makes puppets out of peanuts and has never read Chekov.
She is married to a salesman who's a loser but a great lover.


GIVE THIS DOG A JOB
As a cat lover, I found Donald McCaig's article touching.
Perhaps the hapless dog owners should consider living with a cat.
Unlike dogs, cats were never bred to work.
The one job they consent to do -- rid the house of rodents -- they do by instinct.
And if no rodents have been seen in the vicinity for a decade, they are perfectly content to sit and wait until one makes an appearance.
Felines are not lazy, however; they are relentless in the pursuit of good food and amusing play things.
True aristocrats, they know that work is for other, less fortunate, creatures.
ANNE E. REUTER
Fitchburg, Mass.


The Cart Before the Capital in Eastern Europe
To the Editor:
Why is it that whenever a story appears on an eastern European economy ("Czechoslovakia's Wall Street Brigade," June 21), the emphasis is heavily on what Wall Street is doing?
Haven't we learned from the experience of the 80's and early 90's that when it comes to getting an underdeveloped economy going, Wall Street is the last resort and not the first?
I've been teaching marketing strategy at the International Management Center in Budapest.
My students are from the big state trusts, the newly privatized firms, the rising entrepreneurs.
What don't they know?


Making a Difference; A Dazzling Leap From Pitney Bowes
In 1986, after several years of making small improvements in its high-volume mail processors, Pitney Bowes Inc. decided it was time for a dazzling leap.
It turned out that to get where it wanted to go, the company had to not only produce a new product line but also transform its entire approach to design and manufacturing.
"This was a great learning experience for the corporation," said Patrick Donahue, the 48-year-old project leader.
The Paragon, as Pitney called the new system, which began selling early this month, embodies 75 new patents.
But Paragon's technical innovations had to be matched by numerous other changes to keep the price tag under $20,000 a unit.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Vice President; Quayle Says He Will Remain on Ticket
Ending a brief but feverish bout of speculation about his future on the Republican ticket, Vice President Dan Quayle has told associates that he and President Bush have agreed to run as a team for re-election, Administration officials and party strategists said today.
The two made the decision after several private talks and after Mr.
Quayle sought advice from advisers outside the White House, the officials and strategists said.


American Originals


Judith Kaye, Jonathan Galst
Mr. and Mrs.
Alan R. Kaye of Rydal, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Judith Ann Kaye, to Jonathan Galst, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald Galst of Scarsdale, N.Y.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Kaye, 25 years old, is the consumer marketing manager at the Rosenbluth Travel Agency in Philadelphia.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, from which her fiance graduated magna cum laude.
Her father, who is retired, was a managing partner of the Philadelphia law firm of Kleinbard, Bell &amp; Brecker.
Her mother, Suzanne Kaye, is the director of student and alumni affairs at the Temple University School of Communications and Theater in Philadelphia.


Danielle Moss, Robert Udolf
Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Moss of Linwood, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Danielle Lea Moss to Robert David Udolf, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Udolf of West Hartford, Conn.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Moss, 24 years old, is an account executive for David Glazer Inc., a clothing importer in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father owns and developes commercial property in Atlantic City.


Foreign Affairs; Law Unto Themselves
Gently and without fanfare, Senator Sam Nunn has reopened a can of the most venomous worms in Pentagon history.
He is saying what Presidents and military experts knew long before the Pentagon started functioning in 1943: that the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines get away with bureaucratic and fiscal murder; that each tries to do its own job and the job of the other services as well; and that the result is an outrageously wasteful duplication, triplication and sometimes even quadruplication of effort.
The chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee does not like to be confrontational, but his message is clear: The nation can no longer afford such interservice rivalry.
Defense budgets must be cut.
And they have to be cut in a way that leaves as much muscle as possible -- and not much muscle will remain if each service continues to be a virtual land, sea and air force unto itself.


Topics of The Times; Politics and Prejudice
New York's September primary election is weeks away.
But the contest in the 12th Congressional District, in New York City, is already overheated by nasty ethnic politics.
At issue is the decision by Representative Stephen Solarz to run in this new district, which was deliberately drawn to enhance the chances of adding a Hispanic member to the state's Congressional delegation.
Representative Solarz, a 12-term Congressman whose district was carved up by reapportionment, is not Hispanic.
That has sparked protests from some of his rivals, and from two mayoral aspirants interested in courting Hispanic support: the New York City Council president, Andrew Stein, and former U.S.
Attorney Rudolph Giuliani.


Japanese Election: Unconstitutional but Valid
Every democracy has its own peculiar electoral rituals, but as the Japanese vote on Sunday in a parliamentary election, they will engage in a modern tradition with a good claim to being unique: The balloting will be unconstitutional.
Japan's electoral districts were established in 1947, when much of the population had fled to the countryside to escape the wartime bombing of the cities and postwar food shortages.
Since then there have been a series of major migrations to the cities.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Memo; Pressure Builds on President As Anxiety Mounts in Party
The soothing story line in Republican circles these days is that James A. Baker 3d is riding back to the rescue, just as he did in the summer of 1988, when George Bush was 17 points behind Michael S. Dukakis.
But even the prospect of Mr.
Baker's return, which is still unannounced, can barely contain the Republican alarm.
In a year of wild swings in the polls, almost nobody considers Gov.
Bill Clinton's 27-point lead in a Time-CNN Poll conducted this week to be solid support.
But almost no one expected the Democrat's post-convention bounce to be that big, or to be fueled by a cross-country bus tour that co-opted much of the Republicans' favorite Middle America, hay-bale-and-patriotic-sparkler imagery.
Deeper Problems
Grim as the polls may be, the Republicans have deeper problems as they begin the buildup to their Aug. 17 convention in Houston.
They are achingly aware of how hard it is to improve the image of an unpopular President during hard times.
Jimmy Carter, once their favorite target, is now their worst nightmare.


Mary Ellen Pitt, Stephen P. Cherry
Mr. and Mrs.
Scott Pitt of Naples, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Ellen Pitt, to Stephen Patrick Cherry, a son of Sharon Kay Ritchie of New York and Don Cherry of Las Vegas, Nev.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Pitt, 28 years old, is a sales assistant in the equity trading department of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was a sales manager in New York for J. P. Stevens &amp; Company, a textile maker.
Her mother, Dorothy Lee Pitt, is an independent interior designer in Naples.


Alexandria Aiello, George Hundt Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Carmine P. Aiello of Cutchogue, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alexandria Ann Aiello, to George Stout Hundt Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hundt of Malvern, Pa.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Aiello is a vice president in New York for the international securities trading unit of James Capel &amp; Company, a London investment bank.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is a utilities-engineering consultant in Cutchogue.
Her mother, Dorothy A. Aiello, is a sixth-grade teacher at the Lenox School in Baldwin, L.I.


New Thai Place Offers Welcome Variety
A NEW restaurant called Fork and Spoon recently opened its doors on Main Street in Danbury.
Like the restaurant that previously occupied the storefront space, this, too, is Thai, with just a handful of Chinese dishes on the menu.
The name Fork and Spoon is a reminder not to ask for chopsticks: Thais mainly use spoons, with forks as backup.
The medium-size storefront space has been nicely rejuvenated.
Freshly painted apricot-color walls are hung with a few Thai plaques and shelves displaying blue and white ginger jars, cheerful floral-pattern tablecloths (under glass) match draperies at the front windows, and a muted blue carpet is on the floor.
It is obvious that an effort is being made.


Roberta Rossi, Jonathan Baum
Dr. and Mrs.
Ennio C. Rossi of Winnetka, Ill., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Roberta Geraldine Rossi, to Jonathan Morton Baum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton J. Baum of Baltimore.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Rossi, 30 years old, graduated from Beloit College.
Her father is a professor of medicine at Northwestern University, and is the medical director of Lifesource Donor Centers, a group of blood banks in Glenview, Ill.


N.H.L. Satire Was Too Biting
To the Sports Editor:
I suppose Robert Lipsyte ("My N.H.L., My Icehouse, My Rules," The Times, July 5) imagined he was writing an amusing, light-hearted but satirical account about what's wrong in the National Hockey League.
Instead he revealed a blatantly prejudiced view, that he, as well as perhaps many other Americans, hold against our Canadian neighbors.


IN SHORT: FICTION
HOME TRUTH By Janis Stout. Soho, $19.95.


Update; Youth Is Sentenced In Robbery of Mrs. Trump
The 16-year-old son of a Long Island Rail Road executive has been sentenced to three to nine years in prison for robbing and seriously injuring Mary Trump, the mother of Donald J. Trump, on a street near her Queens home.
The sentence, which was imposed Friday on Paul LoCasto, prompted the youth's lawyer to charged that his client had received a harsher punishment than he would have if the victim had not been "high profile."


Fiona Tingley, Wen Stephenson
Fiona Bristol Tingley, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Nicholas Tingley of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Oliver Wendell Stephenson Jr., the son of Wendell Stephenson of Los Angeles and Pat Stephenson of Dana Point, Calif.
The Rev.
Richard F. Van Wely performed the ceremony at St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Stephenson, who is 24 years old, graduated from Harvard University and is to be a graduate business student at Northwestern University this fall.
Her father is a marketing adviser with Exxon Company International in Florham Park, N.J.


July 19-25: Iraq; To the Brink Again Over Saddam Hussein's Calculated Intransigence
The film version of last week's events could be called "Target Iraq" as Saddam Hussein's latest challenge to the United Nations stirred Western capitals to consider an appropriate response, and President Bush, canceling a vacation weekend in Maine, was bivouacked at Camp David with his war planners.
The specific challenge this time was Mr.
Hussein's refusal to allow a United Nations inspection of a government building suspected of housing information about Iraq's ballistic missile program.


Turmoil in Japan, But Apathy at the Polls
In the midst of Japan's less-than-heated election campaign the other day, someone asked Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa about his goals for the country's future.
He launched into his favorite topic: Transforming Japan into a "lifestyle superpower." People are tired of "living in rabbit hutches," he said, and of riding on trains so overcrowded "that you can only read a small paperback book if you lift it above your head." Mr.
Miyazawa has a bold new vision for Japan in the year 2000: Trains with enough elbow room to open the morning paper.
If Mr.
Miyazawa's vision for the future of the world's second largest industrial democracy seems less than sweeping, he is hardly alone among politicians here.
In a country that plans for everything, one of the unwritten rules of elections is that the country's elected leaders never articulate a plan.


Onward and Upward, a Real Summer Trouper
WHAT did gardeners ever do before impatiens?
This ubiquitous flowering plant is a boon to the summertime landscape.
The impatiens is truly a stick-it-in-the-ground-and-forget-about-it annual.
The happy flower colors: red, coral, orange, rose, almost blue and white (just about every shade but clear yellow) can be seen in borders, along drives, outlining shrub beds, in window boxes, along walls or tucked in just about any place a little spot of flower color is needed.


If Water Floods Basement, A Sump Pump May Help
WHEN a basement is flooded because of water rising from beneath the floor, one solution is to install a sump pump.
Aside from requiring modest excavation, including breaking through the basement floor, the task is not difficult.
But before starting, call the building inspector to ask about the requirements for installing sumps.
Find out whether the pump may discharge into a municipal storm sewer.
In many localities that is strictly forbidden, because sewers can be overloaded during heavy rains.
The inspector will probably say the pump has to discharge onto the ground on the property, where it can soak into the soil.
Never connect a discharge line to an ordinary sewer or a septic tank.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
128.10
124.38
137.60
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5044
1.4583
1.7440
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1918
1.1889
1.1491
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.8942
1.9510
1.6817
U.S. Dollar per British PoundGold
$359.50
$357.50
$366.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Fighting Corruption and Tradition in the School System
As vast and intricate as it is, New York City's Board of Education is viewed by insiders as an intimate shop with its own peculiar customs, a place where people know one another for decades and watch their lives become entangled.
Into that shop has come a stranger, Edward F. Stancik, a lean, blue-eyed 37-year-old Chicago native whose career has not been spent in education but in criminal prosecution.
In 1990, he was appointed the Special Commissioner of Investigation for the school system, charged with ferreting out corruption within it after a mayoral commission found that the board's own internal investigative arm had grown too cozy with those it was supposed to keep honest.


Playing a Round in TriBeCa
As the asphalt fries the feet of New Yorkers this summer, some will find cooler, more esthetic pastures as they hit the links and roam the Astroturf at Artists Space, an alternative gallery in TriBeCa.
There, beginning Saturday, "Putt Modernism," an 18-hole miniature golf course, will open to the public.
Each hole is designed by a different artist -- among them Cindy Sherman, Elizabeth Murray, Michael Graves and Frank Gehry.
Visitors can just look or, for a $5 putter rental fee, sample this staple of Middle American summer nights.
The exhibition runs throughout the dog days of August (until Sept. 6), much to the delight of Ken Buhler, the registrar of Artists Space, whose idea it was.
Mr.
Buhler thought the game's infinite lexicon of cartoon obstacles and architectural kitsch a natural for the art world.
As it turned out, he didn't have to do much arm-twisting; many of the artists he approached, he says, turned out to be closet miniature golf fans.
But their obstacles are for the most part deadly serious, representing such subjects as racism, war and the politics of AIDS.
Not even the golf balls escape: they are adorned with Jenny Holzer truisms.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Livingston 522,500
29 Ross Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; 2-car garage, family room, den, c/a; taxes $8,675.
Millburn 223,000
40 Walnut Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; family room, 2-car garage, h/w floors; taxes $3,378.
Oradell 277,250
360 Grant Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 63-year-old colonial; new kitchen, front porch, underground sprinkler system; taxes $5,419.
Princeton Junction 251,500
17 Berkshire Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; h/w floors, master suite with dressing room, private yard; taxes $5,683.
West Orange 140,000
4 Ridgeview Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, over 100-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, eat-in-kitchen, porch; taxes $4,753.
West Windsor 250,000
35 Highmont Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; large kitchen and breakfast area, sunken family room, fireplace; taxes $5,841.
OTHER AREAS Katonah, N.Y. 265,000
198 North Salem Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 202-year-old farmhouse; parlor, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, family room, w/b stove, office, barn; taxes $5,913.
Bridgeport, Conn. 93,000
715 Lincoln Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old cape cod; 75- by 100-foot lot; taxes $3,202.
Islip, L.I. 193,000
21 Harbor Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $6,000.


Teddy Roosevelt Was No Boor
To the Editor:
In "The Candidates as Culture Vultures"  [ July 12 ] , Michael Kelly states that "Theodore Roosevelt's chief cultural interest was the shooting of animals caught unaware." This a misstatement of historical fact.


Getting Back To the Basics
The world may not have paused much in its orbit when Paul Taylor danced his nearly motionless solo "Epic" in 1957 or when Yvonne Rainer proclaimed a new era with her aptly titled "The Mind Is a Muscle, Part I" (now "Trio A") in 1966.
But works like these caused seismic changes in American modern dance.
Most of them have not been performed in years.
And so this summer's "Megadance" program, to be presented by Lincoln Center's Serious Fun festival on Wednesday and Thursday at Alice Tully Hall, will offer a rare look at dance history with pieces by nine choreographers who preceded, forged or were affected by the post-modernism of the 1960's.
The original idea of "Megadance" was to give uptown audiences an opportunity to sample the newest in dance in the largest possible doses.
This year's audience will likely include a good many young downtown or experimentalist choreographers, whose work, though very different, reflects the kind of paring down and democratizing of dance practiced by this earlier generation.


Hindus Halt Work on a Disputed Temple in India
Leaders of a campaign to build a Hindu temple near a mosque in the northern town of Ayodhya said today that they had agreed to halt construction, easing Hindu-Muslim tensions that had threatened to set off more religious clashes.
The truce was reached at a meeting in New Delhi between Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao and six Hindu religious leaders two weeks after construction of the temple began.


Italy Dispatches 7,000 Anti-Mob Troops to Sicily
Under pressure to display resolve in the face of the Mafia, the Italian Government authorized the deployment of 7,000 troops with the power of arrest today to guard installations and hunt down mobsters in Sicily after the killings of two major crusaders against organized crime.
"This is not muscle flexing or showmanship," said Justice Minister Claudio Martelli.
"This will guarantee greater control and security of the territory and multiply protection against organized crime."


Creativity Marks Summer Menus
THE number of restaurants that offer new menus for each season is increasing.
The summer menus now in place on the Island boast an impressive array of creative dishes.
Soho, an American bistro at 1034 West Beech Street in Long Beach (889-4329), has gone Caribbean for the summer.
A steel band plays calypso music on Monday and Thursday nights, frozen Caribbean cocktails are available, and diners are sampling dishes made with conch, coconut, curry and papaya.
The appetizer possibilities include conch fritters ($5.25), Jamaican beef patties ($5.50), jerk wings ($4.25) and papaya-crab meat pizza ($7.95).
Among the island entrees being featured are coconut-curry shrimp ($13.95), mango-chile steak ($14.25), a stir-fry caribe ($9.25) and calypso-rub chicken ($11.95).
That dish has a grilled chicken breast with Caribbean spices, Jamaican ginger and curry.


South Africa Marches To an Old Drummer
Abram Thwala and Giovanni Pretorius are much more than one nation's two-man boxing team.
The South African fighters are a poignant example of a convergence of dreams: Thwala and Pretorius, two fighters, the first 22 years old, the other 20; the first black, the other white; Thwala from a township, Pretorius from the city.
They are sons of a country that has been ravaged by conflict and violence.
Friday morning they sat side by side in the Olympic Village, both wearing the green and yellow jackets of South Africa's first Olympic team in 32 years.
Tonight they were to march with their teammates under a new flag to a new anthem, sharing the satisfaction of a mission accomplished.


Lisa Ann Galluzzi, Christopher Moss
Lisa Ann Galluzzi, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Galluzzi of Yonkers, was married yesterday to Christopher Vincent Moss, a son of John G. Moss of Portsmouth, R.I., and Patricia Moss-Henderson of Waynesboro, Va.
The Rev.
James R. Moore performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Annunciation in Crestwood, N.Y.
Mrs.
Moss, 25 years old, graduated from Lynchburg College and is a graduate student in education at Iona College.
Her father is an associate financial analyst at Loral International in Yonkers.
Her mother, Barbara Ann Galluzzi, is a sales associate at Brooks Brothers in Scarsdale.


The Quieter Style of the New Generation at Perdue Farms A Tough Time Letting Go
Say "Perdue" and TV watchers will most likely snap back "Frank" for the feisty pitchman of the nation's fourth-largest chicken processor.
But industry watchers have their eye now on James, Frank's 42-year-old son, who became chairman of the privately held Perdue Farms Inc. just a year ago.
Taking the reins from his father, who remains the company's front man, peddling broilers and chicken parts on television and in supermarkets around the country, James A. Perdue has become the "inside man." He has been infusing the company with a stronger devotion to quality control and a bigger commitment to strategic planning, building on his father's groundwork.


The 'Bizarre' Bazaar
I think it's shocking and frightening," said Marlin Fitzwater, a man not easily shocked or frightened, "to see that kind of
bizarre
behavior."
The President's press secretary was talking about Ross Perot's investigation of Mr.
Bush's sons.
Barbara Bush agreed: "I think it's
bizarre
. . . particularly for someone who did come and spend a day with us." Soon afterward, Vice President Dan Quayle joined in the attack on Mr. Perot for "nullifying representative democracy with a
bizarre
scheme of government by polls."


For Adoptive Parents, An Unexpected Fear
After 15 years as an adoption counselor, Kristina Backhaus has come to dread the ring of the telephone.
Could the call be from some young couple suddenly fearful about the adoption laws and asking for reassurance that a child they have grown to love will be theirs to keep?
Or a birth mother, desperate to take back the baby she gave up and asking if an appeal is still possible?
In either case, Ms.
Backhaus fears her answer could be wrong, or so full of caveats as to be meaningless.
Since a New Haven Superior Court judge reinterpreted state adoption law earlier this month and ordered an abandoned infant returned to the mother even after the usual legal deadlines had passed, what had seemed secure and certain in adoption law in Connecticut has become less so.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Islip 193,000
21 Harbor Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $6,000.
Levittown 147,500
134 Blacksmith Road  6-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car attached garage, deck; taxes $4,700.
Lynbrook 168,500
16 Farnum Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 45-year-old colonial; dining room, den, fireplace, basement; taxes $4,400.
Miller Place 277,000
19 Sea Cliff Lane  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; dining room, den, oak beams, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $7,400.
Rocky Point 143,000
5 Model Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den with fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $4,800.
West Sayville 168,000
120 Lorraine Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 14-year-old colonial; dining room, den, fireplace, 1- car garage; taxes $5,200.
OTHER AREAS Katonah, N.Y. 265,000
198 North Salem Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 202-year-old farmhouse; parlor, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, family room, w/b stove, office, barn; taxes $5,913.
Bridgeport, Conn. 93,000
715 Lincoln Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old cape cod; 75- by 100-foot lot; taxes $3,202.
Livingston, N.J. 522,500
29 Ross Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; 2-car garage, family room, den, c/a; taxes $8,675.


Report Urges Biosphere 2 to Spend More Time on Science to Succeed
Biosphere 2, the supposedly self-contained ecological experiment in the Arizona desert, can succeed as a scientific venture as well as a tourist attraction, but only if more attention is paid to its science, a new report says.
The report is by an eight-member committee led by Dr.
Thomas E. Lovejoy, an ecologist and vice president for external affairs at the Smithsonian Institution.
Among other things, it calls for the appointment of a director of science and the creation of a science plan for the project.


The Borland Barbarian's New Weapon
Amid the clutter of toys, musical instruments and other playthings that define Philippe Kahn's office is a striking set of oversized chess pieces.
The set serves as an anchor for Mr.
Kahn's huge U-shaped desk.
But its fierce-looking ranks of hand-carved Celtic warriors are also reminders of the battlefield on which the self-described "barbarian" of the software industry will soon roll out weapons that could accelerate a big shift in the business.
In early 1989, Mr.
Kahn, a heavyset 40-year-old who favors loud Hawaiian shirts and an even louder business style, committed his company, Borland International Inc., to a radically new approach to developing software called object-oriented programming.
Now, three years later, the company's next generation of software is months overdue, depressing Borland's earnings and sending its stock skittering recently to less than half its 52-week high of $86.75.
Critics and competitors say the abrasive Mr.
Kahn has been put in check.


Fortunately, Partner Was Anonymous
RIXI MARKUS, the British star who died in April at the age of 81, was known to a wide public as an author, columnist and winner of world titles.
In a 60-year career, ending with two victories in St.
Moritz shortly before she died, she had far more victories with partners of assorted nationalities than anyone else has ever had.
Away from bridge she was warm-hearted and generous, with a gift for making and keeping friends.
But where bridge was concerned she was a tigress: her total involvement and competitiveness often boiled over, with feuds, lawsuits, official blacklistings and flouncings out of victory banquets.
She once poured a glass of water over the head of a friend who appeared to be consorting, at the card table, with someone in the opposite feuding camp.


Arming Iraq: The Ohio Connection/A special report.; For Weapons Buildup, Baghdad Used American Front Company
In the spring of 1988, the Matrix-Churchill Corporation, an obscure Ohio company owned by the Iraqi Government, approached a California company with a lucrative proposition: Would it go to Baghdad to build a $15 million factory to make fiberglass for state-of-the-art shower stalls and fishing rods?
Glass Incorporated International of Covina, Calif., set to work building the plant even as the State Department, displaying ignorance of the Commerce Department-approved project, was warning that the Iraqis should not be allowed to obtain just such technology.


Swimmers to Lead Rush As Competition Begins
Already, there have been some underattended soccer matches, an overcrowded Dream Team news conference and a lavish opening ceremony.
Now, beginning Sunday, the medals at these 1992 Summer Games will fall as they may: to the strongest, to the hungriest, to the luckiest.
Among the most decorated athletes, by pre-Olympic reckoning, will be the women of the United States swimming team.
Three of America's top 19-year-old racers will risk their lofty reputations early, in a couple of high-profile openers.


Haydn-Mozart Group Decides to 'Go for Baroque'
WHEN the Haydn-Mozart Chamber Orchestra gives its free Untermyer Festival concert in Yonkers on Saturday at 8 P.M. it will abandon its namesake composers to "Go for Baroque."
An all-Baroque evening has been planned for the Grecian Gardens at Untermyer Park (or the Saunders School, if it rains) with concertos by Bach, Handel, Telemann and Vivaldi.
The number to call for more details is 377-6441.


Scarlett L. Bell, P. J. Talamantes
Scarlett Lee Bell, the daughter of Patricia L. Robinson of Alexandria, Va., and P. Jackson Bell of Fort Worth, was married yesterday to Patrick John Talamantes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Talamantes of Sebastopol, Calif.
The Rev.
Stanley Krempa officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Alexandria.
Mrs.
Talamantes, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father is a senior vice president of American Airlines in Fort Worth.
She is the stepdaughter of Virginia Bell of Fort Worth.


Jailbreak Dramatizes Drug-Policy Failures
When Pablo Escobar, the vastly wealthy and equally ruthless drug baron, escaped last week from the comfortable Colombian prison that had been built to his specifications, he not only embarrassed President Cesar Gaviria, but also called attention to the failure of the Bush Administration's anti-drug strategies in Latin America.
His outmaneuvering of the Colombian President seemed to symbolize the utter inability of the Administration to stop drugs at their source and at the United States borders.
The discouraging bottom line on Mr.
Escobar is that, like so much of what the United States has been doing to counter drugs in Latin America, his detention for the last year has, by all accounts, had no effect, one way or the other, on the flow of cocaine into the United States.
It was not only that he continued to run his drug business even from jail, but also that as his Medellin cartel was weakened in a running battle with the Government, his rivals in the Cali cartel seized dominance of the world's cocaine markets.


County Suing to Stop Welfare Change
THE county Department of Social Services is going to court to prevent the state from implementing a program to computerize welfare benefits and simplify their distribution.
The change would increase homelessness in Westchester, county officials said last week in announcing the legal action.
The new state payment method, known as the Electronic Benefits Issuance Control System, will electronically transfer benefits to welfare clients with access cards, but the monthly grant for rent and food will come in two staggered installments.


Crumpled Bike
To the Editor: Although it was heartening to read that Mr.
Williams's lawyerly skills ultimately compelled T.W.A. to compensate him for his beloved bicycle, his experience is unfortunately not an isolated incident.
I have found an easy, inexpensive way to elude the airlines' hostile attitude.
United Parcel Service offers two-day air service to almost anywhere in the continental United States for about $32 for a 22-pound bike.
For the return trip, I use their ground service, for about $12.
U.P.S. also ships internationally.


Seeking Remedies For 'Sick Buildings'
IT was misery.
But it wasn't a cold.
Deborah J. Glick was sneezing, her eyes were watering, her throat was irritated and her head was congested.
The cause, she concluded, was something in the air -- the air coming out of the overhead ductwork in the lower Manhattan office building where she worked.
Like so many Americans who spend so much of their waking lives in office structures that were built tight in the 50's and 60's to accommodate air-conditioning, and then made tighter in the 70's to contain energy costs, Ms.
Glick seemed to be a victim of the indoor environment.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on July 5 about the Baltic states misstated Lithuania's policy on visas.
Lithuania no longer issues free 10-day visas to foreigners arriving at Vilnius Airport.


A Statisical Portrait of the 'Typical' American; This Is Your Life, Generally Speaking
In an election year, politicians dance to the "Fanfare for the Common Man." President Bush has been trying to separate the "advocates of the liberal agenda" from "you and I and those values of family that we share." Bill Clinton invoked the average Americans "who do the work, pay the taxes, raise the kids and play by the rules." in his acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention.
But who is all this aimed at? Who is the typical American?


Britain's Labor Party Names Shadow Cabinet
With Prime Minister John Major's Conservative Government stymied by the longest and most persistent recession of modern times, the British Labor Party has named a new shadow cabinet that hopes it will not be stuck in opposition for too many more years.
Less than four months after an election Mr.
Major won on the promise of a British economic recovery, none is yet in sight.
His Government is in the midst of the biggest political sex scandal in years, a liaison involving his close friend and Cabinet colleague David Mellor, the Secretary of State for National Heritage, and an actress.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Agassi Upends Lendl


A Music School Director Is Taking the Kudos In Stride
IT has been a happy summer for Mary Helton, director of Hoff-Barthelson Music School here.
First came the news, made official earlier this month, that Hoff-Barthelson and its friendly rival, the Westchester Conservatory of Music in White Plains, would each receive $300,000 over three years from the Lila Wallace-Readers Digest Fund as part of its new Community Arts Education initiative.
In announcing the grants, the fund said it had chosen nine community schools of the arts nationwide to receive a total of $3.2 million because of the increasingly important role such privately run schools were playing in American arts education.


You Can't Please All of the People . . .
Stung by three years of controversy, the National Endowment for the Arts recently produced a nine-minute video explaining its mission and achievements.
Walter Cronkite, once the most trusted talking head on television, begins by noting that the endowment represents one of the smallest parts of the Federal budget; it is allocated just 68 cents annually for every American.
The rest of the video demonstrates how much that sum has bought.
There are brief shots of orchestras, ballet companies, circuses, children's festivals, pottery making, the Vietnam Memorial, theater performances, museum galleries, folk dancing, an American Indian ritual -- images punctuated by Ray Charles singing "America." The video stresses two aspects of the endowment's labors: television (a "medium of collective experiences") and community (where the N.E.A. helped "make multiculturalism a reality long before it became a catchword").


July 19-25: Tiananmen Aftermath; Former Communist Leader Sentenced to 7 Years
After several hours of closed-door court proceedings, China sentenced a formerly powerful official to seven years in prison last week for political activities during the Tiananmen Square democracy movement in the spring of 1989.
Bao Tong, a 59-year-old former Communist Party Central Committee member and an advocate of political restructuring, managed a smile as he walked into a packed courtroom for sentencing, his daughter said.
The trial, in which Mr.
Bao was accused of counter-revolutionary incitement and leaking state secrets, was closed to the family, but the sentencing was not.
Mr.
Bao has been in detention since May 28, 1989, and this time spent will count toward his seven-year sentence.
He may be eligible for parole after serving half his term in November, but so far no prominent political prisoners have been released on parole.


Talks Resume to Complete North American Trade Pact
More than a year after they began negotiations for a North American Free Trade Agreement, trade ministers from the United States, Canada and Mexico gathered here today to try to resolve the last remaining issues.
Although the Mexican Government had hoped for a draft treaty this month, trade officials said they doubted that the talks could be wrapped up in the two days of meetings scheduled here.


DISAGREEING TO AGREE
In his discussion of pronoun-antecedent agreement, William Safire touched on the vexing question of how to give the two sexes their due in these matters (On Language: "Disagreeing to Agree," by William Safire, July 5).
It was once acceptable, of course, to say, "If a person feels sick, he should see his doctor." ("Man embraces woman," as waggish grammarians used to put it.) However, that is now politically incorrect.


Army's Monument to the Unsung: Blacks Who Helped Win the West
In the 1860's it was a swampy meadow where black soldiers slept because they were barred from the white barracks.
Today it became the site of a monument to those soldiers, a 16-foot bronze statue of a black cavalryman pulling back the reins of his horse.
The Buffalo Soldier Monument at Fort Leavenworth here commemorates a chapter of military history that is at once proud, shameful and unsung: the existence of separate and unequal all-black regiments in the Army, from the end of the Civil War to the integration of the armed forces in 1952.


All About/African Textiles; Making the Transition From Cultural Statement to Macy's
The American fabrics industry is constantly changing its stripes -- not to mention its plaids and its polka dots.
Something that really catches on, like the green and brown earth tones evocative of the environmental movement, quickly works its way through the fashion chain from dresses to sneakers to upholstery.
One look captivating the $14 billion industry this summer is traditional African and African-style fabrics.
Characterized by bold geometric patterns in vivid reds, blues and golds, these fabrics are moving from small boutiques into major department stores like Macy's.


Making a Difference; Taking Over at America West
"These things are never easy," said Michael J. Conway, talking of the resignation of Edward R. Beauvais, the chairman and co-founder of America West Airlines.
Mr.
Conway, 47 years old, who is president and chief executive of the airline, has taken over the post vacated by Mr.
Beauvais, 55, a little more than a week ago.
The Phoenix-based carrier entered Chapter 11 proceedings 13 months ago and Mr.
Beauvais said he was resigning "with the hope that it will improve the prospects for a successful emergence" of the company from the bankruptcy court.


Update; No Appeal to High Court On Morristown Library
Richard Kreimer, the Morris County, N.J., homeless man whose successful lawsuit against town library was overturned by a Federal appeals court will not be appealing to the United States Supreme Court.
But Mr. Kreimer's litigious days may not be over.


Let Women Play Five-Set Tennis Matches
To the Editor:
Once again it was a fortnight of great tennis at Wimbledon.
However, this year, as every year, I felt cheated.
Don't you think it is time for the women to play the best of five sets?
In the marathon, a race of strategy and endurance, are women required to run only 16, not 26 miles?


Men's Wear and Bare Shoulders
What Americans do for Italian fashion draws a 'Grazie!' . . .
At a Fifth Avenue jewelry salon, a salute to a designer and her designs.


Focus: Greer, S.C.; Making Millionaires of Southern Farmers
A VISIT early last March by a group of BMW executives to rural Flatwood five miles south of here has turned some of its farmers into millionaires.
The German automobile manufacturer was looking for a place to build a $300 million plant that would ultimately employ 2,000 people.
The farmers had just the site.
The BMW party had been looking 60 miles to the southwest in Anderson County, but nothing appealed to them.
On their way to the Greenville-Spartanburg Jetport here they saw a large, sparsely inhabited expanse that seemed to be just the ticket.


If Water Floods Basement, A Sump Pump May Help
WHEN a basement is flooded because of water rising from beneath the floor, one solution is to install a sump pump.
Aside from requiring modest excavation, including breaking through the basement floor, the task is not difficult.
But before starting, call the building inspector to ask about the requirements for installing sumps.
Find out whether the pump may discharge into a municipal storm sewer.
In many localities that is strictly forbidden, because sewers can be overloaded during heavy rains.
The inspector will probably say the pump has to discharge onto the ground on the property, where it can soak into the soil.
Never connect a discharge line to an ordinary sewer or a septic tank.


Wall Street; If It's Not One Thing, It's Another for Bar Coder
What a difference a month made for Symbol Technologies.
In June, when the maker of bar-code systems for retail stores was asked by the New York Stock Exchange to explain a one-day drop in its stock price from $21.50 to $18.375, the company harumphed that the trouble was nothing more than "rumors started by short sellers." It also reassured investors that second-quarter revenues and earnings would be strong.


Hong Kong, Star of 1992, Begins to Dim
The world's major economic powers showed they could act together, for one day at least.
And the world's stock markets showed they too could move in the same direction.
They went down.
The carnage around the world last week was somewhat obscured in this country by the fact that Wall Street did relatively well.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 45.93 points, or 1.4 percent, to 3,285.71.
Intervention by the world's central banks to support the dollar seemed to ease concerns over American stocks, but did not help shares in the rest of the world, where fears of slow economies combined with a host of local factors, not to mention the possibility of bombs over Baghdad, to produce selloffs.


Timeless Marilyn, the Movies' Mona Lisa
Not long ago, the Phil Donahue show featured a panel of female impersonators, one of whom had succeeded in transforming himself into Marilyn Monroe, a re-creation so accurate, so eerily resurrectionist that whenever the camera focused on him, a chill ran down one's spine.
As Marilyn, returned to us, wriggled her shoulders and purred, there was an audible intake of breath, and a hush fell over the Donahue audience.
It was an almost religious silence, the awe that overcomes children at scary puppet shows or that falls upon sacred rituals at the moment when a shaman, through some effect of costume or light, persuades the faithful that they are in the presence of the living god.
Aug. 5 marks the 30th anniversary of Marilyn Monroe's death, and a surprising number of those who have outlived her believe that had they intervened, she might still be alive today.
Recently I watched a group of otherwise adult men discover, to their amazement, that they had all entertained the same adolescent fantasy.
All were teen-agers during the gloomy summer of Marilyn's suicide; each had cherished a fervent, secret faith that had Marilyn been
his
girlfriend, she would never have killed herself; she would have wanted to live forever.


Kathleen Healy, Woodson Merrell
Donald and Colleen Healy of Houston have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Kathleen Patricia Healy, and Dr.
Woodson Charles Merrell, a son of Charles and June Merrell of Chatham, N.J.


Floating Case Holds Limbs
A suitcase containing a human leg and two arms was found floating in the East River yesterday, the police said.
A boater spotted the suitcase about 6 P.M. near the dock of a gas station at East 23d Street in Manhattan, a police spokewoman, Sgt.
Mary S. Wrensen, said.
When he fished it from the water, he discovered the body parts, which were wrapped in blue plastic, and alerted a police patrol boat, she said.
The limbs appeared to be a woman's, she said.
The police turned the remains over to the Medical Examiner's office.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Arab terrorists hijack a Puget Sound ferry.
They manage to sail it into a naval base and steal an American submarine fitted with nuclear missiles.
They attach a detonator, which will set off an explosion that will wipe out Washington State and some of adjoining Canada, making the area uninhabitable for a thousand years.
The terrorists are willing to die as martyrs (a fanatic's best friend is his martyr) unless their conditions are met.
In PRESSURE POINT (Putnam, $21.95), the author, Dick Couch, dumps all this in the lap of the President of the United States.
The President calls his advisers together.
Special teams are mobilized: Navy Seals (the author is a former Seal), the Delta Force.
Regular units of the Navy and the Coast Guard stand by.
But how can one attack a ship when the invaders can destroy part of the United States and Canada with a touch of a button?


It's Ancient and Slow, So It Might Be Saved
There are two ways to look at the Sickletown Road tunnel.
Either it's an ancient, unsafe, one-lane bottleneck that should be razed in favor of a wider and straighter road.
Or, it's an ancient, unsafe, one-lane bottleneck that should be preserved as an oasis of horse-and-buggy gentility in an era of horn-honking impatience.


Sarah A. Binder, Forrest Maltzman
Dr. and Mrs.
Henry J. Binder of New Haven have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sarah Alison Binder, to Forrest Andrew Maltzman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Maltzman of Palo Alto, Calif.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Binder, 27 years old, graduated from Yale University.
She and Mr.
Maltzman are doctoral candidates in political science at the University of Minnesota at Minneapolis.
Her father is a professor of medicine at Yale University.


Tracy Cusick, Harry Hoffman
Michael F. Cusick of New York and Cynthia Ayres of Plainfield, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Tracy Lewis Cusick to Harry Eli Hoffman, a son of Donald Hoffman of Wynnewood, Pa., and the late Anita Hoffman Matusow.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Cusick, 24 years old, is a freelance photographer in Philadelphia.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts.
Her mother is a teacher at the Grover Cleveland Middle School in Elizabeth, N.J.
The bride's stepfather, Burgess N. Ayres, is the headmaster at the Wardlaw-Hartridge School in Plainfield.
Her stepmother, Barbara Peabody, is an assistant corporation counsel for the city of New York.


Sheehan Matches Inkster At Open
Patty Sheehan will attempt to exorcise the demons from the biggest disappointment of her career and overcome her longtime friend and rival Juli Inkster in Sunday's final round of the 47th United States Women's Open.
Sheehan and Inkster, matching shots while playing side by side, finished today's third round tied for the 54-hole lead at two-under-par 211 over an Oakmont course that has parted with birdies very grudgingly.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
PUSS IN BOOTS.
Retold by Lincoln Kirstein.
Illustrated by Alain Vaes.
Little, Brown. $15.95. (Ages 4 to 8) Lushly detailed and dramatic illustrations accompany this brisk version of the familiar story of the cleverest cat in all of France.


35 East 62d Street
To the Editor:
Your "Revlon's Right-Touch Restoration" on May 31 properly applauds Revlon for its sensitive restoration of the former Fleming School, at 35 East 62d Street, into its corporate headquarters.


The Executive Life; A Place That Scorns Synergy and Simpsons
There are literary agents and there are secret agents -- and sometimes there is even a literary secret agent like the one Daniel Edelman met during his first days in London as the latest American to take charge of the venerable British literary agency Curtis Brown.
Or at least that's how Mr.
Edelman now sees it.
The senior Curtis Brown staffer who took him to lunch shortly after he was recruited from New York two years ago filled him with tales of subterranean alliances, hidden motivations and personal agendas, information the "mole" obviously thought would be valuable for the new Yank in London town.


Roberta Smith, Jerome D. Saltz
Roberta Pancoast Smith and Jerome David Saltz were married yesterday at the home of Laurie Simmons and Carroll Dunham in Hampton Bays, L.I.
Everett P. Sharretts Jr., a town justice in Southampton, L.I., officiated.
Ms.
Smith, 44 years old, is an art critic for The New York Times.
She is keeping her name.
A graduate of Grinnell College, she is the daughter of Thomas R. Smith of Lawrence, Kan., and the late Eleanor P. Smith.
Her father is the retired chairman of the geography department at the University of Kansas in Lawrence.


Steinbrenner's Return and the Decline and Fall of the Yankee Empire
In announcing the March 1 return of George Steinbrenner, Steve Greenberg, the deputy baseball commissioner, commented that the owner's active presence would be helpful in bringing "some sense of direction" to the Yankees.
The former first baseman obviously didn't mean direction as in won-lost record and division standing, because the only direction the Yankees traveled in their last five seasons with Steinbrenner as man in charge was down.
That was Steinbrenner's legacy, a steadily deteriorating team that plunged to its nadir in 1990 when it finished the season, six weeks after the owner's departure, with a last-place 67-95 record, the franchise's worst since 1913.
From their 97-victory total in 1985, the Yankees fell in succeeding seasons to 90, 89, 85, 74 and finally 67.


Send Stronger Americans
AN AFGHANISTAN PICTURE SHOW
Or, How I Saved the World.
By William T. Vollmann.
Illustrated. 268 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.


Michele Marte-Abreu, Erik Indzonka
Dr. and Mrs.
Luis Marte-Abreu of Mount Vernon, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Michele Mary Marte-Abreu to Erik Francis Indzonka, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Francis W. Indzonka of Walden, N.Y.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Marte-Abreu, 29 years old, is a criminal defense lawyer for the Legal Aid Society of the Bronx.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received a law degree from the University of Connecticut.
Her father is a urologist in private practice in Manhattan.
Her mother, who is retired, was a registered nurse at Mount Vernon Hospital.


After Bandwagon Runs Off Road
Many of the marooned followers of Ross Perot are moving through the customary stages of grief: denial, anger and acceptance.
And some appear stuck in denial, denying that they were ever so keen on the Texas billionaire.


Jets' Blake Is Surprise In Quarterback Debut
As Jeff Blake left the dining hall at Hofstra University one day last week after lunch, a young autograph seeker approached him and asked if he was a receiver.
Blake shook his head to indicate that he wasn't, then made a throwing motion with his right arm.
The kid shrugged and looked puzzled.
After signing an autograph book, Blake said he was a quarterback.
But the kid still gave him an incredulous look.


Astros Pack Balls, Bats . . . Baedekers
Their bags are packed, and unpacked, and packed, and unpacked.
John McMullen is gone as the owner of the Houston Astros.
His legacy remains: the 26-game, 28-day road trip he agreed to, which begins today.


Mass Grave Reported Found in Zimbabwe
Gold miners have found a mass grave believed to contain the bodies of victims of a Zimbabwean Army crackdown on rebels in the mid-1980's, the national news agency reported today.
The grave is one of several found recently in southern Matabeleland province, which bore the brunt of an army sweep against anti-Government rebels from 1983 to 1986.


Though Illegal, Copied Software Is Now Common
In his home in the heart of Silicon Valley, Charles Farnham, a software writer, has a remarkably complete collection of commercial programs for his Apple Macintosh computer.
Like millions of other people, Mr.
Farnham has not bought many of them; he has copied his friends' software instead.
Federal law is clear that in almost all cases it is illegal to make duplicate copies of software.
But that does not seem to faze many computer users: people who would not steal a book or cheat on a test seem to have no qualms about obtaining software illegally.


Asset Managers Track The Elusive High Yield
As yields on fixed-income securities of all stripes fall ever closer to those being offered on Treasury notes and bonds, portfolio managers are finding it increasingly difficult to pick up incremental yield.
Not surprisingly, the search for higher yield is forcing many of these professionals to plumb markets they had no need to consider even a year ago, when interest rates on high-quality corporate bonds, for example, were much higher than they are today.
Indeed, some have given up looking and are investing bigger and bigger amounts of their portfolios in government bonds.


New Campaigns
*
"You have questions -- Five has answers" is the theme of a campaign for KPIX-TV, Channel 5, San Francisco, introduced by the television station's new agency, Atlas Citron Haligman &amp; Bedecarre, San Francisco.
The initial spot in the campaign was pegged to Ross Perot's withdrawal from the Presidential campaign; within hours of his announcement, viewers watched a spot that asked questions they might also be asking, from "Why did he drop out?" to "Where does he get his hair cut?"


Market Place; Michelin's Climb May Not Be Over
MICHELIN, the world's largest tire company, is not a stock that gives investors a comfortable ride.
The company is notoriously secretive, making it difficult for analysts to make forecasts.
And the swings in the company's stock price have been so extreme over the last five years that one French newspaper recently called it "the lunatic share."
But recently there has been good reason for the crazed smile on the roly-poly Michelin man's face.
After falling to a low of 57.35 francs ($11.47) in 1990, the shares gained 91 percent last year against a Paris Bourse average of 16.37 percent.
The stock has gained 75.2 percent so far this year, to stand at 213.7 francs.
The Bourse average in 1992 has climbed just 6.9 percent.
Michelin stock is not traded on American exchanges.


Bosnian Refugees Arrive in Germany


Christina Eliopoulos, Matthew Ferri
Christina Eliopoulos, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Constantine Eliopoulos of Asbury Park, N.J., was married yesterday to Matthew Sebastian Ferri, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Romolo R. Ferri of New York.
The Rev.
John Rallis officiated at the ceremony at St.
George Greek Orthodox Church in Asbury Park.
Ms.
Eliopoulos, who is 30 years old and keeping her name, is a freelance journalist and screenwriter in New York.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is an owner and chef of the Laurelton Diner Restaurant in Bricktown, N.J.
Her mother, Katina Eliopoulos, is a clothing designer for Woman Power Inc. in Asbury Park.


Going for Gold, Thompson Says She 'Choked'
Jenny Thompson could have bettered her own world record in a morning heat today at the Bernat Picornell Pool, but she floated languidly through the final yards when she might have stroked to the contact pad.
Why bother?
The 100-meter freestyle final tonight was the correct moment for world records and gold medals.


How Your Tax Dollars Arm Felons
Who is the most egregious coddler of criminals in Washington?
It turns out to be the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
Because of a bizarre legal loophole, the bureau must spend as much as $4 million annually helping convicted felons regain the right to own a gun.
Federal law once prohibited any convicted felon from possessing a gun.
But in 1965, the Olin Mathieson Corporation pleaded guilty to felony charges in a kickback scheme; since Olin owned the Winchester Arms Company, the law threatened to put the gun producer out of business.
So Congress passed a new law intended to save Winchester, but its wording allowed individual felons to apply for reinstatement as well.


Jackson Urges the Unregistered to Vote in November


Promotion at Britannica
Merriam-Webster Inc., the nation's leading dictionary publishing company, has announced that its president and publisher, Joseph J. Esposito, is being promoted to executive vice president of its parent company, Encyclopedia Britannica Inc. in Chicago.


South Africa Police Said to Kill Captives
South Africa's most prominent independent pathologist charged the South African Police today with a pattern of torturing and killing prisoners that he said had continued unabated despite his appeals to President F. W. de Klerk.
The pathologist, Dr.
Jonathan Gluckman, opened his files on more than 200 cases of prisoners who died in police custody and said they showed a police force "totally out of control."


Terminator Meets The Terminated?
NICOLE HAISLETT, who finished fourth in last night's 100-meter freestyle, in 55.19 seconds, is an ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER fan who has plastered her room with posters of her muscled hero.
DARA TORRES, a teammate on the United States swim team, happened to know Schwarzenegger from her broadcasting days with NBC.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; GORE, CAMPAIGNING ALONE, ATTACKS BUSH IN VIRGINIA
Senator Al Gore, the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee, hit the campaign trail alone today for the first time.
At a rally here to observe the implementation of the Americans With Disabilities Act, the Tennessee Senator accused President Bush of ignoring the needs of people with physical and mental disabilities.


Excerpts From Remarks by Envoy and Bush
Following are excerpts from news conferences held yesterday at the United Nations by Rolf Ekeus, head of the United Nations commission charged with eliminating Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, and at the White House by President Bush, as provided by Reuters: REMARKS BY EKEUS
I met Ambassador al-Anbari today, this morning, and the modalities of the inspection of the building, the Ministry of Agriculture, were discussed and arrived at to the satisfaction of both sides.
Because of the importance of the current inspection and future inspection operations under the Security Council mandate given to the special commission, I have decided to go to Baghdad -- I leave this afternoon -- and plan to arrive in Baghdad on Tuesday, the 28th of July.


Hillary Clinton Unjustly Pilloried, Again
To the Editor:
I read "Beware the Cookie Monster" (Op-Ed, July 18) by Karen Lehrman with growing bewilderment.
I believe Hillary Clinton has been pilloried by the news media, judged harshly whether viewed as a career woman or now as a housewife with an interest in cookies.


Braves' Streak Is Stopped But Not Without Struggle
Pirates 5, Braves 4
ATLANTA, July 26 (AP) -- The Atlanta Braves took the end of their franchise record-tying 13-game winning streak in stride today.


Hillary Clinton Unjustly Pilloried, Again; Choices Are Choices
To the Editor:
Growing up in the 1970's and early 80's, I was taught I could do whatever I wanted in life.
I went to a women's college, Sweet Briar, where that lesson continued.
After graduating, I lived and worked in Britain and Europe, never hampered by my gender.
After returning to the United States I worked as a project manager for a construction company -- a male-oriented field -- but again, women can do anything, right?


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball  American League


Virginia School Board Bans Anti-Gay Harassment
A Virginia school board has decided that students who taunt others with anti-homosexual remarks will be punished, possibly by suspension from school.
The Fairfax County School Board decision, believed to be one of the first of it kind, appears to defy a recent Supreme Court decision that ruled against "special prohibitions on those speakers who express views on disfavored subjects."


To Catch Triplecast Reruns, Just Switch to NBC
Maybe NBC and Cablevision's Olympics Triplecast is on to something.
Maybe all their propaganda about viewer choice and lack of commercial interruptions is true.
Maybe it will make viewers rethink how to assess NBC's network coverage.
The Triplecast is the antiroone: Everything sports television has learned from ABC's Roone Arledge -- like up-close-and-personal features, viewers preferring competition to results, sophisticated production -- is turned on its head by the live portion of the Triplecast (5 A.M. to 5 P.M.).


Dance in Review
Pilobolus  The Joyce Theater 175 Eighth Avenue at 19th Street


6 Are Killed In Bus Crash In New Jersey
A chartered bus carrying Brooklyn families to an amusement park in rural New Jersey raced out of control down a steep and narrow grade near its destination yesterday, struck two cars and burst into flames, killing five on board, the Vernon Township police said.
A sixth passenger died several hours after the crash.
The dead included two children and four adults, but their identities and ages were not immediately available.
As many as 47 others, including those in the cars and two firefighters, were injured, at least eight of them critically, the police and hospital officials said.


Victory Lifts Ryan To 12th on Career List
Rangers 6, Orioles 2
BALTIMORE, July 26 (AP) -- Nolan Ryan won his fifth consecutive decision for victory No. 319, moving into sole possession of 12th place on the career list, as the Texas Rangers beat the Baltimore Orioles, 6-2, today.


Does Politics of Fairness Mean Only Those From Minorities Should Apply?
THE chorus of politicians urging Representative Stephen J. Solarz not to seek re-election from a district fashioned for a Hispanic candidate was joined last week by the New York City Council President, Andrew J. Stein.
He warned that if Mr.
Solarz won, "the resentment and anger within the new district could be explosive."
But when Mr.
Stein was asked whether he would run himself under the same circumstances, he replied with endearing candor.
"I can't answer that," he said.
"It's a tough issue because you have to weigh the interests of Steve and of the city as a whole." Addressing those interests raises a number of questions:


CYCLING: Biking in the U.S.A. -- Day 48; A 32-Winner Event
Greetings from Asbury Park, as the $1.25 "collectors item" post cards here say.
The Coast To Coast Bicycle Classic ended in the sunshine at this faded shore town this afternoon.
Thirty-two grinning riders in identical "finisher" T-shirts rattled in a pack onto the boardwalk, 3,380 miles from our starting point in Seattle, escorted by police cars and a beeping convoy of autos filled with friends, family and curious onlookers.
It was a rousing climax to a trip the dimensions of which most of us still cannot really comprehend.


Adm. Paul P. Blackburn Jr., 83, Head of Seventh Fleet in Vietnam
Paul P. Blackburn Jr., a retired vice admiral who commanded the Navy's Seventh Fleet in the early months of its buildup in the Vietnam War, died Wednesday at the Seabrook retirement center in Hilton Head, S.C.
He was 83 years old.
He died of lymph cancer, his family said.


Snapple Begins Account Review
The Snapple Beverage Corporation in Valley Stream, L.I., said a review of its advertising account had begun, confirming reports in trade publications.
The account had been handled for the last year and a half by the Marketing Communications Corporation in Essex, Conn.
In a telephone interview, Jude Hammerle, Snapple's director of consumer marketing, said the review involved 10 agencies, whose names he did not disclose, in addition to the incumbent.
A final decision is expected in September, he added.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  THE NATIONAL PARKS CLOSER TO HOME
Even though the Gateway National Recreation Area, which sprawls over a large swath of New York City and New Jersey, ranks among the National Park Service's most popular recreation spots, the agency has never made urban spaces like it a priority.
Federal financing for parks and recreation is still distributed in disproportionate amounts to the far bigger, yet more remote, expanses in the West, such as Glacier National Park, Yellowstone and the Grand Canyon.
Some parks advocates insist that if priorities do not change, urban parks could soon be overrun.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  PRAYERS AND FEAR FOR BUS CRASH VICTIMS
In the tightly knit, mostly Hispanic community along Bedford Avenue in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, as people huddled under umbrellas and awnings talking darkly about what they called "the tragedy:" a bus crash in which six of their neighbors were killed on the way to Action Park in New Jersey.
At the Rock of Horeb Church, the congregation said special prayers for the dead and the 47 injured, nearly all of whom lived within a few blocks of each other.
B3.
AFTER PEROT . . .
Many of the marooned followers of Ross Perot are moving through the customary stages of grief: denial, anger and acceptance.
And some appear stuck in denial, denying that they were ever so keen on the Texas billionaire.
Shortly before Mr.
Perot abandoned his efforts, volunteers had identified 50,000 supporters in New York State alone, among them many of New York's most influential men and women, who are now involved in a sort of political -- and psychological -- retrenchment.
B3.
PREACHING THE FAITH, MTV STYLE
Faith can work in mysterious ways in New York City, as when performers give up the search for fame to take up the search for souls.
The members of the Unbroken Chain Church in Manhattan dressed as prostitutes, homeless people and addicts and gathered under an abandoned train trestle in the graffiti-scarred Meatpacking District to shoot a music video of the 114th Psalm.
The music was written and the video performed and directed by congregants, some of whom said they were called by God off of Broadway stages.
Hell's Kitchen Journal, B3.
THE QUESTIONS REDISTRICTING RAISES
The chorus of politicians urging Representative Stephen J. Solarz not to seek re-election from a district fashioned for a Hispanic candidate was joined last week by the New York City Council President, Andrew J. Stein, who warned that if Mr.
Solarz won, "the resentment and anger within the new district could be explosive." But when Mr.
Stein was asked whether he would run himself under the same circumstances, his answer underscored the questions surrounding the issue.
Metro Matters, B4.
REGION  INDEPENDENTS CONVENE IN CONNECTICUT
A youthful political animal ventured out into the world of convention politics as the independent party founded by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. -- A Connecticut Party -- gathered in Wallingford, Conn., on Saturday night to endorse candidates, celebrate and see what it had created.
The two-year-old party -- an amalgam of former Republicans and Democrats, Weicker devotees and a healthy contingent of people simply fed up with two-party politics -- is positioning itself as more than just a personal political vehicle for the Governor, but rather as a permanent third party with its own agenda and hopes for a full slate of candidates.
B5.
A BROWN TIDE WASHES AWAY HOPE
The baymen of eastern Long Island have for centuries depended on the brief but lucrative scallop season in late summer to get them over the lean winter months, but the brown tide, which first surfaced in 1985 in a murky, dense cloud that spread over the bays embraced by the North and South Forks of Long Island, has continued to bloom in an erratic pattern, confusing marine biologists, frustrating environmentalists and devastating the baymens' way of life.
No one seems to have an exact explanation for the growth of the coffee-colored tide, which is caused by algae, but the some of the baymen believe it has something to do with people.
B5.
The Traffic Map B4


Political Memo; Baker as Campaign Director: Nothing to Gain but His Job
James A. Baker 3d headed home today, ending what is probably his last overseas trip as Secretary of State in this Administration.
It has been a melancholy journey.
Mr.
Baker and some of his closest aides seem as excited about moving from the State Department to the White House as a group of tourists being asked to transfer from the QE2 to a leaky barge.


Sanabu Journal; Heaviest Cross for Egypt's Copts: March of Islam
Daniel Samaan, a 26-year-old farmer, has not left his mud hovel to tend his fields for three months.
The last time he stood barefoot in the dark, fecund earth where he and his family have grown wheat and corn for generations, he collected the bodies of his uncle and five cousins, who had been slain by Islamic militants.


O.K. on the Self-Realization; What About the Economy?
As Sally Jessy Raphael sat in her New York apartment watching the final night of the Democratic convention, she had a shock of recognition.
All that talk about addiction, trauma, dysfunctional relationships, marital troubles, self-help and recovery sounded like the talk-show host's diet.
And there was Bill Clinton on the podium saying, "I love you," to his wife, and Roger Clinton saying, "I love you," to his brother and kissing his Alcoholics Anonymous good-behavior chip.


Musical Highlights Featuring Women
When ERIC CLAPTON, the guitarist-singer wrote "Wonderful Tonight," he had the grace and beauty of his wife in mind.
But television viewers of the Olympic Games will hear the song along with images of grace and beauty of another kind: female athletes doing flips across the floor and swinging on the parallel bars.
NBC Sports, Warner Brothers Music and Coca-Cola will join forces to present a hybrid of sports and contemporary music, sort of MTV meets the Olympics during the telecasts from Barcelona.


Caution: Don't Try This at Home


Reporter's Notebook; Blending Aquarius, Columbus And Faith
For the most part, the arts offerings at Expo '92 here are properly big and populist.
Except for the higher-flown events in the Teatro de la Maestranza, an opera house off the Expo grounds, most Expo arts are designed for a broad public, take place outdoors and compete successfully with the bustling cacophony of the world's fair itself.
On the surface, one of Expo's most unusual arts items filled that bill perfectly.
Entitled "Prayer for the Age of Aquarius," it was a two-hour ballet with oratorio-scaled musical forces: a Mahler-sized orchestra, four vocal soloists and chorus.


Editorial Notebook; The Television Time Bomb
For the toddlers, it's gangs of cartoon mice dynamiting a menacing cat.
Elementary schoolers sit rapt while superheroes wield special powers to dispatch evil.
And by the time they're in junior high, American kids regularly witness barroom fistfights, knifepoint rapes, drug-deal shootouts and terrorist attacks.
All on television, of course.
But for years parents have worried about the effects of such violence, fanciful as it may be, on developing minds.
Now a Seattle psychiatrist, Brandon Centerwall, offers a theory that, if corroborated by other researchers, suggests good reason for worry.


BARCELONA: SWIMMING HEADLINE&gt;Diebel Finds This Fast Lane Lined With Gold
elson Diebel, rebel with a medal, strutted and waved on the victory stand.
He did not sing along with "The Star-Spangled Banner," but the hyper young man with the overactive history managed to stand still for a full, respectful minute.
A swimming official handed him some flowers and Diebel dug his nose, his eyes, his earrings, his bald head and his bandana deep down into the stems and inhaled.


Pickpocket Parking
There's a stiff tax on parking in New York City garages and parking lots.
In Manhattan, daily parkers pay 18 1/4 percent.
The tax yields roughly $100 million a year, but could yield at least $30 million more if unscrupulous operators weren't skimming the tax into their own pockets.
The State Senate and Assembly have passed bills to snare evaders.
The Senate approved a strong bill unanimously.
By the time the Assembly acted last month, hostile garage owners had weakened it.
But either bill would be better than none.


Terese Pottruck, Henry A. Sachs
Terese Pamela Pottruck, a daughter of William and Dolores Weinman of Hicksville, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Henry Alan Sachs, a son of Dr.
Hersch and Juliette Sachs of Woodmere, L.I.
Cantor Bernard Fitch performed the ceremony at Westbury Manor in Westbury, L.I.
Mrs.
Sachs, 34 years old, is the director of management information systems in New York for the law firm of Baker &amp; McKenzie.
She graduated magna cum laude from the New York Institute of Technology at Old Westbury.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


New York Post Owner Says Financial Aid Deal Is Near
Peter S. Kalikow, the owner of The New York Post and a big real estate developer, said yesterday that he was close to reaching a deal that would provide an initial investment of about $50 million to pull himself and his real estate holdings out of bankruptcy.
He said that he expected to complete the deal in a few weeks and that it would be followed by a renewed bid for The Daily News.
The investors, whom Mr.
Kalikow did not identify, had agreed to provide financing for such an offer.


Marcie Gitlin, Bruce Solomon
Marcie Susan Gitlin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Gitlin of Bayside, Queens, was married yesterday to Bruce Randy Solomon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Solomon of Flushing, Queens.
Cantor Hilda Abrevaya officiated at a private residence in Manhattan.
Ms.
Gitlin, who is 35 years old and keeping her name, graduated from Cornell University.
She is to enter the Fashion Institute of Technology next month.
Her father retired as director of architecture and engineering at the New York State Urban Development Corporation in Manhattan.
Her mother, Roslyn K. Gitlin, also retired, was the editor of Alumnus, the alumni magazine of City College of New York.


Bill and Note Auctions Set
Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill and note markets, beginning with today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills, followed on Tuesday by an auction of two-year notes and on Wednesday an auction of five-year notes.
By late Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was 3.15 percent and on the six-month bill 3.23 percent.
Two-year and five-year notes were offered at prices to yield 4.27 percent and 5.69 percent, respectively.


NEXT MOVE YOURS, BAKER TELLS ARABS
When Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d set off on his weeklong swing through the Middle East, he declared that now that the Israeli Government was signaling a willingness to compromise, it was time for the Arabs to indicate some new flexibility as well.
But few such public signals came from the Arab side during Mr.
Baker's trip, which ended today after a two-day swing through Asia.


Lynn Oliver, Leader Of Jazz Orchestras And Educator, 68
Lynn Oliver, a band leader and jazz educator who taught several generations of musicians the art of studio performance, died on Thursday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 68 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, his wife, Ann, said.
Mr.
Oliver, a trombonist whose big band performed frequently in the New York metropolitan area, operated a studio for more than 30 years on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
The studio was the site of many rehearsals for recordings and concerts by musicians like Duke Ellington, Quincy Jones and Gerry Mulligan.


People
*
David J. Pecker, president and chief operating officer of Hachette Magazines Inc., New York, was named to the additional position of chief executive, succeeding Daniel Filipacchi, who will continue as chairman.


Machine Tool Orders Jump 31.1%
Orders for American-made machine tools jumped 31.1 percent last month from May's level, in another sign of economic growth in the United States, according to a report from an industry trade group.
The trade group, the Association for Manufacturing Technology, based in McLean, Va., calculated June's orders at $208.6 million, 20.6 percent above the June 1991 figures.


Griffin, Reilly Get U.S. Off to Fast Start
After a month of trials, box-offs and strenuous training camps in North Carolina and Florida, the United States boxing team began its Olympic competition today with impressive performances by Eric Griffin and Pepe Reilly.
Griffin, from Lafayette, La., and the world champion in the light-flyweight division, started off slowly against Fausto Mercedes of the Dominican Republic, but finished strongly to earn a 14-2 decision in the three-round bout.


Castro, in Seville, Is Heckled On a Visit to Cuba's Pavilion
Protesters shouting "Assassin!" disrupted an otherwise warm reception for President Fidel Castro of Cuba when he visited his country's pavilion today at Seville's universal exposition.


Barcelona Games Start, And Atlanta Is Staring
As millions watch the Olympics in Barcelona for the sheer pleasure of seeing great athletes in action, some Atlanta officials are looking beyond the drama of the Games for tips on everything from security to traffic flow.
The Summer Games will be in Atlanta four years from now.
And officials here are using the Spanish city as a guide not only to the nuts and bolts of running such an extravaganza but also on how to translate the euphoria of being an Olympic site into a chance to make long-needed city improvements -- improvements that one official said will be the "lasting legacy" of having the Games here.


World Economies


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Environmental Politics; Book by Gore Could Become a Campaign Issue, for Both Sides
Senator Al Gore published a best-selling book seven months ago that is the most graphic analysis of the world's environmental condition and the most advanced plan for economic solutions that has ever been written by an American politician.
Reviews at the time were favorable, commending the book's "thoughtfulness" and "style."


BARCELONA
SMASHING DEBUT
The American basketball team routed Angola, 116-48, but Charles Barkley created some ill will with an intentional elbow to a slightly built Angolan.
ATHLETE'S FATHER DIES
The father of a U.S. swimmer from Maplewood, N.J., collapsed and died Saturday night after watching his son in the opening ceremonies.
SOUTH AFRICA RETURNS


The 'Pentath' Who? Americans May Ask
It is an irony that the modern pentathlon, the one event created by the founder of the modern Games, Baron Pierre de Coubertin, receives little recognition in the United States.
Since 1912, the event has been a prestigious one for Europeans, with its unusual combination of riding, swimming, cross-country running, fencing and shooting.


Converse's View Of Magic Johnson
Responding further to Magic Johnson's request last week to end his endorsement relationship with Converse Inc., the shoe company sharpened its criticism of him and said commercials featuring him would continue to run as planned.
Gib Ford, Converse's president in North Reading, Mass., said Friday that despite Mr.
Johnson's remarks that he was unhappy with Converse's advertising and marketing strategies, "the real issue is over money."


'Progress' but No Accord In 3-Nation Trade Talks
Despite a push to conclude their negotiations for a North American free-trade agreement, senior trade officials from the United States, Canada and Mexico failed here this weekend to reach agreements on a series of important issues.
The officials said that the pace of their talks had quickened and that they had advanced considerably on some topics.
And underscoring what they called a new momentum, they agreed to meet again within a week.


INSIDE
Ruling Party Wins in Japan
Recovering from a big setback, Japan's governing party won a majority of seats in parliamentary elections.
Prime Minister Miyazawa's office now seems secure.
Page A2.
Trade Pact Unresolved
Despite a push to conclude a free-trade agreement, trade ministers from the United States, Canada and Mexico failed to reach agreements on a series of crucial issues.
Page D1. 6 Killed in Bus Crash


New Federal Law Offers the Disabled New Opportunities


A Tiny Brown Alga Outwits Scientists and Threatens Baymen
Tom Lester, who has been fishing the bays of eastern Long Island for more than 50 years, eased his boat away from the dock, pleased to see that there were no signs in his wake of the coffee-colored brown tide, caused by algae that are wiping out most of what is left of this year's scallop crop.
"This time a year ago, we thought the crop might come back," he said, heading out of Three Mile Harbor into Gardiners Bay.
"But the brown tide wiped it out again, with this year's seed along with it."


Water Good Enough To Avoid Sickness
Because so many sailors became ill in a regatta off Barcelona last year -- presumably from pollution in the water -- the bacteria level of the courses in the Mediterranean is checked daily.
One Olympic official contends: "We have three levels of acceptance: good, very good and excellent. All our readings have been very good to excellent." . . .
The weather will be sweltering for the outdoor athletes: a temperature-humidity index of 110 degrees.
The average temperature for two weeks is expected to be 90, along with a stifling 90 percent humidity.


Heiress to L.L. Bean Champions Conservatism in Race for Congress
The name is Bean, L. L. Bean.
But Linda Lorraine Bean, the granddaughter and an heir of the founder of the outdoor clothing company that is practically synonymous with Maine, is not selling boots or down-filled jackets.
Instead, Ms.
Bean is promoting her conservative philosophy, which she hopes will enable her to triumph over Representative Thomas H. Andrews, a liberal Democrat, in the Congressional race this fall for the district here that includes President Bush's summer home in Kennebunkport.


Lillian V. Oppenheimer, 93, Dies; Introduced Americans to Origami
Lillian Vorhaus Oppenheimer, who made origami, the intricate Japanese art of paper-folding, popular in the United States, died on Friday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 93 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died after a heart operation, her family said.


Review/Television; Believing the Children, Not the Father
In "Promise Not to Tell," the producer Rhea Gavry plunges into the heavy emotions stirred by charges of sexual abuse, especially when they involve children and parents.
This hourlong PBS documentary takes viewers to a suburb of Salt Lake City, where a few years ago a father was tried for sexually assaulting his 12-year-old daughter and 10-year-old son.
Although the police said they could find no evidence against the man -- "There was nothing there," says one officer -- a therapist hired by the children's mother became convinced from her sessions with them that they had been abused and pressed the authorities to bring charges.
Prosecutors say the case relied largely on evidence that she elicited.
The children's courtroom accounts, heard but not seen, include details of what one calls "bad touches" to breasts, buttocks, vagina.


Male and Female
To the Editor:
Referring to this nation's Founding Fathers (column, July 4), Russell Baker writes: "All men were created equal, they had said, ignoring women." Mr.
Baker is poking fun, but the point bears clarifying anyway.


Review/Music; At a Cimarosa Opera, Talk Is Dominated By Musings on Mozart
Domenico Cimarosa's "Secret Marriage" played on Friday night at the Glimmerglass Opera, but at intermission and afterward, audience members talked mostly of Mozart.
Describing one composer in terms of the other made some sense.
"The Secret Marriage" and "The Magic Flute" were written at almost the same time.
They share a vocabulary and each is being performed here, on Friday and today.
The comparison also made no sense at all.
Indeed, hearing the first opera while anticipating the second led more naturally to a picture of diverging sensibilities: Cimarosa, one of the last Classical composers, Mozart, the first true Romantic, the two traveling in opposite directions.


No Reagan Indictment Is Seen
An aide to former President Ronald Reagan today disputed an article in The Washington Post that said the independent counsel investigating the Iran-contra scandal was considering indicting Mr.
Reagan.
"We have been assured by the independent counsel that President Reagan is not a target of that investigation," said Mr.
Reagan's spokeswoman, Catherine Goldberg, in a statement sent to newspapers and agencies.


QUESTION BOX
Aaron's Top Rankings
Q.
An answer last month reported that Henry Aaron is baseball's career leader in intentional walks, as well as home runs.
Are there any other significant career offensive categories in which Aaron ranks first?
A.There are at least three others, all centered on his first-rate ability to put bat on ball and ball over, off and to fence.
Aaron's 755 home runs, 41 more than Babe Ruth, form the core of his career leadership in extra-base hits (1,477), total bases (6,856) and runs batted in (2,297).


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Japanese central bank cut its discount rate to 3.25 percent in an effort to invigorate the economy and shore up the sagging stock market in Tokyo.
The half-point reduction in the key rate was taken just before the market opened.
Analysts said over the weekend that such an action would be a huge risk.  [ Page D1. ]
Efforts to wrap up a North American free-trade agreement failed this weekend.
But top trade officials from the United States, Canada and Mexico said that the pace of their talks had quickened and that had made considerable progress on some topics.
They agreed to meet again within a week.  [ D1. ] The Economy
Billions of dollars of computer software are stolen every year often by ordinary people with help from their friends.
They are taking advantage of the ease with which computer data can be copied on disks.
Many consumer appear to believe that software is in the public domain.
Some in the industry argue that the thefts inhibits the development of new software.  [ A1. ]


Can the Poor No Longer Get a Good Education?; Racial Politics
To the Editor:
Your July 7 report on CUNY ignores ethnic and racial politics in the university's management, particularly in the selection of its senior officers.
Too often, appointments are based on ethnicity, not academic or administrative distinction.


Mets Turn Revival Into New Era of Stagnation
He might have been uneasy on the dugout bench moments before, but in his office chair after the game, Jeff Torborg didn't squirm.
The manager's conservative ninth-inning strategy had failed.
The Mets had lost, 1-0, to the Padres.
There would, though, be no apology from him.
"I'd do it that way every day of the week," Torborg said.


Wetsuit Is Creating Quite a Big Splash
When United States swimmer HANS DERSCH stepped onto the catwalk at the Bernat Picornell pool to compete in the 100-meter breast-stroke preliminaries yesterday, he set an Olympic fashion precedent that was not altogether welcomed by other nations.
Dersch, like teammate DOUG GJERTSON in the 200-meter freestyle and all the American women competing yesterday, wore a Speedo full-body swimsuit that looks like a wetsuit without arms or legs.
The suit is intended to reduce friction in the water, because the fiber is less resistant than skin in the water.
Several nations complained about the suit, saying that they did not have the time to train in it properly.
The Germans threatened to protest, but did not.
In the case of Dersch, there was no need: He failed to qualify for the finals, finishing in 1 minute 3.14 seconds, third place in his heat.


Iraqi Press Does Not Mention Accord on Standoff
Iraq's Government-controlled radio and television carried no mention today of the agreement in New York apparently ending President Saddam Hussein's longest and most bitter standoff with the United Nations Security Council since the Persian Gulf war.
Instead, the evening television news showed Mr.
Hussein distributing medals to a few of his supporters and saying, "The mother of battles is not yet over."
Demonstrations against the United Nations continued while newspapers vowed defiance and renewed Iraq's claim to Kuwait.
This morning, protesters gathered again outside the hotels where United Nations arms inspectors and aid workers are staying, chanting insults, waving banners and carrying large portraits of Mr.
Hussein.


Pope Makes First Appearance Since His Surgery


In a Peru Shantytown, Terror Reigns
In this shantytown, where Lima's milky winter sky blurs into beige desert hills and raw adobe houses, Pascuala Rosado Cornejo lives in her house as a prisoner, trying to talk her way out of a death sentence.
Receiving visitors in her living room, which has a dirt floor, cardboard walls and a ceiling of woven reeds, Mrs.
Rosado, Huaycan's highest elected official, on Saturday carefully explained that her community's new civilian defense corps fought crime, not the Shining Path guerrillas.


FETAL-TISSUE BANK CANNOT MEET GOAL AGENCY MEMO SAYS
In May, when the Bush Administration announced a plan to collect fetal tissue for research into Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases and other ailments, officials stated that they could supply all that would be needed without using tissue from induced abortions.
But newly obtained memorandums from officials at the National Institutes of Health show that the Administration greatly exaggerated the amount of fetal tissue that its storage bank could obtain from miscarriages and from ectopic pregnancies, in which the fertilized egg develops outside the uterus.


Homecoming for Students of Nonviolence


Pin Mania Moving Behind Closed Doors
That requisite Olympic phenomenon known as Pin Mania is in full bloom here, even though the scene keeps shifting by the moment.
Stores and souvenir stands throughout the area have plenty on hand, and a dozen or so private collectors have set up on the benches outside the main press center at the foot of Montjuic, site of many of the events.
But the collectors are only being permitted to trade their pins, not sell them for profit, so when police officers see money changing hands, they shoo away the offenders.


CHRONICLE
"Senator, I think this is the media request of the year," FRANK COLEMAN, Senator ALFONSE M. D'AMATO's press secretary, said the other day as he relayed a request to the New York State Republican for an appearance in a movie.
The Senator laughed, he said.
But tomorrow Mr.
D'Amato will go before the cameras for a film being shot in Washington this summer called "Dave." Other Senators who have agreed to cameo performances are DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN, Democrat of New York; ALAN K. SIMPSON, Republican of Wyoming; LLOYD BENTSEN, Democrat of Texas; NANCY LANDON KASSEBAUM, Republican of Kansas, and HOWELL HEFLIN, Democrat of Alabama.


At Conde Nast, Newhouse Maintains Loose Reins With a Tight Grip
Conde Nast is a company of stunning contradictions.
Through its 12 lush magazines, which include Vogue and Vanity Fair, it preaches the gospel of glamour to millions of followers around the world.
It is known for its spare-no-expenses fashion photographs, its glittering galas like Vogue's recent 100th anniversary celebration and its high-visibility editors like Tina Brown, whose recent move from Vanity Fair to The New Yorker was a coup de theatre that left the magazine industry reeling.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B6-7.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; Democrats Have Money Machine Up and Running
Reaping the rewards of the largest post-convention popularity surge since measurements were taken, Democratic officials say July is quickly becoming the strongest month in this election season for raising money and one of the best in the party's history.
The Democrats expect to raise more than $8 million this month, compared with $3.5 million in July four years ago.
And if they keep up the pace, the Democratic fund-raisers will set a record for a Presidential challenger.


Critic's Notebook; Waning Shock Waves From the Outrageous
As a performance concept, outrageousness is fast becoming dull.
There's a problem with the shout-and-shock school of entertainment: how do you keep topping what you've just done?
Television's latest evidence can be found, tonight at 11:15, on HBO's "Sandra After Dark," starring Sandra Bernhard as frantic party hostess, determined to control and upstage anyone and anything in her vicinity.
Ms.
Bernhard pulls off the not inconsiderable trick of making Roseanne Arnold, one guest, look almost demure.
In what is supposed to be her own Manhattan apartment, Ms.
Bernhard is first discovered having her hair done and shrieking, "You're trying to make me look like a drag queen!" Entering the party in a black-sequined see-through robe suitable for Vampira of Coconut Grove, she listens to her trendy guests make small -- very small -- talk: "I just finished 'Malcolm X,' " says an actor; "Hi, this is Damian; he was on my show," says a blonde with hunk in tow.
Spotting Roseanne and Tom Arnold in a corner (Ms. Bernhard has done guest spots on "Roseanne"), the hostess assures this comic actress, "If you look any hotter, I'm going to sleep with you." Mrs.
Arnold responds with an oh-you-kid giggle.


Disney Signs Up Merchant And Ivory
Like politics, the movie business makes strange bedfellows.
But even in Hollywood terms, the marriage between Walt Disney Studios and the team of Ismail Merchant and James Ivory is one of the town's oddest matches.
The marriage, disclosed over the weekend, seems, well, weird because the Disney Company and the Merchant-Ivory team have entirely different tastes and styles: relentlessly commercial versus relentlessly highbrow.


Sheehan's Surge Forces A Playoff With Inkster
Reacting to an 11th-hour lightning delay as if electrified with inspiration, Patty Sheehan courageously birdied the final two holes today to tie Juli Inkster after 72 holes of the 47th United States Women's Open.
Sheehan and Inkster, longtime rivals and friends seeking to win the most prestigious championship in women's golf for the first time, will play together on a drenched Oakmont Country Club course for the third straight day Monday in an 18-hole playoff beginning at 11 A.M.


In Victory, Afghans Can't Find Peace
One of the first things the new leaders in Kabul set about doing after rebel guerrillas occupied Kabul in April was to erect a blue-and-white plastic sign at the Khyber Pass reading, "Welcome to the Islamic State of Afghanistan."
Shortly afterward, movie theaters in Kabul were shut, liquor was banned and women were told to cover their heads.
Since then, little else resembling governance has taken root.


Can the Poor No Longer Get a Good Education?; Blow to Health Care
To the Editor:
Your July 7 article on the City University of New York describes the debate about how CUNY can best meet the city's needs.
CUNY plays a major role in educating the city's health work force.
With degrees in 38 health disciplines and about 2,000 graduates each year, CUNY educates more health professionals for the city than any other institution.


Even a Loss In the Ring Is Magical To Mandela
Ultimately, the sense of time, place and history were too much for Abram Thwala to shake.
This afternoon, the 22-year-old light flyweight became the first South African fighter in 32 years to represent his country in an Olympics, and it was clear that he was tied tightly to his nerves.
"I thought he was tense and he didn't loosen up," said Dan Bushney, the South African coach.
"Of course, the Spanish chappie was very clever. He moved a lot, wasn't easy to hit."


LONG IMPASSE ENDS
Iraq agreed today to allow United Nations arms inspectors into a Government building in Baghdad, ending a 21-day standoff and removing the diplomatic thorn that in recent days prompted the United States and its allies to consider military action against Iraq.
The United Nations official in charge of disarming Iraq under the terms of the Persian Gulf war cease-fire, Rolf Ekeus, announced that he would join a new team of inspectors in Baghdad on Tuesday, and that they had been assured of full access to search for evidence of missile-building activity.


Review/Film; Intergalactic Despot Wears Toupees
"Nice little planet you have here," says Marge Nelson (Teri Garr) to Tod Spengo (Jon Lovitz), the intergalactic despot who has whisked her to his tiny kingdom somewhere in outer space to become his wife.
"It's not the size of your planet, it's how you use it," the vain, nasty emperor snaps back defensively.


Japan's Central Bank Cuts Key Interest Rate
In a growing atmosphere of crisis surrounding the economy and the stock market, the Bank of Japan announced early this morning that it was lowering a key interest rate in response to what it described as a "severe adjustment process" in the economy.
The central bank said it was reducing its official discount rate, which it charges banks for short-term loans, to 3.25 percent from 3.75 percent, effective immediately.


A Stunning Reverse In Zmeskal's Opener
It took all of 10 seconds for Kim Zmeskal to make an unforgettable first impression at the Barcelona Olympics.
Completing her first acrobatic move on the balance beam, her first of the four apparatuses, she fell off.
This was hardly to be expected, something along the lines of Rickey Henderson getting picked off first base.
Zmeskal is a three-time United States gymnastics champion and the 1991 world champion.
She entered the Olympics as the leading challenger to Svetlana Boginskaya of the Unified Team, the grande dame of contemporary gymnastics.


Write Roe Into Law
Congress is about to take up what may be the most important piece of Federal legislation since the landmark civil rights laws of the 1960's.
It is the Freedom of Choice Act of 1992.
That act would establish, in
statutory
law, the same reproductive freedom that women were guaranteed in
constitutional
law when the Supreme Court applied Roe v. Wade in undiluted form, from 1973 to 1989.
When four of the nine Supreme Court Justices announced in Planned Parenthood of Pennsylvania v.
Casey that they were ready to overrule Roe and let states completely outlaw abortion, it became absolutely clear why the possible re-election of President Bush -- on a party platform calling for the appointment of anti-Roe judges -- makes it mandatory for Congress to enact the Freedom of Choice Act if women are to be protected.


A Taste of Urban Violence Sours A Quiet Town's Sense of Security
It was the type of crime that should have happened somewhere else.
For years now, Burlington, with its attractive mix of small-town atmosphere and big-city amenities, has drawn newcomers expressly because it did not seem infected by the ills of urban America.
But for many of the city's 39,000 residents, that cherished perception of safety vanished over one violent weekend in May.
Left behind in the wake of drug arrests and a killing was proof that urban America had arrived.


Our Airlines Don't Need Subsidized Foreign Competition
To the Editor:
"Friendlier Skies in Europe?" (editorial, June 27) applauds the European Community's decision to deregulate air travel and foresees a time when European airlines compete with United States lines within this country.


Books of The Times; Sheehan Turns to Peace in Vietnam
After the War Was Over  Hanoi and Saigon  By Neil Sheehan  Illustrated. 131 pages.
Random House. $17.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; BUSH FINDS WAY TO DISCUSS ANTI-DRUG FIGHT ON TV
For months, President Bush and his aides have complained that he could not get enough television time to talk about domestic issues.
Today, he found a way.
Arriving at the White House in his Marine helicopter, Mr.
Bush strode up to a lectern where he was to deliver a statement on Iraq.
Some television networks were carrying the event live and Mr.
Bush began talking -- about drugs.


A Swimmer Wins First Gold Medal for U.S.


Barkley's Elbow Fouls a U.S. Rout
Not surprisingly, Charles Barkley got into the Olympic spirit this afternoon by smashing an intentional elbow into the chest of the skinniest member of the Angolan team.
Leave it to the 250-pound Barkley to pick on a 174-pound economics student from a third-world, war-torn nation who has spent many a Wednesday night back home in Luanda searching the television dial in search of his favorite forward from the National Basketball Association.


Dance in Review
Dances for Wave Hill  Various Choreographers  Wave Hill, the Bronx


Beth E. Halper, Richard S. Sklarin
Beth Ellen Halper, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvyn H. Halper of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married yesterday to Richard Stephen Sklarin, a son of Phillip Sklarin of Nanuet, N.Y., and the late Norma Sklarin.
Rabbi Jeffrey Sirkman officiated at Le Chateau restaurant in North Salem, N.Y.
Mrs.
Sklarin, 26 years old, is a drug-abuse-prevention counselor in Mamaroneck, N.Y,. for the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York.
She graduated cum laude from the State University of New York at Albany and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Wien, Malkin &amp; Bettex.
Her mother, Phyllis J. Halper, is a travel agent with Lakeside Travel Inc. in Silver Lake, N.Y.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of July 26: MONDAY  Armstrong World Inds ARCO Duke Pwr Co Fort Dearborn Income Georgia Pac Corp Howell Corp Kennametal Inc La Z Boy Chair Co Midwest Res Inc Philadelphia Elec Co Stone Container Corp United Dominion Inds Watkins
-


City Dwellers Want U.S. Park Funds to Go East
At first glance, James Townsend looks like anything but a man who spends a lot of time in the forest.
Tall and gangly, he wears a diamond stud in his left ear, keeps a Walkman tucked into his knapsack, and has a summer wardrobe that runs to mesh jerseys, Reeboks and a Lakers cap.
The 21-year-old Mr.
Townsend has always lived in the Bronx.
He wouldn't know a Winnebago from a Wurlitzer, and while he says he'd be glad to visit Yosemite some day, it is nowhere near the top of his wish list.


Lights! Camera! Gospel! (Sinners Repent, Take 1)
IT was a familiar scene: prostitutes, homeless people and addicts gathered under the rusted girders of an abandoned train trestle in lower Manhattan on Saturday night.
Thing was, these people were dancing.
And singing the 114th Psalm.
Faith can work in mysterious ways in New York City, as when performers give up the search for fame to take up the search for souls.
Members of a tiny Manhattan church, the singers were using their talents to portray sin in order to save others from it, shooting a music video against a graffiti-scarred cinderblock wall in the Meatpacking District.


Olympics Triplecast To Stay Ad Free
Does "commercial free" mean "advertising free"?
For the Olympics Triplecast, the pay-per-view coverage of the 1992 summer games, it originally did not.
But now it will.
NBC and the Cablevision Systems Corporation, which are co-sponsoring the unusual experiment in selling three cable channels' worth of Olympics coverage for $125, planned to run 20-second sponsor identifications six times a day during each of the 15 days of coverage.
The two minutes of messages every 24 hours, which would have been similar to the "brought-to-you-by" identifications that run on PBS, might have surprised and dismayed viewers who had subscribed to the Triplecast because it was promoted extensively as "commercial free."


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Active Noise and Vibration Technologies Inc., 3 million common shares.
Paine Webber Inc.
Austin's International Inc., 1 million common shares. Noble Investment Co.


Blood Banks Vigilant But Vouch for Safety
Reports of patients who appear to have AIDS but are not infected with the virus that normally causes it have created concern and confusion at the nation's blood banks.
But officials there say they see no immediate need to change the guidelines for donating or receiving blood.
Even if research determines that a new AIDS-like illness is caused by a microbe that cannot be detected now in donated blood, experts say a high degree of protection should be provided by the precautions already in place to screen out blood donations contaminated by H.I.V., the human immunodeficiency virus, which is known to cause AIDS.
Among the small number of cases described, the new condition mainly afflicts people in groups known to be at risk for AIDS, and it seems to be relatively rare.


Fu Shows Why 13 (Years) Exceeds 11 (Opponents)
Performing on a mountain with the rest of this city as a backdrop, Fu Mingxia, the 13-year-old from China who attempts the most difficult dives in the Olympics, led the 12 female qualifiers today in the platform event.
Because of the extra points Fu amasses as a result of the difficulty of her attempts, she appears to have a clear advantage over second-place Mary Ellen Clark, a 29-year-old from Fort Lauderdale, Fla., going into the final on Monday.


Behind an 8-0 Victory, Cuba Joins the Field
Back when Victor Mesa was 19, which was 13 years ago, he developed a fondness for uniform No. 32.
"Many famous athletes wore that number," Mesa, the Cuban center fielder, recalled today after an 8-0 victory over the Dominican Republic in the baseball competition of the 1992 Summer Games.


Sharpton Brings Surprises to 4-Way Senate Race; As a Candidate, He's Restyled and Determined About His Political Goals and Impact
For Patricia Irvin, one of the handful of black partners who practice law on Wall Street, it was a revelation, hearing the Rev.
Al Sharpton talk about his run for the United States Senate a few weeks ago at a forum for members of her old-line firm, Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy.
In place of the negative picture gleaned from years of news accounts of his protests, Ms.
Irvin said, she heard someone who was "clearly very smart, and very concerned about the black community, but also concerned about a lot of broader issues that affect our society, and he talked about them in a very articulate way."


Indurain Wins Tour Again, and It's No Contest
Looking to the manner born, Miguel Indurain rode regally into Paris today as the winner of the Tour de France for a second successive year.
Once again, it was not close.


Company Invests in Human Assets: Disabled Employees in Regular Jobs
With his one eye, Bert Smith cannot detect anything clearer than large dark forms against bright light.
He listens with his fingers, placing a hand over the hands of people who speak in sign language.
His voice is strong and emphatic, but his speech is severely slurred.
Yet Mr.
Smith plays his workbench with the deftness of a concert pianist.
He is part of a crew that makes photographic film-processing machines, as big as dishwashers, and his current task is assembling ventilation sections that fit on the backs of the machines.
His fingers dance along a four-foot-long aluminum rack, inspecting notches and holes where he will insert bolts, secure fans and attach the wiring.


U.N. Suggests Airdrops to Bosnia Town
After a dangerous and ultimately unsuccessful attempt to deliver food and medical supplies by road to the besieged city of Gorazde, in the deepest mountains of eastern Bosnia, United Nations relief officials here said today that they would ask Western nations to consider airdrops of supplies.
The officials, including Fabrizio Hochschild, chief representative in Sarajevo of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, emphasized that the idea of airdrops was still preliminary.
They said a major drawback was that the airdrops would take place over areas where there would be no United Nations ground troops for security.


Can the Poor No Longer Get a Good Education?
To the Editor:
Your July 7 report on the City University of New York presents the plans of Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds to make the nation's largest urban university, in her words, "more effective, more scholarly, more supportive of its faculty, more supportive of its students." In closing, you quote me on the financing of CUNY by New York State without adequately connecting what I said with CUNY's mission to provide high-quality education to poor and minority students.


A Town Mourns A Hero's Father
At the Prospect Presbyterian Church in this quiet community about 20 miles from New York, the congregation this morning let out an audible gasp when the minister announced that their neighbor, Peter Karnaugh, had died at the opening ceremonies of the Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, only six days before his son Ron was to swim in the Games.
A few blocks away, in a real estate office on the town's main street, Marie Almagno, a Maplewood resident for 10 years who had never met Peter Karnaugh, said that she "burst into tears" when she heard news of his death on television.


Review/Theater; Getting Carried Away With Clowning Around
Crucial to the revitalization of the circus arts in what has been called the New Vaudeville has been a deepening of the relationship between performer and audience.
In lowering the traditional fourth wall between actor and spectator, cutting-edge performers have begun to describe their techniques, theorize about their work and barge aggressively into the audience.
David Shiner, who appeared at Alice Tully Hall on Friday and Saturday evenings with his special guests, Bill Irwin and the Red Clay Ramblers, goes further than most in testing the limits of that relationship.
His clown personality, which is far closer to Charlie Chaplin's than to Emmett Kelly's, is no icon of wistful sensitivity but a cantankerous practical joker.
Audience members he accosts during a performance are commandeered in the theatrical equivalent of a rough-and-tumble silent film.


Dream Team Reaching New Heights
How big, and bad, is the United States Olympic basketball team?
Both questions, believe it or not, might be considered unanswered.
The first one has to do with the players' actual heights.
Long after the United States beat Angola, 116-48, today, it was noticed that the official American roster lists almost all of the players in shorter heights than they are listed for the National Basketball Association.


Yankees Stranded With 5-6 Road Trip
At the end of the afternoon, and at the end of just another so-so road trip, the Yankees packed their bags and tried to sort out their feelings.
But even that was difficult.
Eleven games turned into just five victories.
They beat the Oakland A's but couldn't beat the California Angels.
They had sweep on their minds against the Seattle Mariners but wound up with a split of four games.


Iraq Is Said to Rebuild a Big Part Of Its War-Damaged Oil Industry
Fourteen months after the end of the Persian Gulf war, Iraq has "rehabilitated a significant portion of its oil producing, exporting and refining capability," according to a report based on a three-week inspection of Iraqi oil installations devastated by allied bombing.
The account in Petroleum Intelligence Weekly, a New York-based newsletter, parallels several others from Iraqis and Jordanians in the last few months saying reconstruction efforts, financed by multibillion-dollar slush funds still held by Iraq largely in Switzerland, have gone a long way to produce spare parts for Iraq, helping improve food distribution and repairs of roads, bridges, electric grids and potable water services.


Ruling Party Wins in Japan Vote But Victory Is Diluted by Apathy
Japan's governing Liberal Democratic Party rebounded from its worst setback in post-war history, winning more than half the seats in a parliamentary election on Sunday and apparently securing Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa's hold on office.
But the victory was ambiguous, filled with signs that voters were returning to the conservative party fold more because of a perceived lack of alternatives than because of enthusiasm.


Third Party Celebrates Its Second Year
A youthful political animal ventured out into the world of convention politics as the independent party founded by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. -- A Connecticut Party -- gathered here tonight to endorse candidates, celebrate and see what it had created.
The two-year-old party -- an amalgam of former Republicans and Democrats, Weicker devotees and a healthy contingent of people simply fed up with two-party politics -- is positioning itself as more than just a personal political vehicle for the Governor, but rather as a permanent third party with its own agenda and hopes for a full slate of candidates.


AIDS-Like Cases Stir Concern, Not Panic
It cannot be said that a panic has followed the reports of a mysterious virus and unexplained illnesses across the Atlantic Ocean.
Ten years into the AIDS epidemic, many people are just too smart, too skeptical and too numb to be easily shocked or terrified.
The news from the AIDS conference last week in Amsterdam certainly did not blindside James Baggett, who is 31 years old, gay and H.I.V.-negative.
AIDS, he said, has been "the background music" to his coming out and his coming of age.
To learn that about 30 patients with a disease that resembles AIDS have tested negative for H.I.V. merely added some static.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; Even in College, Gore Watched the Camera
It should come as no surprise that Senator Al Gore won high marks for his skill at playing to the cameras on his maiden tour as the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee.
Long before he was elected to Congress in 1976, long before he became a newspaper reporter, Mr.
Gore studied television and the Presidency.
In 1969, Mr.
Gore seized on the topic for his senior thesis at Harvard College: "The Impact of Television on the Conduct of the Presidency, 1947-1969." Earlier Politicians Recalled


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  IRAQ YIELDS ON INSPECTIONS
Iraq agreed to allow United Nations arms inspectors into a Government building in Baghdad, ending a 21-day standoff and removing the diplomatic thorn that had recently prompted the United States and its allies to consider military action.
A1  BUSH SAYS HUSSEIN 'CAVED IN'
President Bush said he was dissatisfied with Iraq's agreement to permit an arms search at a ministry.
But he called the Iraqi President a "bully" who finally "caved in." A6  Iraqi television makes no mention of the accord with the U.N.
A6  A report says Iraq has regained much of its ability to export oil.
A7  SUBDUED, BAKER FLIES HOME
James Baker headed home, ending what might be his last overseas trip as Secretary of State in the Bush Administration.
He did not seem buoyed by reports that he will take over the President's campaign.
A1  Few signals that Arabs are ready to compromise with Israel.
A7  U.N.
SEEKS AIRDROP IN BOSNIA
After a dangerous and futile effort to deliver food by road to the besieged city of Gorazde, United Nations relief officials in Bosnia said they would ask Western nations to consider airdropping supplies.
A3  FILES ON SOUTH AFRICAN TORTURE
South Africa's most prominent independent pathologist accused the police of a pattern of torturing and killing prisoners.
A5  ISLAM BUT NO ORDER IN KABUL
Movie theaters have been shut and liquor has been banned in the Afghan capital, but the Muslim factions that took the city in April after a 14-year civil war have not succeeded in governing peaceably.
A3  COWED BY THE SHINING PATH
The terror in a Peruvian shantytown started July 15, when President Fujimori praised its self-defense patrol for standing up to guerrillas.
A5  RULING PARTY WINS IN JAPAN
Japan's governing Liberal Democratic Party rebounded from its worst setback in postwar history, winning more than half the seats in a parliamentary election.
A2  Sanabu Journal: Coptic Christians are victims of violence.
A4  Mass grave reported found in Zimbabwe.
A7  National A8-13  FETAL TISSUE PLAN IS FAULTED
Memorandums by officials at the National Institutes of Health questioned whether the Bush Administration's proposed fetal tissue bank could provide enough tissue for most of the experiments scientists would like to do.
A1  HIGH COST OF SOFTWARE THEFT
People who would not steal a book or cheat on a test seem to have no qualms about obtaining software illegally, even though Federal law is clear that in almost all cases it is illegal to make copies of software.
This thievery costs software companies billions of dollars.
A1  YEAR OF THE CONFESSION
This seems to be the year of the political confessional, at least for the Democrats, as Governor Clinton and Senator Gore bare their inner thoughts.
A1  GOOD TIME FOR DEMOCRATS
Reaping the rewards of the largest post-convention popularity surge on record, Democratic officials say July is quickly becoming the strongest month in this election season for raising money.
A10  GORE'S BOOK SCRUTINIZED
In the days since Senator Gore was nominated to be Governor Clinton's running mate, his recent book on the environment has come under a new wave of scrutiny.
A11  Senator Gore was a student of TV's influence on elections.
A11  Vice President Quayle took the G.O.P. campaign to the races.
A10  WORKING WITH THE DISABLED
Under the Americans With Disabilities Act, employers must now give the disabled the same opportunities as other workers, and many executives are concerned about costs.
But a handful of companies that employ a lot of disabled workers have lessons to offer.
A8  CONTENTIOUS RACE IN MAINE
An heir of the founder of L.L.
Bean, the company that is practically synonymous with Maine, is promoting her conservative philosophy in her campaign for Congress.
A8  ATLANTA'S OLYMPIC TASK
As millions watch the Olympics in Barcelona for the sheer pleasure of seeing great athletes in action, officials in Atlanta, the next site of the games, are looking for tips on everything from security to traffic.
A13  URBAN ILLS IN A SMALL CITY
Burlington, Vt., has drawn newcomers because it did not seem to have the ills of urban America.
But now drug arrests and a murder have shattered the city's image.
A13  An aide disputed a report that Ronald Reagan might be indicted.
A8  A school board plans to punish students for antigay taunts.
A12  Man with H. I. V. challenges U. S. Entry ban.
A12  Metro Digest B1  PARKS WHERE PEOPLE ARE
Urban parks like Gateway National Recreation Area in New York and New Jersey are among the National Park Service's most popular recreation spots.
But the agency has never made such urban spaces a priority, and Federal financing is still distributed in disproportionate amounts to the far bigger, yet more remote, expanses in the West.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C15-18  A deal between Disney and Merchant-Ivory.
C15  A musical extravaganza at Expo '92.
C15  Theater: Carried away clowning around.
C15  Film: "Mom and Dad Save the World." C18  Music: "The Secret Marriage" at Glimmerglass Opera.
C15  Word and Image: Trying to shock.
B6  "Promise Not to Tell," a program on child abuse.
B6  Neil Sheehan on Vietnam.
C18  Sports C1-14  DIEBEL GETS FIRST U.S.
GOLD
Nelson Diebel became the first United States swimmer to win a gold medal in the 100-meter breast-stroke since the 1976 Olympics.
The 21-year-old Diebel, capturing the first gold medal for the United States at Barcelona, set an Olympic record of 1 minute 1.50 seconds despite a sore shoulder.
C1.
SHEEHAN'S SURGE FORCES PLAYOFF
After a long rain delay, Patty Sheehan birdied the last two holes at the Oakmont Country Club in Pennsylvania to force an 18-hole playoff with Julie Inkster today for the United States Women's Open.
C3.
Olympics: Barkley's elbow fouls U.S. rout.
C1  Strong Cuban start in baseball.
C6  U. S. basketball team awaits Croatia.
C6  Fu, at 13, leads divers.
C6  TV Sports C6  2 Americans advance in boxing.
C8  Last Olympics for Karolyi?
C8  Stunning reverse for Zmeskal.
C8  Even loss in ring is magical to Mandela.
C8  Shock in Jersey over a death in Barcelona.
C9  Thompson says she "choked." C9  Australian wins cycling gold.
C11  Baseball: Mets blanked again by Padres.
C5  Yanks end trip on losing note.
C5  Another milestone for Ryan.
C5  Braves' streak ended by Pirates.
C5  Column: Anderson on death at opening cermony.
C1  Cycling: Indurain wins Tour de France again.
C3  Features: Sidelines C12  Question Box C14  Obituaries D8  Adm.
Paul P. Blackburn Jr., Head of Seventh Fleet in Vietnam.
Mary Wells, pop singer.
Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials  Solving Europe's refugee crisis.
How your tax dollars arm felons.
Pickpocket parking.
David Anderson: TV time bomb.
Letters  John R. MacArthur: The other defeat in the gulf.
Laurence H. Tribe: Write Roe into law.
Deborah Linfield: How do I tell my daughter?
Robert Stone: Fiction's claim on fact.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Levi's Two New Campaigns Aim at Who Fits the Jeans
NEW advertising for Levi's jeans takes a down-to-earth, back-to-basics approach, featuring earnest young men in charmingly inarticulate discussions of life's larger meaning as they wander through urban and rural settings.
And new advertising for Levi's jeans also takes a glossy, chic-and-trendy approach, featuring extraordinarily handsome young men, utterly silent, romping athletically on a hauntingly isolated beach.


Relax, New Yorkers,They're Just Friendly
Advice to cynical New Yorkers coming to Barcelona.
This place is easy, even for you, but:
*Just disregard the classical music from the subway speakers.


The Newest Feature: A Fashion Runway
There is a new entrant in the Olympics: the designer wars.
For the first time at the Summer Games, the United States used a name designer, HENRY GRETHEL, to outfit the team for the opening ceremony.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Vice President; In G.O.P. Tradition, Quayle Courts Stock-Car Race Fans
Another day on the Republican campaign trail, another stock-car race.
This time, only 22 days after President Bush served as grand marshal at the Firecracker 400, it was Vice President Dan Quayle who ordered the gentlemen at the Die Hard 500 to start their engines and then took a lap in a Pontiac pace car around the 2.66-mile Talladega Superspeedway here.


No Headline
When you buy a new injection molding machine, you have to hire a maintenance man for it.
We're just investing in the maintenance of our human assets. -- LARRY BURD, whose Wichita factory has a full-time supervisor for disabled employees.  [ A8:4. ]


Men's Victory Put on Hold After Protest
The United States men's volleyball team staged a dramatic comeback victory on the court today, then waited for what promises to be an equally dramatic meeting Monday with international officials of the sport after a successful protest by Japan.
The United States team, which has won the gold medal in the last two Summer Olympics, lost the second and third sets and staved off match point in the fourth set to prevail in its opener with Japan, 15-8, 11-15, 10-15, 17-16, 16-14.


Making the Cash Machine A Safer Place for Banking
New York City, whose large banks lagged behind those in other cities in introducing automated teller machines in the 1970's, now seems about to become a leader in requiring tougher security at the computerized cash dispensers.
The City Council is expected to pass a proposal on Wednesday to require better security at cash machines, and some banking and government officials expect other cities and states will follow suit.


Music's Over, and a Magazine Begins
David A. Krebs, who spent most of the last 20 years managing hard-living rock bands like Aerosmith and AC/DC, is explaining his vision for his serious new monthly magazine, The National Times.
"My joke line is that I've gone from heavy metal to heavy mental," said Mr.
Krebs in his chaotic Manhattan office, where the walls are studded with platinum records signifying million-sellers from the days when he would go a year without wearing a suit.
These days, his uniform comes from Brooks Brothers.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Hourlong Dramas Are Paying Off Again
PROVING that trends in television last about as long as it takes to flip channels by remote control, the hourlong drama series, last year an endangered species, is suddenly flourishing.
As the networks prepare for the new television season, the drama is now considered the hot property.
One drama, CBS's "Northern Exposure," has become a consistent hit and dominated the nominations for this year's Emmy Awards, winning 16.


At Saratoga, Competition With Style
For the 125th year, New York racing will migrate north this week for its midsummer interlude in the countryside in the serene old community of Saratoga Springs.
And starting Wednesday for the next five weeks, 30 stakes will be staged in 30 days, more than $4.7 million in purses will be paid and half a dozen fillies and colts will take giant strides along the road to 1992 championships.
It is pastoral, it is picturesque, it is the stately old race track among the trees at the foothills of the Adirondack Mountains.
It is also perilous for form, the graveyard of champions, the place where Secretariat was outrun and where, half a century earlier, Man o' War was outrun for the only time in his career.
But it is the place where important races are held almost every day, and it is a milestone on the road to the ultimate goal in any year, the Breeders' Cup and the Eclipse Awards.


Bridge
The Grand National Team Championship was won here Saturday night by a foursome representing Washington.
The winners were Steve Robinson, Peter Boyd, Bob Lipsitz and Ed Manfield, who were world champions in 1986.
They also won the Grand National in 1984 and 1988, which they feel was unlucky: those were the only years in each four-year cycle which were not meaningful in advancing to world honors.
The final was a close battle.
The Washington foursome led by 12 imps into the final segment, then pulled away to win by 44 against a strong Florida team comprising Michael Becker, Ron Rubin, Richard Pavlicek, Bill Root, Bobby Levin and Jeff Wolfson.


Finding Salvation Through Music Video


Bush Is Still Unsatisfied With Iraq's Compliance
President Bush said today that Iraq's agreement to permit inspectors into a Government building did not resolve his concerns about Baghdad's violations of Security Council resolutions.
Although the Iraq's move seemed to end the immediate threat of military force, senior Administration officials said Mr.
Bush would continue confronting Saddam Hussein and left open the possibility of military action in the future.


Airlines Are Again Attracting the Full-Fare Fliers
When American Airlines reduced its unrestricted fares and simplified its fare structure in early April -- and most other airlines followed suit in most domestic markets -- one goal was to increase the number of fliers paying full fare.
That goal appears to have been realized.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Faxon Wins by 2


Fiction's Claim on Fact
To what degree may fiction writers make use of real life events reported in the press?
Ought a novelist somehow credit the news story that underlies a work?
In March, I published a novel called "Outerbridge Reach." One of the central characters is a participant in a round-the-world sailing race.
As I affirmed before the book was published, the novel was partly based on 1968 press accounts about an Englishman named Donald Crowhurst who attempted to win The London Times's Golden Globe race by subterfuge.


Jane Halperin, Allan Rubenstein
Jane Carol Halperin, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold Halperin of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Allan Earl Rubenstein, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Rubenstein.
Rabbi Robert Levine performed the ceremony at Congregation Rodeph Sholom in New York.
Mrs.
Rubenstein is the coordinator for the Neurofibromatosis Center at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York; her husband is the center's director.
She graduated from Skidmore College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and has a master's degree in genetics from Sarah Lawrence College.
She is a doctoral student in clinical psychology at Columbia University.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
July  Wednesday  None  Thursday  G.D.P . . .2d Qtr.
New-Home Sales . . .
June Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Factory Orders . . .
June Personal Income . . .
June Farm Prices . . .
July


Baker's Deputy Reads the Signs
In an appearance on the ABC News program "This Week," Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger seemed keen today to dampen reports that his boss, James A. Baker 3d, was resigning.
"I don't have a crystal ball," Mr.
Eagleburger said, "but I am predicting to you that I will be Deputy Secretary for a long period of time to come and Jim Baker will be Secretary."


Could This Be Karolyi's Olympic Swan Song?
The United States today began its quest for a few medals in women's gymnastics at the Barcelona Olympics.
But the coach who has led them and so many others to international achievement could well be embarking on his final campaign.
Bela Karolyi, a coach for 19 years in Romania and 11 in Houston after he defected from his homeland, said he plans to consider other opportunities in gymnastics when the 1992 Summer Olympics end.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; CLINTON URGES U.S. TO KEEP PRESSING IRAQ
Gov.
Bill Clinton said today that the United States should continue pressing Iraq to comply with all provisions of the United Nations cease-fire agreement and that the Bush Administration had offered to brief him on the subject.


Sports of The Times; Death At Opening Ceremony
RON KARNAUGH learned to swim in the Maplewood, N.J., town pool but his husky 60-year-old father seldom went there.
After two heart attacks, Peter Karnaugh no longer drove the truck he hired out; his older son, Peter Jr., did.
The father occasionally attended the big swimming meets around the country.
Whenever he had visited Ron at the University of California at Berkeley, he always cooked one of his son's favorite meals, liver and onions.
As soon as Ron qualified for the United States Olympic team in March, the family's friends in Maplewood had an idea: They would raise $25,000 to send Peter and Jean Karnaugh and their daughter, Debbie, to the Summer Games.


Solving Europe's Refugee Crisis
The conflict in Bosnia is taking a staggering human toll -- not only in lives lost, but in lives wrenched from their moorings.
United Nations officials are already assisting more than two million people who have fled their homes for safer areas.
A million more refugees could leave their devastated towns and villages by winter.
It is Europe's worst refugee crisis since World War II.
To deal with the refugees' plight, United Nations officials have called an urgent meeting of foreign ministers in Geneva this week.
The mass exodus cries out for a compassionate, comprehensive response from Bosnia's European neighbors -- and from the United States.


Anxious Wait for Bus Victims' Kin
The rumors would not stop all afternoon along Bedford Avenue in Williamsburg.
At South Third Street, the same corner where only hours earlier an excited busload left the Brooklyn neighborhood for Action Park, the rumor was that Noel Aquino had died when the bus crashed in New Jersey.
His brother, Pete Planten, did not want to believe it.
"There are five of us total," he said late yesterday of his family -- four brothers raised alone by their mother, Lydia.
"And it's going to stay like that."


Fine the Few Dog Owners Who Don't Pick Up After Their Pets
To the Editor:
Re "Pooper-Scooter" (editorial, July 14): I am a Francophile who has the good fortune to go to Paris several times a year to visit with family.
My daily participation in shopping for household needs in the 15th Arrondissement and long walking tours of many business and residential neighborhoods of Paris have given me firsthand knowledge of the motorized pooper-scooter corps at work and the results they achieve.
I walk with a stooped gait and find that after a Parisian stay the tilt of my head has declined down and forward several degrees.
The only brief period it is safe to walk in Paris with head held high is for the few fleeting moments when following close behind a motorized pooper-scooter.


Chinese Exports Growing At Rapid Rate, C.I.A. Says
China is sustaining rapid growth in its industrial output and exports, according to the Central Intelligence Agency's annual report on the country's economy.
China's gross national product increased 7 percent and its industrial output rose 14 percent in 1991 while exports grew 16 percent to nearly $72 billion, the report said.
It said preliminary data indicated that the growth rates increased in the first five months of 1992.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Amid the Political Hoopla, A Pitch for Children's Rights
AN advocacy organization for children is seeking to take advantage of the heightened interest in politics this summer to press its agenda through a provocative series of advertising messages.
The Children's Defense Fund, a Washington-based organization that lobbies on children's-rights issues like education, health care and nutrition, is intensifying the advertising efforts it has sponsored since 1986.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidates' Records; Four Years of Bush's Drug War: New Funds but an Old Strategy
No American President has come to office with more experience in trying to hold back the tide of drugs than George Bush.
As Director of Central Intelligence under President Gerald R. Ford, Mr.
Bush monitored the drug threat worldwide.
As Ronald Reagan's Vice President, he led the Administration's anti-drug campaign, often climbing aboard powerful chase boats and helicopters as agents patrolled the Florida coast in the first concerted Federal effort to halt the surging tide of cocaine.


C.D.C. Is Embarrassed By Its Tardy Response To AIDS-Like Illness
For officials of the Centers for Disease Control and other Federal health agencies, the international AIDS meeting here last week was an embarrassment because they had overlooked two fundamental principles of public health.
Those principles are swiftly investigating mysterious cases of an illness to determine their cause and rapidly communicating with the public and with scientists to allay alarm about the perceived threat.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Rev.
Al Sharpton's Senate campaign referred incompletely to the amounts raised by his Democratic rivals.
Robert Abrams and Geraldine A. Ferraro have each raised about $3.5 million since their campaigns began; Elizabeth Holtzman has raised $1.7 million.
Of those totals, Mr.
Abrams and Ms.
Ferraro have each raised about $1.5 million in this year alone, and Ms.
Holtzman $700,000.


Review/Theater; Celebrating Sexual Diversity With the Dancers
Toward the end of "The Penny Arcade Sex and Censorship Show," an exuberant two-hour revue with a defiant political agenda, Ms.
Arcade and seven scantily clad erotic dancers descend into the audience for some friendly physical contact.
To the strains of Steve Winwood's inspirational anthem, "Higher Love," the performers climb through the seats, flirting, dancing and sitting on people's laps.
For several minutes, the main auditorium of Performance Space 122, where the show runs through Aug. 23, becomes a low-tech disco and party hangout where the action, were it put on film, might be rated PG-13.
The carefully prepared meeting of the audience and dancers, who appear to have been chosen for their ethnic and sexual diversity, is the high point of a show that celebrates sex in all its adult consensual varieties.
Ms.
Arcade, who plays host and ringmaster of the revels, is a veteran East Village bohemian who as a teen-ager acted in John Vacarro's Playhouse of the Ridiculous troupe and was later featured in Andy Warhol's film "Women in Revolt."


Clinton vs. 'L' Word
Campaigning on the West Coast, Gov.
Bill Clinton preached a message of self-sufficiency and fiscal conservatism that he said should appeal to traditional Democratic constituencies as well.
He called Republican efforts to characterize the Democratic ticket as liberal a "load of bull."
Article, page A11.


Critic's Notebook; Salzburg, a Festival in Transition Without the Karajan Mystique
When the Salzburg Festival began yesterday, it might have appeared just business as usual.
As in 1989, when I first visited the festival, the town's store windows hold as many record company posters as consumer goods.
Cheryl Studer peeks out of a Lufthansa ticket office.
Sir Georg Solti is nestled in lingerie.
Neville Marriner is surrounded by flasks of perfume.
Here and there are even a few posters of Herbert von Karajan, whose portrait once dominated the festival.
Before his death in 1989 -- he was sometimes called the "uncrowned king" of Salzburg -- Karajan helped turn this festival into one of the major trade fairs for the European music business and a cultural watering hole for the patrician elite willing to pay high prices to witness the festival's meticulously produced concerts, operas and plays.


Sarajevo Airlift: 'We Worry About Those Missiles'
From the cockpit of a plane bringing relief supplies into embattled Sarajevo, the city looks so peaceful it is almost deathly.
The air corridor does not run over the center of the city, where street fighting and mortar bombardment have damaged or destroyed many buildings.
Instead, pilots fly over villages and suburbs whose handsome homes, many of them with red tile roofs, invite comparisons to Southern California.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Placed Chris Gwynn, outfielder, and Mike Boddicker, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Dennis Moeller, pitcher, and Kevin Koslofski, outfielder, from Omaha of the American Association.
National League


Giants' Bunch Is Powering Way Into Playing Time
Jarrod Bunch established the pattern early in his football career.
Back home in Ashtabula, Ohio, after word spread that Bunch might be headed for the hated University of Michigan and he was told he would never make it there, he became a Wolverine.
Bunch remembered hearing he would not handle the university's academic demands, so he earned a degree in four years and played his senior season as a graduate student.
Then, after becoming a first-round draft choice of the Giants in 1991, Bunch preferred a three-year contract to a longer one with the thinking that his success would make the fourth season a more expensive one.


George L. Mehren Is Dead at 79; Ex-Official in Agriculture Dept.
Dr.
George L. Mehren, an internationally renowned agricultural economist who served as Assistant Secretary of Agriculture in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, died Saturday night at Santa Rose North Hospital in San Antonio.
He was 79 years old and lived in San Antonio.
His family said he died of a bone-marrow disease.


British Art (TV) Imitates U.S. Political Life
Here's the story: The Democratic contender is ahead in the polls.
The Republican incumbent is shedding market share with the voters.
The Republican is older, seasoned; the Democrat is a flashy baby-boomer who made some mistakes in the 1960's.
The Republican is toiling day and night with his advisers to change his image.
But the Democrat may have an Achilles heel: a weakness that the Republicans call the bimbo factor.
George Bush vs. Bill Clinton, of course.


Trial Focusing on Damages
After meeting for nearly seven hours over two days last week and failing to reach a settlement, both sides in the Freeman McNeil v. the National Football League trial over free agency returned to the courtroom today, with the players' attorneys seeking to establish parameters for possible damages.
Michael Glassman, president of Glassman-Oliver Economic Consultants based in Washington, said that after extensive research he had concluded that the eight players filing the suit deserved damages that total nearly $4 million.


Market Place; Wall St.'s Doubts on Boeing Grow With Airline Turmoil
It dominates its industry worldwide.
Its management is highly regarded, its costs are under control and its balance sheet is extremely strong.
So why is Wall Street so down on the Boeing Company?
Boeing's shares, after hitting a 52-week peak of $54 in late January, have been sliding steadily.
The stock closed yesterday at $39.25 on the New York Stock Exchange, down 50 cents, after the company reported flat earnings for the second quarter.
Boeing said it earned $453 million, or $1.33 a share, compared with $454 million, or $1.32 a share, in last year's second quarter, when there were more shares outstanding.
Revenues rose very slightly, to $7.82 billion from $7.81 billion.


CHRONICLE
ADRIENNE RICH has been named the 58th recipient of the Academy of American Poets' fellowship for "distinguished poetic achievement," which carries an award of $20,000.
In a career of more than 40 years, Ms.
Rich, a passionate feminist, has received many honors, including the Brandeis University Creative Arts Medal, the Ruth Lilly Poetry Prize, the National Book Award, a National Institute of Arts and Letters award and the 1992 William Whitehead Award for lifetime achievement.


Hard Times for Somalians
Hours before the opening ceremonies of the Barcelona Olympics last Saturday, the doctor examining Abdi Bile's right leg found a stress fracture and prepared to place the leg in a cast.
Bile objected.
"I have to walk in opening ceremonies," he said. "If I cannot run, I must walk."


Judge Gives Probation To Former Robb Aide
A former top aide to Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia was fined $500 today and sentenced to four months' probation for conspiring to falsify a report on the Senator's campaign finances.
The aide, David K. McCloud, pleaded guilty to the charge in May.
He was sentenced by Judge John A. MacKenzie of Federal District Court.


Editorial Notebook; The Other Civil War
With what one might call stiff-lipped ambivalence, the English are observing the 350th anniversary of their own Civil War.
This was, Macaulay once wrote, the most discussed and least understood event in the island's history -- the Great Rebellion of 1642-51.
The war sprang from an angry confrontation between King Charles and a defiant Long Parliament -- whose leaders, more Protestant than the monarch, were furious over royal attempts to arrest the nobles, merchants and landed gentry who enacted laws he refused to heed.
Two armies took to the field to decide who should rule, Crown or Parliament.


Bridge
An "accident" made it possible for two Texans, Bob Hamman of Dallas and Hemant Lall of Katy, to win the Life Master Pairs Championship here Sunday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
They had been teammates four days earlier in Grand National playoffs, and Hamman, who has won eight world titles and 24 national titles, suggested that they play together in the Life Master Pairs if they had an "accident" -- by which he meant early elimination from the team event.
This came to pass, and Lall won his first national title by a narrow margin.


Canadian Airlines Set Merger Talks
Canada's two financially troubled national airlines will begin discussions this week about a possible merger.
The carriers, Air Canada and Canadian Airlines International Ltd., have been feuding for months.
The surprise disclosure of the impending talks came in an announcement today by the PWA Corporation, the parent company of Canadian Airlines.


An Urban Aid Bill in Name Only
Ross Perot aroused voters by tapping their frustration with Washington politics.
He accused Congress of rarely managing to link workable solutions to specific problems.
Were Mr.
Perot still an unannounced Presidential candidate, he would no doubt point to tomorrow's vote in the Senate Finance Committee on an urban aid bill as an ugly case in point.
The bill was originally intended to be a serious response to the Los Angeles riots, providing desperately needed aid to urban ghettos.
What's emerged is a miserly handout to cities and a large grab-bag of unrelated tax breaks and gimmicks.


For Greco-Roman Wrestler, Age Has No Hold on Gold
Dennis Koslowski, who came back to Greco-Roman wrestling after retiring in 1988 to become the Olympic coach, will close out an illustrious career Tuesday night by going for a gold medal.
A victory by Koslowski will give the United States only its third gold in Greco-Roman wrestling; Jeff Blatnick and Steve Fraser won golds in the 1984 Games.
Koslowski can also become the first American to win two medals in the Greco-Roman style.


Executive Changes
COASTAL CORP., Houston, an energy holding company, named Jerry D. Bullock senior vice president of exploration and production.
GEO.
A.
HORMEL &amp; CO., Austin, Minn., a consumer products company, appointed Joel W. Johnson president.
IN-FLIGHT PHONE CORP., Oakbrook Terrace, Ill., named Neal F. Meehan senior vice president and chief operating officer.
LASERSCOPE, San Jose, Calif., a provider of surgical systems, said it had named Robert V. McCormick chief executive and a director.
MORSE SHOE INC., Canton, Mass., named Earle J. Spokane senior vice president and chief financial officer.
PHOTONICS CORP., San Jose, Calif., a developer of infrared wireless connectivity solutions for mobile computing, appointed John M. Thompson vice president for finance and chief financial officer.
TRAVELING SOFTWARE, Bothell, Wash., appointed Jonathan Scott, its chief operating officer, to the additional position of president.


The Men's Team Isn't Doing Any Cartwheels
You know how it is when you travel to a different country.
The food is different.
The language is strange.
The water tastes funny.
And those landing mats.
You know how those landing mats can be.
You couldn't have blamed the United States men's gymnastics team for complaining about them tonight.
The guidebooks only tell you so much about a place, such as where to shop and what to eat.
Not that many tell you to be on the lookout for mats with a tighter nap and harder surface than the ones you find in the United States.
They should, though.
It might help the next time you're vaulting in an important compulsory round at the Olympics.


Olivetti's Chief Sees a Vendetta
Italy is a land of plots and counterplots, of unsolved crimes and unresolved mysteries.
But even by these standards, the case of Carlo de Benedetti, chairman of the computer maker Ing.
C.
Olivetti, is unusual.
Mr. de Benedetti, who is widely viewed in the United States as one of Europe's most perceptive businessmen, was sentenced by a Milan court this spring to six years and four months in jail.
But he insinuates that a political vendetta was behind the verdict -- and many in Italy and America share that view.


Sales Outlook For Christmas
It's the end of July and the retail industry is already talking about Christmas sales.
Edward F. Johnson, publisher of the Johnson Redbook market report on the retail business, was the first analyst to formally stick his neck out with a prediction yesterday that sales during the 1992 holiday season would climb at least 6 percent compared with a meager 3.7 percent increase last year.
"This won't be a super Christmas, but it's a bonanza compared to last year," he said.


Biologist's Speedy Gene Method Scares Peers But Gains Backer
DR.
J.
CRAIG VENTER is riding high.
A group of venture capitalists has staked him with $70 million for a laboratory that will identify thousands of human genes a month and enable at least some of them to patented.
But other researchers are aghast at the possibility that the human genome could be locked up and owned by private investors, whether they are Dr.
Venter's backers or others.
They say they fear a "land grab" for the human genome that will greatly impede scientific progress and the free exchange of information.


Fatal Bus Crash Raises Safety and Legal Questions
The driver of a chartered bus that crashed in New Jersey on Sunday, killing six people from Brooklyn, attributed the accident to brake failure yesterday as state and Federal officials began an intense investigation into the causes.
Questions arose about the safety of the steep country road where the bus rammed into two cars and burst into flames and also about the qualifications of the driver, 60-year-old Robert Campbell of Brooklyn, who officials say never underwent the medical, on-the-road and written tests required of charter bus drivers in New York.


Women Face Increasing Bias As China Focuses on Profits
The capitalist-style changes in China over the last dozen years have made almost everyone richer, but in some ways they have also made life more difficult and more frustrating for the nation's 565 million women.
As Chinese society focuses more on profit than on equality, and as Communist morality loses its influence, women are in some cases losing the ground they gained in the Maoist years.


Dime Savings Loses Ruling
The Dime Savings Bank, one of the largest landlords in Massachusetts as a result of recently defaulted mortgage loans, was told yesterday by a Massachusetts court that eviction of tenants would require a more time-consuming procedure than it had been using.
The ruling by the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court said "summary process" proceedings through the Land Court system were the appropriate way to evict tenants because they gave tenants and owners a fair hearing.
Dime and some other banks in the state had favored a "trespass action" technique, under which a tenant could be evicted after an order was obtained from the state's Superior Court.


Corrections
A book review yesterday about "After the War Was Over: Hanoi and Saigon," by Neil Sheehan, referred incorrectly in some editions to the presidency of South Vietnam.
The President in office when the country fell to the Communists was Gen.
Duong Van Minh.
His predecessor, who resigned nine days earlier, was Nguyen Van Thieu, not Le Duc Thieu.


Bush's Policy on Republics Has Fluctuated
Over the last 13 months, the policies of the Bush Administration toward the conflict in the former Yugoslavian republics have fluctuated, from the personal involvement of Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to virtual disengagement.
Now the subject of exchanges between Bill Clinton, the Democratic Presidential nominee, and the Bush re-election campaign, the issue of how to handle the civil war in the republics has not seized the attention of most Americans.


When Hawks Turn Into Bats: New-Found Night Driving Woes
YOU have always been proud of your 20/ 20 vision.
You play tennis without glasses and prefer movies from the back row.
When applying for a driver's license, you speed read to the bottom of the vision chart.
So why does the world look so funny and fuzzy through the windshield at night?
Why are those who are hawks by day not necessarily owls after the sun sets?


A Fetal Tissue Compromise Is Needed
To the Editor:
Yes, the research Julianne Byrne performed between 1977 and 1981 at Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons on 3,500 miscarriages was the basis for the Bush Administration's estimate that about 1,000 fetuses a year will be available for research from a tissue bank such as that implemented by executive order last May ("Tissue Bank Is Needed," letter, July 14).
But the Administration's use of her study does not stand up under scrutiny.
Dr.
Byrne's research was evaluated by D. Eugene Redmond Jr. and Richard J. Robbins, members of Yale University's neural transplant program.
They concluded that the Administration had misconstrued her analysis and failed to consider certain significant variables.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  WHO GAINS BY IRAQI ACCORD?
Reflecting divisions in the Bush Administration, some senior officials said Washington had compromised principles by allowing Iraq a say in United Nations inspections for weapons of mass destruction.
Under the cease-fire, inspectors were to have quick and unimpeded access.
But Sunday's accord excludes Americans and other Persian Gulf allies from the inspection team.
A1  IRAQ STARTS TO KILL MERCHANTS  Faced with growing public discontent over soaring food prices, President Saddam Hussein was reported to have started executing merchants as part of a stepped up drive against speculators and profiteers.
A8  A MILD-MANNERED DIPLOMAT  Man in the News: At the eye of the diplomatic hurricane that enveloped Iraq and the United Nations is Rolf Ekeus, a mild-mannered career diplomat from Sweden.
A8  IN CHINA, PROFIT BEFORE EQUALITY  The capitalist-style changes in China over the last dozen years have made almost everyone richer, but in some ways they have also made life more difficult and more frustrating for the nation's 565 million women.
A1  Philippine leader seeks legality for Communists.
A7  U.N.
FLIGHTS DAY AFTER DAY  No commercial flights have landed in Sarajevo since May, but almost every day planes bearing the United Nations insignia bring in food, medicine and other supplies.
Many of the planes are American, flown by United States Air Force crews.
A3  BOSNIA FACTIONS MEET IN LONDON  Leaders of the three factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina met in London for another round of talks about their future.
A Serbian representative said Serbs had a mandate to lay claim to almost two-thirds of the republic's territory.
A3  Washington Talk: Old rivals join sides over Latin envoys.
A4  Ex-East German chief may stay in Moscow a while.
A7  Fischer seeking changes in chess hall in Yugoslavia.
A7  Nongoma Journal: A king, his fifth wife and some controversy.
A4  National A9-13  CLINTON'S FOREIGN POLICY  President Bush and his advisers attacked Gov.
Bill Clinton head on for the first time over foreign policy, calling his ideas on Yugoslavia "reckless" and painting Mr.
Bush as the candidate who can be trusted with the nation's security.
A1  BUSH AND HIS WAR ON DRUGS  The Bush Record: When he took office in 1988, President Bush pledged to end "this scourge" of drugs.
While he helped change the attitude that cocaine was part of the Good Life, most of his anti-drug tactics have fallen short.
And critics say he neglected the most important areas: education, treatment and prevention programs.
A1  A road trip by Republicans who favor abortion rights.
A10  Before a liberal audience, Clinton rebuffed the liberal label.
A11  Ex-Senator Tsongas joined Senator Rudman to fight the deficit.
A13  WHITE HOUSE PULLS BACK  Concerned about possible public criticism, the White House decided against revising the Government system for analyzing risks from toxic chemicals in air, water and food, Administration officials said.
A9  CLIFFORD INDICTMENT SEEN  The Manhattan District Attorney will seek an indictment this week against Clark M. Clifford, a top adviser to several Presidents, and his junior law partner, law enforcement officials say.
The charges relate to allegations that the two lawyers played a role in the multibillion-dollar fraud involving the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
A1  STATES IN FISCAL DISTRESS  States are in worse financial shape than after any of the five previous national recessions, and a broad survey of state officials reports that the 1993 fiscal year looks bleak.
B6  BREAKING A STRIKE, SORT OF  Pittsburgh newspapers appeared for the first time since drivers went on strike 70 days ago, but only a few thousand copies were delivered, and public support appeared to be building for the strikers.
A9  John Demjanjuk accused the U.S. of withholding evidence.
A9  Metro Digest B1  BRAKE FAILURE IN CRASH
The driver of a chartered bus that crashed in New Jersey on Sunday, killing six people from Brooklyn, attributed the accident to brake failure yesterday as state and Federal officials began an intense investigation into the causes.
Questions arose about the safety of the steep country road where the bus rammed into two cars and burst into flames and also about the qualifications of the driver, 60-year-old Robert Campbell of Brooklyn, who officials say never underwent the medical, on-the-road and written tests required of charter bus drivers in New York.
A1  Business Digest D1  Science C1-10  Shuttle plans to study use of a tethered satellite.
C1  Should the human genome be subject to patents?
C1  Standard tests said to tell little about drivers' night vision.
C1  Mushroom hunters endanger their prey in Pacific Northwest.
C4  Science Watch C8  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Music: Philharmonic in Argentina.
C16  "Turn of the Screw." C11  Classical Music in Review C12  German papers to go back.
C11  British TV on U.S. politics.
C11  Theater: "Penny Arcade Sex and Censorship Show." C13  Fashion B7  In Paris, it's Lacroix  Patterns  Sports B8-18  LONG WAIT IS OVER  Eight years after he was edged out for a gold medal in Los Angeles, four years after he failed to make the United States swimming team for Seoul, Pablo Morales finally reached the end of an Olympic pool first yesterday, winning the 100-meter butterfly.
A1  Baseball: Mets shut out yet again.
B17  Pat Kelly's lessons aren't complete.
B17  Column: Vecsey on Croatia's Toni Kukoc.
B9  Olympics:  Dream Teams top Croatia.
B9  Diver, 13, wins easily.
B9  Kuwait is friendly loser to U.S. in soccer.
B10  U.S. passes test in baseball.
B10  U.S. men lose game in volleyball ruling.
B11  Notebook B11  Thompson angered by drug testing.
B11  Hard times for Somalia.
B14  Obituaries D20  George L. Mehren, former official in Agriculture Dept.
Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  Plan now for the next Iraqi test.
An urban aid bill in name only.
Karl E. Meyer: Other Civil War.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Saddam and Gore.
Russell Baker: An unmailed letter.
David J. Breen: Cold cash in cold blood.
David Twersky: The risks of cozying up to Syria.


U.S. Accused of Concealing Evidence on 'Ivan'
Lawyers for John Demjanjuk today accused the Justice Department of withholding crucial evidence showing that Mr.
Demjanjuk was not the savage executioner "Ivan the Terrible" at the Nazis' Treblinka death camp in Poland.
In their first brief since a Federal appeals court in Cincinnati reopened the case last month, Mr.
Demjanjuk's lawyers maintained that the department had for years withheld evidence that would have cleared their client, showing that he was not the Nazi war criminal described by American and Israeli prosecutors but instead was the victim of mistaken identity.
Appeal of Death Sentence
The lawyers said that while the prosecutors were seeking the deportation of Mr.
Demjanjuk they had improperly failed to disclose the existence of testimony of guards at Treblinka indicating that another man, Ivan Marchenko, was Ivan the Terrible.
Mr.
Marchenko was last seen alive in 1944, and his fate is unknown.


Volleyball Victory By U.S. Reversed
Twenty-three hours after the first serve, the result of the men's volleyball game between the United States and Japan could be recorded.
But for the Americans, the finality was anything but welcome.
The International Volleyball Federation today took away a five-set victory scored by the United States men's team Sunday over Japan, ruling that the referee failed to assess a required penalty point that would have given the Japanese the victory in the fourth set.
Thus, Japan became an 8-15, 15-11, 15-10, 15-13 winner, leaving the Americans frustrated but not appreciably impeded in their quest for a third straight Olympic gold medal.


Street Corners Still More Desolate
For the family of Jojani Gonzalez, a 20-year-old mother who perished instantly on Sunday as a chartered bus bound for Action Park in Vernon, N.J., flipped off its course, crushing her beneath its weight, the accident layered pain upon pain.
Three months ago, the victim's 26-year-old sister, Mireya, was strangled in the family's Brooklyn apartment.
Jojani Gonzalez's death whittled the family again and left her sister, Maribel, who is 23, stunned and still in pain herself, from injuries suffered during the crash.


American Express Reports 21% Gain in Second Quarter
The American Express Company reported yesterday that second-quarter earnings climbed 21 percent although the company still struggled to regain its financial footing in its charge card business.
A series of one-time gains and losses masked deterioration of the company's operating net income.
On a pretax operating basis, American Express's earnings dropped more than 30 percent in the second quarter, to $269 million, from $386 million in the second quarter last year.


CHRONICLE
The good news this summer is, it's never too late to get into shape.
The messenger is MILTON BERLE, who just turned 84 years old and has been named special adviser to ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER, chairman of the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports.
Mr.
Berle will appear in a public service television announcement, riding a bike and hitting a speed bag to promote exercise for older adults.


Expos Pull to Within 1 Game Of Pirates
Expos 6, Cardinals 4
ST.
LOUIS, July 27 (AP) -- Darren Reed hit a three-run homer and Delino DeShields homered and tripled as the Montreal Expos beat the St.
Louis Cardinals tonight, 6-4, and closed to within one game of the first-place Pittsburgh Pirates in the National League East.
Montreal has not been so near first place after the All-Star Game break since Aug. 7, 1989.
The Expos were also a game back on that date, but finished 12 games behind Chicago.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Qualifier Wins, But Will Borg?
A local qualifier, David Hall, might get to meet his boyhood idol, Bjorn Borg, in the U.S.
Pro Tennis Championships at Longwood Cricket Club in Brookline, Mass.
The 21-year-old Hall, who plays for Duke and lives in Norwell, eliminated Peter Svensson of Sweden, 6-2, 6-4, yesterday in the first round.
He will face the winner of tonight's match between the 36-year-old Borg and George Bezecny of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Borg, who hasn't won a match on the ATP Tour this year, won at Longwood in 1974, 1975 and 1976.
Jimmy Arias, who won the tournament nine years ago, defeated Luke Jensen, 6-7 (8-6), 6-3, 6-4. (AP)


It's 10 P.M. Do You Know Where the Mets' Offense Is?
The silent surrenders by the Mets, which have long lacked explanation, have begun to lose even their dignity.
In a 5-0 defeat against the Phillies tonight, the Mets absorbed the insult of still more scoreboard zeros, and there was no response.
No anger.
No answers.
No promises.
And, of course, absolutely no threat of a run.
Thus the Mets, who failed to capitalize on another Pittsburgh loss tonight and appear incapable of mounting an authentic fight for the title in the National League East, have managed to lay sole claim to one distinction: Their 14th shutout of the season is unmatched in baseball.


There's Pounce in Pippen's Step as U.S. Rolls
Scottie Pippen wanted a piece of Toni Kukoc tonight as badly as he wanted no part of Xavier McDaniel two months ago.
Somewhere between Madison Square Garden and the Palau D'Esportes, between the National Basketball Association playoffs and the Olympics, this soft-spoken soul became a trash-talking, take-no-prisoners tough guy.


I.R.S. Fraud Is Denied By Lawyer
Harvey Myerson, a swashbuckling corporate lawyer charged with a tax- fraud conspiracy, told a jury yesterday that he had merely concealed some of his income to hide the money from his former wife.
Acting as his own lawyer in his tax-fraud trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, Mr.
Myerson told the jury that "it never entered my mind" to defraud the Internal Revenue Service of income taxes.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; CLINTON ATTACKED ON FOREIGN POLICY
President Bush and his advisers today confronted Gov.
Bill Clinton head on for the first time on foreign policy, opening the new front by calling his ideas on the crisis in Bosnia reckless and painting Mr.
Bush as the candidate who can be trusted with the nation's security.
Campaigning in Wisconsin and Michigan, Mr.
Bush hurled threats at President Saddam Hussein of Iraq and talked in hushed tones of receiving late-night phone calls from the White House crisis center to underscore his own foreign policy credentials, which his strategists view as his best card in the 1992 elections.


Pat Kelly's Lessons Are Hardly Complete
For all the bad days, all the nights of missed chances and strikeouts and pop-ups that never make it past the infield, Pat Kelly realizes one thing: he's still new to the game.
New and naive and still learning.
When you are 24 years old, even a double play can be an education.


Philippines' Leader Wants Legalization Of Communist Party
President Fidel V. Ramos asked the Philippine Congress today to repeal a 35-year-old law that makes the Communist Party illegal, a politically symbolic move aimed at demonstrating his Government's resolve to settle Asia's remaining Marxist insurgency peacefully.
In his state of the nation address at the opening session of Congress, Mr.
Ramos also ordered a review of the cases of hundreds of political prisoners to determine whether they can be released either by posting bail or through presidential pardon.


Iran Appeals for Afghan Peace
Iran appealed today for an end to the fighting in Afghanistan and said it did not discriminate between the Sunni and Shiite warring factions.
The appeal was made by the Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister for Asian Affairs, Allaedin Boroujerdi, who met with leaders of the Hezb-i-Wahadat, who were trained in Iran, and with the Afghan President, Burhanuddin Rabbani, in Kabul, the official news agency said.


BARCELONA
BASKETBALL BLOWOUT
Croatia, considered the strongest challenger to the U.S., couldn't keep up with the American pros and lost, 103-70.
REVERSAL IN VOLLEYBALL
The American victory over Japan on Sunday was overturned and awarded to Japan because of an officiating mistake.
SportsTuesday, page B9.


Nongoma Journal; Zulu King Takes a Bride, The Xhosa Tribe's Juliet
Before a throng of guests variously attired in pinstripes and leopard skins, King Goodwill Zwelethini, the hereditary monarch of seven million Zulus, wed his fifth wife on Saturday.
On a drought-seared promontory beneath the thatched palace compound he had commissioned for his new Queen, the King formally declared his love to a 19-year-old Xhosa-speaking maiden whose selection excited a swirl of political speculation.


Classical Music in Review
Magic Circle Opera Repertory Ensemble  St.
Peter's Lutheran Church Lexington Avenue at 54th Street Mid-Manhattan Through Sunday
Ray Evans Harrell started the Magic Circle Opera Repertory Ensemble in 1990 with the idea of giving young singers not only stage experience, but also administrative experience.
The ensemble's steady roster of 18 -- including singers, dancers, a stage director, a choreographer and a composer -- doubles as an executive committee responsible for raising money and doing the other mundane tasks that keep the company afloat.
One thing the ensemble has learned is a sense of economy.
The productions are spare but evocative, and the company takes an additive approach to its repertory.
The three one-act contemporary operas it presented last summer have been revived, with casts intact, and the troupe has worked up three more short operas for the new season.
The group is presenting these six works as companion pieces to installments in a serialized version of "Carmen."


Quest for Fusion Power Is Going International
THE trend toward international teamwork in big science quickened last week as Japan, Russia, the United States and the European Community agreed to spend $1.2 billion to explore the feasibility of a huge machine that would harness for constructive human use the kind of thermonuclear fire that lights the sun and produces the blast of the hydrogen bomb.
The proposed device is known as the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor, or ITER, meaning "way" in Latin.
"The ITER cooperation has no precedent in size and scope and could well become the model for other worldwide joint ventures in big science," said Ambassador Andreas van Agt, who signed the international research accord on behalf of the European Community.


Fine the Few Dog Owners Who Don't Pick Up After Their Pets
To the Editor:
Your proposal of pooper-scooters for New York City represents a step backward from civic responsibility and would certainly result in a dirtier city.
It would be an insult and an unnecessary financial burden to conscientious, law-abiding dog owners.
I am a resident of Berlin.
That city's smeared sidewalks testify to the inadvisability of delegating to another the responsibility of cleaning up one's own mess.
Although Berlin has a scooper law similar to New York's, it is virtually unenforced and generally disregarded.


FISCHER IS ISSUING DEMANDS ON MATCH
Bobby Fischer, the long-dormant American chess giant, has given promoters an undisclosed list of demands for adjustments to the hall where he is scheduled to play a $5 million exhibition match against his old rival, Boris Spassky, beginning on Sept. 2, local news reports said today.
Mr.
Fischer, who appears to be ready to emerge from 20 years of self-imposed obscurity, presented the demands on Sunday after examining the hall, which is in the Hotel Maestral at Sveti Stefan, a resort island and casino on Yugoslavia's Adriatic coast, the reports said.


IRAQ WON ITS POINT ON U.N. INSPECTORS, TOP U.S. AIDES SAY
Reflecting divisions within the Bush Administration over policy toward Iraq, some senior officials said today that Washington had compromised important principles by allowing Iraq a say in the makeup of a United Nations inspection team in Baghdad.
Under the cease-fire terms drawn up after the Persian Gulf war, United Nations inspectors were to have quick and unimpeded access to Iraqi installations to insure that Baghdad's weapons of mass destruction were destroyed.


White House Drops Plan on Setting Health Risks
After weeks of contentious internal debate, the White House has decided against a plan to revise the Government system for analyzing the risks from toxic chemicals in air, water and food, Administration officials said today.
The President's Council on Competitiveness, a Cabinet-level group headed by Vice President Dan Quayle, had urged President Bush to consider substantial changes in the process of determining risks.
The council maintained that the present system, costing billions of dollars, needed to be modernized.


Cloak and Dagger in the Courtroom
The judge in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George said today that he was considering allowing some agents of the Central Intelligence Agency to testify "in light disguise" to conceal their identities.
The Government lawyers said the witnesses could wear special eyeglasses or hairpieces to preserve their usefulness as covert operators.


Corrections
A picture on the first sports page yesterday showing an Olympic swimmer amid spray in the 100-meter breast-stroke final was published in error.
The swimmer was Vasily Ivanov of the Unified Team (the former Soviet Union), not the gold-medal winner, Nelson Diebel of the United States.


Fine the Few Dog Owners Who Don't Pick Up After Their Pets
To the Editor:
The French pooper-scooter you describe (editorial, July 14) -- a vacuum device mounted on a motorcycle that scoops up dog droppings and disinfects the sidewalk -- may be ingenious, and many New York dog owners, including this one, would willingly pay a fee for clean sidewalks.


Stocks Gain in Tokyo
Stocks rose slightly here this afternoon after dropping in the morning.
At the end of the trading day, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 53.30 points, or 0.35 percent, to 15,426.64.
On Monday, after the Government announced measures to spur the economy, the Nikkei fell 124.45 points to a six-year low of 15,373.34.


NASA Unveils A Satellite On a Tether 12 Miles Long
AFTER the space walks, Moon walks and various orbital loop-the-loops, now comes the high wire act.
On the next space shuttle mission, scheduled for launching on Friday, American astronauts will try something new and daring.
They plan to reel out a half-ton satellite at the end of a wire 12 miles long.
Then the shuttle and the satellite, always connected by the thin wire, are to fly a duet round and round the world, before the satellite is reeled back into the shuttle's cargo bay.


Lucrative Harvesting Of Edible Mushrooms Puts Supply in Danger
BARRISTER'S WIG, candy cap, chicken of the woods, short-stemmed slippery Jack, man on horseback, chanterelle and matsutake: these are the names of the highly prized edible wild mushrooms that grow in the verdant mountains of the Pacific Northwest.
But the valuable mushrooms, like the gold for which prospectors once combed these ancient forests, are in danger of being collected to exhaustion, while the forests themselves are being damaged by ever increasing troops of mushroom hunters.
While many more Americans have developed a taste for the wild mushrooms in recent years, nearly all of the Northwest's harvest goes to Europe and Japan, where declining forests are failing to provide enough mushrooms to satisfy the large demand.


Gephardt Leads Charge Against Free-Trade Pact
In the Democrats' first major Presidential campaign attack against the North American Free Trade Agreement that the Bush Administration is negotiating with Mexico and Canada, the House majority leader said today that the pact did not include adequate safeguards for workers, the environment and public health.
While the majority leader, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, stopped short today of saying that he would vote against the agreement in its current form, his criticisms foreshadowed what will probably be a bitter debate on the campaign trail and raised questions about the agreement's prospects when lawmakers vote on it early next year.


METRO DIGEST
DRIVER SAYS BRAKES FAILED
The driver of a chartered bus that crashed in New Jersey on Sunday has attributed the accident to brake failure.
And as state and Federal officials begin an intense investigation into the causes of the crash, questions have already arisen about the safety of the steep country road where the bus rammed into two cars and burst into flames and also about the qualifications of the driver, 60-year-old Robert Campbell of Brooklyn, who officials say never underwent all the tests required of charter bus drivers in New York.
A1.
LOOKING FOR RELIEF FROM THE HEAT
The trip was meant to be a part of summer itself, a break from the pressing heat and the needling uncertainties too familiar in the Brooklyn neighborhood of Williamsburg.
B4.
Before the crash, passengers yelled: "Stop!" B4.
NEW YORK CITY  LAWYER SAYS HE HID MONEY FROM WIFE
Harvey Myerson, a swashbuckling corporate lawyer charged with a tax-fraud conspiracy, told a jury that he had merely concealed some of his income to hide the money from his former wife.
Acting as his own lawyer in his tax-fraud trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, Mr.
Myerson told the jury that "it never entered my mind" to defraud the Internal Revenue Service of income taxes.
B3.
LUKEWARM STATEN ISLAND WELCOME
Mayor Dinkins took the ferry across the bay to Staten Island yesterday, in an effort to learn more about both the borough and its president.
But before he even got a chance to meet the people, he ran into a frosty reception from their leader.
Mr.
Dinkins and many of his top aides are spending the week on Staten Island, the latest stop of his campaign to convince the voters that he is the Mayor of all the people, not just the people in Manhattan.
B3.
REGION  CUOMO REJECTS NASSAU PLAN
Governor Cuomo is seeking to slam the door on a last-minute bid by Nassau County officials to change the terms of a fiscal rescue for the county that he and legislative leaders agreed to last week.
The Governor insisted that he saw no reason why the accord should be revised.
Nassau's bid, essentially an effort by County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta to gain more emergency spending authority in the event that he and the county Board of Supervisors cannot agree on a budget, added a note of discord to the special session of the Legislature that begins today.
It was supposed to be a collegial flurry of bill passing that would help redeem lawmakers for the angry, unproductive close of session earlier this month.
B5.
AFTER 52 YEARS, A LAW IS USED
Questions about the purchase of four automobile tires have made news in Madison and apparently made history in Connecticut.
An investigation that started with the tires led to the dismissal of the police chief, apparently the first chief to be dismissed in the 52 years since a state law, permitting towns to do so for "just cause," took effect.
B5.
Arrest in fatal stabbing in theater.
B5.
Our Towns by George Judson B5


Kuwait Proves Friendly Despite Loss to Americans
At halftime of the match between the United States and Kuwait tonight, a banner was unfurled by Kuwaiti supporters that seemed to be unintentionally mocking.
"Kuwait thanks USA," it read.
At that point, Kuwait was ahead by 1-0.
More surprisingly, after the American players came alive in the second half, scoring three goals and recording a 3-1 victory -- only their third triumph in 18 Olympic appearances -- even the Kuwaiti players were thanking the United States.
This time, for driving Iraq from their country last year.


Treasury Bonds Show Price Gains
Prices of most Treasury securities moved higher, and long-term interest rates fell yesterday in trading that was described as uncharacteristically heavy for a summer Monday.
The move to buy notes and bonds began overnight in Tokyo, as dealers began to buy securities after the Bank of Japan cut its discount rate by half a point.


Chairman Will Leave At Lloyd's
The chairman of Lloyd's of London announced yesterday that he had nominated the author of a report on reforming the shaken insurance market to succeed him as chairman beginning next year.
The chairman, David Coleridge, confirmed widespread expectations that he would not continue in office amid a torrent of criticism from angry members about Lloyd's management.
In his place, Mr.
Coleridge endorsed David Rowland, chairman of the Sedgewick Group P.L.C. insurance brokerage firm.
A panel led by Mr.
Rowland delivered a report in January recommending extensive changes in the way Lloyd's does business.


Sports of The Times; Toni Kukoc Must Winter In Chicago
EVERYBODY was waiting for the reluctant Toni Kukoc to try his skills against his pals from Chicago named Scottie and Michael.
Unfortunately, the Toni Kukoc they were looking for did not arrive for last night's game.
Instead, Croatia used what resembled a vacationing 6-foot-10-inch bus driver from Sarajevo named Dobro Dobrovic, who scored 4 points in 34 minutes 38 seconds, and looked generally as intimidated as a tourist might be when pressed into a real live Olympic game.
Wherever the real Toni Kukoc was in the province of Catalonia last night, we can only hope he learned something from the 103-70 victory by the United States over the renewed nation of Croatia.


Goodyear's Net Surges In Quarter
Buoyed by its cost-cutting and intense marketing of new products and the sale of some assets, the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company said today that its second-quarter net income soared nearly fivefold from the corresponding period last year.
The quarterly income represented the company's highest earnings in four years.
Goodyear, the world's second-largest tire producer, behind Groupe Michelin of France, said its second-quarter earnings rose to $109.7 million, or $1.54 a share, compared with income of $22.5 million, or 38 cents a share, in the corresponding period last year.
Revenues for the quarter rose to $3.1 billion, from $2.8 billion last year.


Two Police Officers Injured in 'Hard Landing' of Helicopter


Plan Now for the Next Iraqi Test
The United Nations has won another battle with Saddam Hussein -- to everyone's relief, without dropping any bombs.
But if the U.N. is to bring him into full compliance, it needs to be far more resolute and ready than it was this time.
Although some officials insist that Iraq emerged the victor, the U.N. successfully asserted its right to go anywhere in Iraq to uncover efforts to defy the disarmament provisions of the cease-fire resolution.
Bowing to international pressure, Mr.
Hussein will allow arms inspectors to search Iraq's Agriculture Ministry.


Step in Bee Security
The honey bee, one of nature's most social insects, rejects or accepts other bees depending on their scents.
When there are multiple scents, a new study has found, bees use the dominant smell as the basis for recognizing hivemates.
The finding, reported recently in Nature, may have its greatest significance to beekeepers who need methods to keep intruder bees from invading their stocks, said an author of the study, Dr.
Michael Breed, professor of environmental, population and organismic biology at the University of Colorado.


Chess
The game cannot be played in disregard of your opponents.
No matter how attractive your strategy may be, you cannot get so wrapped up in it as to ignore what your opponent is up to.
The history of the game is strewn with failures to divine the grossest traps that opponents can think up.
It doesn't matter that they are theoretical numskulls who cannot appreciate your great plans; if they can slip in a checkmate or arrange to do you out of a piece, they are dangerous.


Proposal for Hybrid Fund
Investors would be offered a new breed of mutual funds under a plan expected to be proposed on Tuesday by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The plan is intended to give the $1.5 trillion mutual fund industry more flexibility to sell products that involve thinly traded securities, like overseas stocks and shares of small companies, as well as certain bonds.


American Express And Visa Vie
Trying to ambush an ambusher, Visa U.S.A. will begin running an additional television commercial with an Olympic theme that addresses commercials sponsored by American Express.
The Visa commercial, by BBDO New York , is scheduled to appear tonight during NBC's coverage of the 1992 Summer Games, of which Visa in an official sponsor.
Commercials by Chiat/Day/Mojo in New York for American Express, which is not an Olympic sponsor, tweak Visa in a tactic known as ambush marketing.


Honors
*
Donald A. Macdonald, vice chairman emeritus at Dow Jones &amp; Company, New York, was named chairman of the national council of the American Advertising Museum, Portland, Ore.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Resists Being Labeled a Liberal
Gov.
Bill Clinton told members of the National Urban League today that Republican efforts to characterize the Democratic Presidential ticket as liberal were a "load of bull we've been paralyzed with for too long."
Mr.
Clinton, who spent the weekend traveling in California and Washington state in search of support from voters who backed President Bush in 1988 and Ronald Reagan in 1980 and 1984, preached a message of self-sufficiency and fiscal conservatism that he said should appeal to traditional Democratic constituencies as well.


For a Mental Workout
STUCK for an idea?
Here is a computer program that may get those creative juices flowing.
Mindlink Problem Solver, from Mindlink of North Pomfret, Vt., has four parts: the Gym, Idea Generation, Guided Problem Solving and Problem Solving.
The Gym is for a mental workout; the Idea Generation module is a simple way to come up with ideas; Guided Problem Solving is a tutorial on a structured method of approaching problem solving, and Problem Solving is the complete tool "for generating and organizing wishes, ideas and potential solutions," to quote the manual.


Indictment of Clark Clifford Is Expected in B.C.C.I. Case
The Manhattan District Attorney will seek an indictment this week against Clark M. Clifford, a top adviser to several Presidents, and his junior law partner, Robert A. Altman, law enforcement officials say.
The charges will relate to allegations that the two prominent Washington lawyers played a role in the multibillion-dollar fraud involving the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
The indictment by the District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, will include charges that Mr.
Clifford and Mr.
Altman lied to banking regulators in the 1980's when they swore that B.C.C.I. did not secretly control First American Bankshares, Washington's biggest bank holding company, the officials said.
Mr.
Clifford, a highly respected Washington insider who was a close friend and trusted confidant of Democratic Presidents, was then the chairman of First American.


New Council Is Becoming More Powerful
Seven months after the New York City Council expanded to 51 members, there are signs that the legislative body once derided as a rubber stamp is becoming more democratic and more powerful.
Both critics and supporters of the Council say it is taking significant steps toward being the counterweight to the Mayor, virtually an equal branch of government.
They say the Council was a major force in shaping the last two budgets and in setting tax policy.


Pittsburgh Papers Publish, But Strikers Block Trucks
The 70-day-old strike that has shut down this city's two daily newspapers has eroded people's patience.
But as several thousand copies of the papers reappeared today, support seemed to build for the union strikers in this city, where unionism is almost a religious denomination.
In a show of solidarity today, striking drivers linked arms and blocked trucks trying to deliver the first editions of The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and The Pittsburgh Press published since May.


Q&amp;A
The Boiling Pot
Q.
I bought a metal disk that is supposed to keep pots from boiling over.
How does it work?
A.
"Boiling is directly related to clouds raining," said Dr.
Alan J. Friedman, director of the New York Hall of Science in Queens.
When such a process is on the verge of happening, he explained, it requires a spot to start.
For a cloud, it would be particles of dust around which the first drop can form, generating other droplets, he said.
For boiling water or for the similar bubbling of carbonated beverages, there appears to be a single spot that is the source of the bubbles, a spot at which temperature and pressure conditions are just right to begin the release of vapor.
It is possible to encourage such a process on the verge of happening, as when clouds are seeded so that rainfall starts, Dr.
Friedman said, but it is also possible to suppress it mechanically, by putting the disk in the pot, for example.
"The ring either suppresses spots where boiling would start or makes so many spots that instead of one big bubble that throws water out of the pot, lots of little ones form, and the boiling is more uniform," he said.
"Marbles can also be used."
The seemingly unrelated phenomena of triggering sudden rain or sudden boiling can be described mathematically, Dr.
Friedman said.
Another example is a supersaturated solution that is slowly cooled below the freezing point but stays unfrozen until it is disturbed, then freezes in a flash.
Chelation
Q.
What is a chelated vitamin?
A.
"A vitamin is a vitamin," said Dr.
Michael Kazarinoff, professor of nutritional biochemistry at Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y., and does not need to be chelated to be made available for use by the body, but certain metals that the body uses as nutrients, like iron, zinc and copper, are absorbed better in chelated form, he said.
"Generally, chelation involves combinations of organic ions and metal ions in which there is ionic interaction between the metal and organic ions which enhances absorption," Dr.
Kazarinoff said.
For example, he said, "In a multivitamin preparation, there might be chelated iron, as a citrate or EDTA complex or an ascorbic complex, to enhance absorption of iron."
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) itself can act as a chelator with iron or zinc, he explained.
EDTA, commonly used as a food preservative, is also a typical chelator, he said.
Chela is the Greek word for claw.
A chelator or chelating agent is a molecule whose structure provides chemical "claws" to form bonds with a metal ion.
EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid or C10 H16 N2 O8 , has six places to form bonds with a metal ion.
Chelation therapy for poisoning with a heavy metal like cadmium, mercury or lead involves the use of a chelating agent to bond with the metal so it forms a compound that can be excreted.
. . .
Readers are invited to submit questions about science to Questions, Science Times, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Questions of general interest will be answered in this column, but requests for medical advice cannot be honored and unpublished letters cannot be answered individually.


BARCELONA: Swimming; Swimmer Ends His 8-Year Wait For Gold Medal
Eight years after he was edged out for a gold medal in Los Angeles, four years after he failed to make the United States swimming team for Seoul, Pablo Morales finally reached the end of an Olympic pool first.
His victory over Rafal Szukala of Poland today in the 100-meter butterfly was so close, decided by three-hundredths of a second, that Morales held on to the side of the pool nervously for a few seconds before turning to face the scoreboard.


Nissan Sales Strategy: Think 'Car,' Buy Mini-Van
Like most station wagons, the mini-van is more about utility than about fantasy.
Forget romance, power and style; these autos exist for grocery shopping, soccer games and weekend gardening projects.
But the Nissan Motor Company, in trying for the third time to sell mini-vans in the United States, is striving to balance the two worlds to tap the apparent discontent of one category of customers.
Its research detected a latent but smoldering resentment among baby boomers against driving a sluggish, boxy conveyance to fulfill family responsibilities.


Mott's Reviewing Beverage Account
Mott's U.S.A. said yesterday that it had begun to review its beverages account after five years at Ally &amp; Gargano in New York.
In a telephone interview, a Mott's spokeswoman in Stamford, Conn., confirmed reports of the review in this week's trade publications but declined to discuss the billings or to identify participants besides the incumbent.


Who's Calm and Cool? A Preseason Lageman
Whatever happened to the wild and crazy guy with the ponytail sticking out from underneath a bandana?
The guy who wore the Andrew Dice Clay T-shirt until, he said, "it got up and walked out of camp on its own." The guy who rode his Harley-Davidson motorcycle to lunch each day?
Who is this guy in the plain white T-shirt, the tan slacks and the baseball cap with the Swiss Army insignia over a regulation haircut, pretending that he is Jets defensive end Jeff Lageman?


Business Scene; Finger Pointing On Russian Debt
NO economic issue seems hotter in Russia this summer than the question of how quickly to force that nation's giant state-owned industrial enterprises to stand on their own, without Government subsidies.
The issue comes up in various forms, the latest being a struggle over who should pay off 500 billion rubles in corporate debt: the companies themselves or the Government.
As usual, the proposed solution tries to have it both ways, with President Boris N. Yeltsin neither cracking down on the companies nor paying all their bills.
The struggle over the corporate debt reflects a wider battle, of course.
The Yeltsin administration, prodded by the West, is trying to speed up the transition to a market economy.
But a speedy transition might bankrupt many industrial enterprises suddenly cut off from subsidies.
Naturally, their managers object, and increasingly they are getting their way.


Another American Boxer Manages to Solve System
Raul Marquez took his first step toward an Olympic medal this evening, but like his two teammates who survived opening-round competition on Sunday, the light middleweight from California learned that the days of jab-and-run tactics are over.
During the United States Olympic trials, Marquez and several others succeeded under the new computerized scoring system with this out-of-harm's-way technique.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.08
5.66
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.19
3.15
5.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.26
3.23
5.69
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.15
6.18
8.03
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.51
7.56
8.37
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.54
8.56
9.34
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.09
6.13
7.11
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


COMPANY NEWS
ALLEN-BRADLEY COMPANY INC., Milwaukee, an industrial-automation products concern and a unit of Rockwell International Corp., completed the purchase of Controlmatic Allen-Bradley S.A., Mexico City.
INSTINET CORP., New York, a computerized stock market information concern and a subsidiary of Reuters Holdings P.L.C., said it had acquired Bomar Securities L.P. of New York for $8 million in cash.
KERR ADDISON MINES LTD., Toronto, and Metall Mining Corp., announced an agreement for Metall to purchase for cash Kerr Addison's 50.4 percent interest in Minnova Inc., also of Toronto.
The agreement is valued at $136.6 million.
OMNICARE INC., Cincinnati, a health-care services concern, has acquired the institutional pharmacy business of privately owned Crystal Care Corp., Ashland, Ky., for an undisclosed amount of cash.
ROHR INDUSTRIES, and GE Aircraft Engines announced that Rohr would sell its share in Composite Technology Engine Components, the two companies' joint venture in San Marcos, Tex., to GE Aircraft Engines Composites Inc., a unit of GE Aircraft Engines.


Honda to Reduce Output At Auto Plants in Ohio
Rather than offer cash rebates to entice buyers, Honda of America Manufacturing Inc. will adjust to slower sales by trimming production at its two assembly plants in Ohio.
Honda said today that it would maintain its no-layoff policy.
The auto maker will lower production by reducing the speed of assembly lines at plants in Marysville and East Liberty, Ohio, and by using several half-days to train workers rather than build cars.


Scaling the Prison Wall Next to the Picket Fence
THIS is not a prison town.
It is a suburb the kind of suburb where the rush to Little League practice causes traffic jams -- that happens to have a prison in it.
Well, four prisons.
But it is determined not to be a prison town.
That is why people here want the prison escapes to stop.
"We're asking to be able to come home and not be concerned with what's going on around us," said Jeff Watcke, who lives on Peck Lane, behind the prisons.


Observer; An Unmailed Letter
Mrs.
M.
G. of Houma, Louisiana, writes that she is astounded by the sweet temper constantly displayed in these columns.
"Your veins," she says, "must be rich in the milk of human kindness. Don't you ever get grouchy, fed up and sick and tired of it all, like other people do?"
Ah, Mrs.
M.
G., if only you knew.
I am much too kind to write it, but at this very moment I am not only sick and tired of, but also thoroughly fed up with George Steinbrenner.
This is not all Steinbrenner's fault.
The New York newspapers, which refuse to let him just fade away, are equally to blame for perpetuating this eternal, inescapable, inevitable, endlessly tedious Steinbrenner story.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Manhattan District Attorney will seek an indictment this week against Clark Clifford, a top adviser to several Presidents, and his junior law partner, law enforcement officials say.
The charges relate to allegations that the lawyers played a role in the multibillion-dollar fraud involving B.C.C.I.  [ Page A1. ] Companies
Goodyear Tire and Rubber's second-quarter net soared fivefold to $109.7 million, a four-year high, as a result of cost-cutting, intense marketing of new products and asset sales.  [ D1. ]
Dow Corning earnings tumbled 84.4 percent because of a $45 million charge related to silicone gel breast implants.  [ D2. ]
Mobil's net income plunged 42.7 percent as domestic refining and marketing operations lost money; Chevron reported an 8.9 percent drop.
But with crude oil and natural gas prices up, ARCO's net rose 25.6 percent, and Phillips had a sixfold increase.  [ D4 ]
The chairman of Lloyd's of London nominated as his successor the author of a report on reforming the shaken market.  [ D5. ]
Wellcome Trust sold 270 million shares of Wellcome P.L.C., maker of the AIDS drug AZT, at $:8 each, raising about $4.14 billion, in the biggest private stock sale in history.  [ D4. ]
Honda of America plans to trim production at its two Ohio assembly plants, rather than offer cash rebates to entice buyers.
[ D7. ]
Canada's two troubled airlines will begin merger discussions.
The carriers, Air Canada and Canadian Airlines International Ltd., have been feuding for months.  [ D5. ]
American Express earnings rose 21 percent to $310 million, or 63 cents a share, but pretax operating earnings dropped more than 30 percent as struggles continued in the charge card business.  [ D4. ]
A Litton Industries unit illegally overcharged the Government for computer services in the mid-1980's and now faces $400 million in fines, Federal District Judge Mariana Pfaelzer ruled.  [ D2. ]
Dime Savings Bank was told by a Massachusetts court that eviction of tenants it has acquired because of mortgage defaults would require a time-consuming procedure.  [ D19. ] International
In the first Democratic attack on the free-trade agreement proposed with Mexico and Canada, the House majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt, said the pact did not include adequate safeguards for workers, the environment and public health.  [ D7. ]
Japan's stock market fell to a six-year low, despite the Government's administration of potent medicine to reinvigorate it.  [ D6. ]
The head of Thai Airways is to be ousted by Thailand's new civilian Government.  [ D6. ] Markets
Stocks closed mixed.
The Dow Jones industrial average gave up 3.51 points at 3,282.20, but in the broad market winning shares outnumbered losers 928 to 804.  [ D8. ]
Prices of most Treasury securities moved higher, with buying beginning in Tokyo.  [ D15. ]
Coffee futures prices fell sharply as mild Brazilian weather led to speculative selling.  [ D16. ]  The dollar settled lower.  [ D16. ] Today's Columns
Boeing shares have been sliding because Wall Street fears the aircraft maker will catch the airlines' maladies, even though it dominates its industry and wins high marks for its management, cost control and strong balance sheet.
Market Place.  [ D1. ]
Russia is caught in an economic bind: how to force its giant state-owned enterprises into a market economy without bankrupting them, and President Boris N. Yeltsin's approach is to compromise.
Louis Uchitelle: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Children's rights ads are being created pro bono for the Children's Defense Fund by Fallon McElligott and Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D19. ]


Crash Survivors Describe Journey of Fear and Death
Shortly after 11 A.M.
Sunday, the skies over Vernon Valley, N.J., were milky gray as the aged bus bounced up the steep hills and around the tight turns of Route 515.
Jose and Abigail Rivera were uneasy, lurching against each other in the middle of the 20-year-old bus packed with 43 others from Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
Perhaps, they told each other, it was just as well that they had left their 1-year-old daughter, Shantelle, at home.


CHRYSLER TO RAISE PRICES AN AVERAGE 2.6%
The Chrysler Corporation said yesterday that it planned to raise prices on its 1993 models by an average 2.6 percent, slightly less than the average price increase planned by the Ford Motor Company.
Ford had previously said that the bulk of its 1993 cars would carry prices 2.9 percent higher on average, with trucks up 3 percent over comparably equipped 1992 models.
A few models were not included in Ford's general pricing announcement.
Chrysler's tentative prices range from $8,397 for a Dodge Shadow-Plymouth Sundance and $11,941 for a compact Dodge Shadow-Plymouth Acclaim to $21,948 for a full-size Chrysler Fifth Avenue.
Base prices announced earlier for the new Dodge Intrepid, Eagle Vision and Chrysler Concorde midsize cars range from $15,930 to $18,341.


13-Year-Old Easily Takes a Gold in Diving
Diving like a small bird plunging into the sea and creating hardly a ripple, 13-year-old Fu Mingxia of China today became the second-youngest person in Olympic history to win an individual gold medal.
She simply dominated her older rivals off the 10-meter platform at the Municipal Pool on Montjuic.
The youngest person to win an individual gold medal was another diver, Majorie Gestring of the United States, who was 13 years 267 days old when she won in springboard diving at Berlin in 1936.


I.O.C. to Lewis: Hold the Calls
Carl Lewis used a portable phone to relate his feelings to a newspaper during Saturday's opening ceremony of the Barcelona Games.
The International Olympic Committee, far from amused by Lewis's action, says it's time for him to hang up.
The six-time gold medalist was in breach of the Olympic charter, the I.O.C. said today as it warned the American team to stop Lewis from acting as a journalist at the Games.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Kansas City Chiefs
Veteran free safety Deron Cherry announced his retirement yesterday after 11 years in the league.
Cherry, who will be 33 years old in September, talked at the end of the 1991 season about needing to spend more time in his new business.
He is a partner in an Anheuser-Busch beer distributorship in Kansas City.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Bush's Trampoline Act: Less Bounce This Time
Four years ago George Bush went to a Republican convention in a hot, steamy city on the Gulf Coast and turned his political fortunes around with a well-written speech that included a memorable phrase -- something about reading his lips.
Next month many of his aides are suggesting, as they read poll after poll showing him trailing Bill Clinton by 2-to-1 margins, that he will repeat his electoral escape act.
But the Republicans are meeting in Houston this year, not New Orleans, and the political context is different.
The economy is far weaker, the Democrats are far more united, Mr.
Bush's approval ratings are far lower than Ronald Reagan's were in 1988.


Review/Opera; Ghosts: In Minds, In Mirrors, In Flesh
Opera has treated literature badly, and it is this tradition of distortion and oversimplification that makes Benjamin Britten's "Turn of the Screw" come always as a pleasing surprise.
Yet even with Britten's fastidious tone-painting, the full effect of Henry James's famous ghost story presupposes an audience of readers.
Illustrations of it on a musical stage are so easily taken at face value, and lacking James's careful layers of reflection, slide into the mode of a Hammersmith horror movie.
Britten and James had helpful collaborators at the Glimmerglass Opera last night: Mark Lamos, who has directed the company's new production, and John Conklin, who has designed it.
Both add inventive metaphors for the eye in support of Britten's splendid music and James's exhaustive observation.


A Dream Is Dead. A Deed Survives.
There was a player for a West Coast team during the last decade who dared to be a dreamer and a romantic.
His idea of a good time?
Taking his wife, a bottle of wine, some bread and some cheese, and sitting on a beach facing the Pacific, watching the sun set.
Despite what tabloid mindsets will have you believe, such players do exist.


Vintage Squadron Marks Anniversary of World War II


DEERE, SEEING LOSS FOR UNIT, PLANS TO SLASH PRODUCTION
Deere &amp; Company said that its equipment division would lose money in 1992 and that the company would slash production of agricultural equipment by 20 percent in the fourth quarter in response to poor sales.
"Industry retail sales of agricultural equipment, both domestic and overseas, have been very weak in recent months as farmers continue to be cautious about major capital purchases," Deere's chairman, Hans W. Becherer, said in a news release.
The fourth quarter begins Aug. 1.
The company had previously predicted a drop in production, but not one this large.
Mr.
Becherer said production was down 13 percent from this time last year.
On the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Deere shares closed at $41.375, up 75 cents.


Review/Fashion; The Opening Round Goes to Lacroix
Christian Lacroix towered over the first days of the fall and winter couture shows that began over the weekend.
The fashion openings coincided with the finish of the Tour de France on the Champs- Elysees.
Streets were cordoned off, restricting movement of models and fans from one show to another.
Eight models had not arrived for Valentino's show at the Palais de Chaillot at the scheduled starting time Sunday evening.
But he had arranged for the audience to be deployed at small tables stocked with Champagne and crudites, so the hourlong delay was bearable.
The starting line of the Paris couture shows was crowded with Italian designers who have found a fashion home away from home.
Gianni Versace, of Milan, sent up some fireworks on the first day of the showings.
So did Mila Schon, another Italian, who alternated between miniskirts that left a gap of flesh between the hem and the over-the-knee boots, and tapered skirts that stopped at the knee.
Valentino's Craftsmanship


By Design; Paris When It Sizzles
Everyone here is either on vacation or dressed as if they were.
That's the impression, at least, that one could get while viewing the hordes of people milling around the Champs-Elysee in the torrid heat as the cyclists in the Tour de France sweep to their finale.
The boulevard resembles the main street in a giant resort town.
Everyone -- men, women, children and teen-agers -- is attired in sawed-off jeans, poplin shorts, colorful tank tops or shirts, beach sandals, sunglasses and baseball caps.


INSIDE
Coming Soon, a Space Rope
Astronauts aboard the space shuttle plan to deploy a half-ton satellite tethered to the craft by a 12-mile-long wire.
Science Times, page C1.
The States: Down and Out
States are in worse financial shape now than after any previous recession, and a new survey shows the 1993 fiscal year looks bleak.
Page B6.


Net Off at Mobil and Chevron; 2 Others Post Gains
Four big oil companies reported mixed earnings results today.
The Mobil Corporation said its net income plunged 42.7 percent.
The Chevron Corporation reported a decline of 8.9 percent.
ARCO said its net income rose 25.6 percent.
And the Phillips Petroleum Company reported a sixfold increase.
Like most oil companies that last week announced results for the quarter ended June 30, the four companies posted higher profits in exploration and production activities, with crude oil and natural gas prices modestly higher than in the 1991 quarter.


Books of The Times; Past Imperfect, and Future Even Worse
In the Heart of the Valley of Love  By Cynthia Kadohata  224 pages. Viking. $20.
In her luminous first novel, "The Floating World" (1989), Cynthia Kadohata gave readers a meticulously observed portrait of a Japanese immigrant family's experiences during the 1950's.
In her latest book, she makes a fast-forward leap into the future, abandoning the emotional intimacy of that earlier book to create an apocalyptic picture of America on the brink of civil disorder and social collapse.
The year is 2052, and Los Angeles has become a frightening, frightened city, ceaselessly patrolled by police helicopters and squad cars.
Water and gas are rationed, and nonsynthetic food is hard to find.
People are randomly arrested and jailed; some disappear completely.
Cancer rates have soared, and strange new diseases -- one of which causes the skin to break out in small, black pearls -- afflict the old and young.
Historians are saying "the Dark Century" has arrived.


Well, So It's Not Precisely the Ritz
Jim Courier and Pete Sampras, two very different players on the court, not surprisingly have decidedly dissimilar reactions to the apartment they are sharing in the athletes' village at the Olympics.
Courier, the world's top-ranked player and the favorite for the tennis singles gold medal here, finds life with the other, generally far less famous athletes to be invigorating.
Sampras, fresh off the first clay-court victory of his professional career, isn't so sure.


Washington Talk; Anger Unites Dodd and Helms, the Oddest Couple
In the days when Capitol Hill was another battlefield in the Central American revolution, Senators Christopher J. Dodd and Jesse Helms fortified opposite sides of the ramparts.
As the Connecticut Democrat worked to crack down on the death squads in El Salvador, the North Carolina Republican ushered their supposed leader through the halls of Congress.
In the battle for Nicaragua, Mr.
Dodd charged that the contras were obstacles to peace while Mr.
Helms characterized them as freedom fighters.


A Fetal Tissue Compromise Is Needed; What Abortion Isn't
To the Editor:
Characterizing President Bush as "pro-death" in "On Fetal Tissue, Bush Shows He's Pro-Death" (letter, July 14) is a bit heavy-handed, don't you think?
David Andrews's letter misrepresents the President's position on providing reproductive services to women.
I can set the record straight, as the official responsible for administering $150 million worth of family planning through Title X of the Public Health Service Act.
Mr.
Andrews refers to an appropriations bill to renew funds for Federal family planning clinics.
The program, whose funds have increased for 20 years under Title X, serves more than four million, primarily low-income or adolescent women with preconception counseling and preventive family-planning services.


Security Council Supporting U.N. Chief's Plan on Somalia
The Security Council today instructed the Secretary General to "mount an urgent airlift" to speed up the delivery of relief supplies to Somalia.
In its decision, the Council endorsed a plan that Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali proposed on Friday to expand United Nations forces in Somalia.
Relief workers estimate that starvation threatens a third of the 4.5 million to 6 million people in the country, which has been afflicted by not only drought but also factional warfare.


Iraq Is Said to Execute Merchants In a Campaign Against Profiteers
Faced with growing public discontent over soaring food prices, President Saddam Hussein was reported today to have started executing merchants as part of a stepped-up drive against speculators and profiteers.
Foreign diplomats here say normally reliable Iraqis have reported that seven merchants were hanged in the capital on Sunday after about 600 had been arrested.
Those executed were said to have included a member of the Hamra family, one of Baghdad's most prominent merchant families.


States' Strained Finances Reveal Recession's Toll
States are in worse fiscal condition than they were after any of the five previous national recessions, and, in a broad new survey by state legislatures, they report that the 1993 fiscal year looks bleak.
While the states' troubles with rising obligations and dwindling incomes have been closely tracked by fiscal experts in the recession who say the study suggests that further strains were placed on budgets in the last year by legislators torn between making tough budget choices and pleasing disgusted voters.


No Headline
If you think of Congress and the President as a weather vane, then the function of our organization is to change the direction of the wind. -- PAUL E. TSONGAS, who is trying to force the Presidential candidates to focus on the Federal deficit.  [ A13:1. ]


Corruption Charges Ripple Across a Town
In this well-preserved shore-front town, life has a certain predictability.
People are friendly, American flags flutter in the breeze and big-city problems, like crime and corruption, are usually kept at bay.
But over the last few months, a drama has unfolded that began with questions about the purchase of four automobile tires and resulted, earlier this week, in the dismissal of the chief of police, Dennis J. Anziano.


On My Mind; Saddam and Gore
The two largest New York tabloids carry triumphant front-page headlines: Saddam backs down.
Why not?
It's not often papers get to shout out such good news.
And the editors of Newsday and The Daily News have the proof right there in their hands -- the statement from the President of the United States announcing that Saddam Hussein had "caved in." What more do they need, right?


U.S. Team Gets Big Test In Beating Taiwan, 10-9
At the end of the United States Olympic baseball team's dugout, the scouting report on Taiwan's starting pitcher, left-hander Chen Jung-Lo, was taped to the wall.
"Tries to get hitters to chase bad balls early in the count," it read in part next to three photos of his delivery.
"Make him get the ball up. Does not have a true strikeout pitch. Be patient."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Cascade Natural Gas Corp., Seattle, filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $100 million of medium-term notes, through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co. *
Maxus Energy Corp. filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a proposed public offering of up to $350 million of debt securities. *
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co. filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $2 billion of debt securities through Dean Witter Reynolds.
Common *
Latin America Dollar Income Fund Inc. announced an initial public offering of five million shares of common stock at $15 a share, through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co. *
Megafoods Stores Inc. announced an initial public offering of two million shares of common stock at $7 a share, through Piper Jaffray Inc.
Ratings *
Williams Cos.' senior unsecured debt was lowered to Ba-1 from Baa-3 by Moody's Investors Service. *
Countrywide Credit Industries Inc.'s senior debt was raised to A from BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


McCAW CELLULAR IN VENTURE TO BUILD HONG KONG NETWORK
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. and its partners have been granted a license to set up and operate a digital cellular telephone system in Hong Kong, McCaw said.
Partners in the venture, operating under the name SmartCom Ltd., are McCaw, the largest cellular telephone company in the United States; Sun Hung Kai Properties Ltd., a large Hong Kong property owner and developer; ABC Communications, a Hong Kong paging company, and Town Khan, a company owned by China's Ministry of Post and Telecommunications.
The system will cost about $120 million to put in place.
McCaw's commitment is less than $10 million over the next five years, Todd Wolfenbarger, a McCaw spokesman, said.


Henry Starr, Leader In Advocacy Groups For Jews, Dies at 92
Henry Starr, the former chairman of the Lucius N. Littauer Foundation, which provides funds for research in Jewish studies, died on Saturday at the Nathan Littauer Hospital-Nursing Home, in Gloversville, N.Y.
He was 92 years old.
Mr.
Starr and Lucius Littauer, a Gloversville manufacturer of gloves who became a philanthropist and Congressman from New York, had several things in common: Both were raised in Gloversville; both had graduated from the high school there and had gone on to Harvard College, where Mr.
Starr earned a bachelor's degree in 1921 and a law degree in 1924.
And both were lifelong supporters of Jewish causes, including furthering Jewish education.


Lights, Cameras, Psycho-Dramas, Dysfunction!
NBC is in hyper-drive, seeking heroes and the human touch at the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
Kim Zmeskal falls off the balance beam.
O.K., we'll take Shannon Miller instead.
Jenny Thompson falters in the pool.
Nicole Haislett will do just fine.
At the gymnastics site, announcers John Tesh, Elfi Schlegel and Tim Daggett gradually moved on Sunday night from the "disaster" of Zmeskal's tumble and the ripple effects of her 9.35 out of 10.0 on the four-inch-wide beam to an enthusiasic embrace of Miller.
By evening's end, Tesh pronounced Miller's not-so-surprising emergence the story of the night.


Texaco Picks Europe Official
Texaco Inc. said yesterday that Glenn F. Tilton had been named president of Texaco Europe, effective on Sept. 1.
The Europe unit, one of four international divisions of Texaco, encompasses the subsidiaries engaged in exploration and production, manufacturing, trading and supply, and marketing operations in 22 countries in Europe.


Mansdorf Is Out Of the Games
Amos Mansdorf of Israel, the No. 14-seeded player in men's singles, dropped out of the Summer Games today because of a stress fracture in his left foot.
Mansdorf will be replaced in the singles, a head-on, single-elimination competition, by Javier Frana of Argentina.
The Israeli doubles team of Mansdorf and Gilad Bloom will be replaced by Slovenians Istok Bozic and Blaz Trupej.


COMPANY NEWS: Disarming the Utility Poles; An Acquired Taste For Creosote
To the companies that have to replace them, telephone poles are a nuisance.
To the Environmental Protection Agency, they may be a source of toxic wastes.
But to Dr.
Ralph Portier's bacteria, they're dinner.
There are an estimated 120 million poles on which electric utilities and telephone companies around the nation festoon their lines.
Natural decay, normal renovation of roads and various highway accidents mean that about 2.4 million of these poles need to be replaced every year.


Developed Countries Still Have Debt to Africa
To the Editor:
"Partners in the Slave Trade" (Op-Ed, July 10), Caroline Alexander's condescending history lesson and critique of Jesse Jackson's call for reparations to Africa for the injustices of slave trading, ignores Mr.
Jackson's basic thesis.
For the last 500 years, Africa has continually been exploited for its resources -- human, mineral and wildlife -- by more developed nations, while little or no thought has been given to the political or industrial development of the continent.
Furthermore, while other groups of people have experienced equally egregious acts of devastation (Eastern Europe during the cold war, Holocaust survivors, Japanese-Americans interned during World War II) and received reparation, Africans have not enjoyed one act of contrition for the pain caused to them by the slave trade.


Teen-Ager Arrested in Death of Theater Manager
The teen-ager arrested in the stabbing death of a movie theater manager in Westchester County earlier this month has waived extradition from New Mexico, authorities said today.
Eduardo Javier Castillo-Rojas, 16 years old, of Chihuahua, Mexico, was arrested Saturday in Las Cruces, N.M., and charged with second-degree murder, said Larchmont's police chief, William Keresey.


The 1992 CAMPAIGN; Old Park, New Pitch


Galileo's Optical Edge
RESEARCHERS in Italy who examined a lens from Galileo's telescope with modern interferometric equipment say they found an extraordinarily low level of diffraction, reflecting a high level of craftsmanship.
Their report in the July 9 issue of Nature noted that although the optical performance of the telescope was degraded because of chromatic aberration, nevertheless "at single wavelength the telescopes are nearly optically perfect."


The Envelope, Please, And With an Address
LAURA and Nicholas are away for the summer, exploring the verdant hills of Vermont.
Laura, who is 14 years old, made me promise not to embarrass her by writing every day.
So far I have honored her wishes.
However, a personal computer equipped with mailing label software places the promise in jeopardy by making it so easy to write.
The Avery Commercial Products Division, maker of the Avery labels that are standard fare in office supply stores, also makes software for DOS and Macintosh computers.
In less than two minutes the Mac and its LaserWriter IIg printer on my desk have pumped out dozens of elegantly printed, peel-off address labels that will be used to send letters and postcards to Vermont. (Don't worry, Laura, half are for Nick.)


Dinkins Gets Cool Hello As His S.I. Trip Starts
Mayor David N. Dinkins took the ferry across the bay to Staten Island yesterday, in an effort to learn more about both the borough and its president.
But before he even got a chance to meet the people, he ran into a frosty reception from their leader.
Mr.
Dinkins and many of his top aides are spending the week on Staten Island, the latest stop of his campaign to convince the voters that he is the Mayor of all the people, not just the people in Manhattan.
And there is probably no part of New York that feels more alienated than the largely Republican and conservative Staten Island, where many residents support secession from the city and where Mr.
Dinkins received scant support in the 1989 mayoral race.


Campaigns For Congress Take Shape
As the deadline for filing candidate petitions drew New York's Congressional races into sharper focus yesterday, City Councilwoman Susan D. Alter became the latest white aspirant in a district drawn with minorities in mind.
She is preparing a Democratic primary challenge to the black incumbent, Edolphus Towns, in a Brooklyn district that stretches from East Flatbush to East New York.
All around New York State, the petition deadline forced candidates to tip their hands in a range of races, from the hot fight to fill a new seat in a largely Hispanic Brooklyn neighborhood to the effort of an old Bronx lion, former Representative Mario Biaggi, to roar again.


Surrogate Law vs. Last Hope of the Childless; Facing New Restrictions in New York, Couples Vow to Find Loopholes
In the five years since Mary Beth Whitehead-Gould attracted national attention by refusing to relinquish custody of the child she had borne as a surrogate mother, efforts to curb the baby-bearing industry have been gaining momentum across the nation.
Last month, New York became the 18th state to sharply restrict the practice, as legislators who call it baby selling outvoted those who see it as a legitimate last hope.
In many ways, the debate in New York was more emotional than most, because the surrogacy business has been more active here than in any other place in the country.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Jesse Jackson; Mississippi Trip Offers Jackson Campaign Role
Artie Armstrong was 14 years old when he tagged along with his father in the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's 1983 voter registration "crusade" in the South, an effort that led to the civil rights leader's first run for the Democratic Presidential nomination a year later.
"I'm a product of that 1983 crusade," said Mr.
Armstrong, now 23 and running in the Democratic primary on Aug. 4 to represent a newly drawn state legislative district in a mostly black area of Jackson, Miss.
"It got me interested in politics, and now he has come back to help us again."


Riney Reportedly Wins Sunoco Work
Hal Riney &amp; Partners in New York is reported to have been awarded, after a four-month review, the Sun Company's Sunoco account, with billings estimated at $8 million to $9 million.
The account had been at Wells Rich Greene BDDP for almost 20 years.
In a telephone interview yesterday, Greg Driscoll, Sun's director of planning and development in Philadelphia, declined to confirm the report in this week's Adweek.
He said that "a preferred agency was chosen," adding, "Once we complete negotiations, we will provide the name."


Japan's Interest Rate Cut Fails to End Stock Slide
Even though the Japanese Government has administered potent medicine for reinvigorating the stock market in the last few days, the market resumed its downward slump today and reached a six-year low, adding to the deep gloom surrounding Japan's beleaguered financial system.
The Bank of Japan cut its official discount rate this morning to 3.25 percent from 3.75 percent and the Government said Friday evening after an emergency meeting of top politicians that it would accelerate a program of public works spending to jump-start the economy.


Developed Countries Still Have Debt to Africa; Corrupted Helpers
To the Editor:
"Partners in the Slave Trade" (Op-Ed, July 10) by Caroline Alexander mentions that slavery existed in certain African tribes before the white man's arrival.
But she neglects to mention the form of slavery there.
Being a "slave" in an African village did not mean you were not considered or treated like a human being.
Becoming a slave could have been as a result of a settlement of debt or being captured in battle.
Perhaps most important, a slave in an African village did not necessarily remain a slave for life.
One could marry out of slavery, or in many instances, "slavery" was for a specific time period (much like the Europeans indentured servant system).


Developed Countries Still Have Debt to Africa; The Slave Coast
To the Editor:
As a Ghanaian, I am dismayed by "Partners in the Slave Trade," (Op-Ed, July 10) by Caroline Alexander.
Ms.
Alexander is correct to assert that slavery existed in Africa before the arrival of whites.
But by pushing her argument to the extreme, rather than correcting common misperceptions, she has helped perpetuate a false picture of one of history's greatest criminal enterprises.
My country stands in stark contrast to her prevailing image of whites waiting benignly offshore while deep in the interior, in places like Equatorial Africa, indigenous slave traders were generating the bulk of the continent's human export.


Man in the News: Rolf Ekeus; Tracker of Iraqi Arms
At the eye of the diplomatic hurricane that enveloped Iraq and the United Nations over the last week and then faded almost as suddenly as it appeared, stood Rolf Ekeus, a mild-mannered career diplomat from Sweden.
Mr.
Ekeus is executive chairman of the United Nations special commission responsible for disposing of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, and has represented the United Nations in the dispute that began when Iraq blocked inspectors from entering a ministry on July 5.


Honecker's Early Return to Germany Is Doubtful
Despite strong suggestions last week that Erich Honecker, the former East German leader, would soon be brought home to face trial, it now appears that he will not emerge from his Moscow refuge anytime soon.
Germany's largest newspaper, Bild, reported on Sunday that discussions aimed at finding a formula for Mr.
Honecker's return had "definitively collapsed." A spokesman for the German Foreign Ministry, asked about the report, said negotiations over Mr.
Honecker's fate were continuing but were "quite clearly difficult."


A Victim of the Nazis To Return Documents To a Church in Germany
Generosity to the German people did not come easily to a Westchester woman who was a prisoner at Auschwitz in 1944.
But as a result of her beneficence, a collection of seven medieval manuscripts taken from Germany by an American soldier at the end of World War II will be delivered to an official of the German consulate at a ceremony at the Pierpont Morgan Library in Manhattan on Aug. 6.
A German diplomat will then return the manuscripts to the place that housed them for several centuries: St.
Anthony's Roman Catholic Church in the village of Hambach, near Aachen.


Three Factions in Bosnia Begin Talks in London
Leaders of the three factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina gathered in London today for another round of talks with a European Community mediator about a political settlement.
The prospects of success appeared dim as the talks began.
The representative of the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government told the mediator that he could talk only about the fighting, not about future political arrangements, and Serbian representatives said they had a mandate to lay claim to almost two-thirds of the republic's territory.


Chinese Diver Becomes 2d Youngest Olympic Gold Medalist


California Governor Predicts Prolonged Budget Stalemate
California's budget stalemate will probably last at least another week, easily making it the longest in state history, Gov.
Pete Wilson said today.
Mr.
Wilson, a Republican, and the Democratic-controlled Legislature have been deadlocked over how to come up with $6 billion to keep the state operating.
Today the state issued another round of i.o.u.'s to pay its bills, bringing to more than $1 billion the total amount mailed out in 27 days.


Bravos Are Mutual as Philharmonic Visits Argentina
They heard the tango with all its melancholy, ate big Argentine steaks and other less-familiar beef parts, partied until early morning, attended embassy receptions, promenaded down fashionable Florida Street, loading up on leather goods, sipped coffee at outdoor cafes, played in a gilded music hall in which the faintest pianissimo was audible, and were saluted by audiences that clapped for almost 20 minutes to get a second encore.
On Saturday night the New York Philharmonic ended three concerts in this city, which is considered the cultural center of Latin America and would prefer to think of itself as a distant capital of Europe.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Budget; Tsongas and Rudman Lead Drive to Confront the Deficit
Senator Warren B. Rudman, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas and former Commerce Secretary Peter G. Peterson are forming a bipartisan coalition that they hope will force this year's Presidential candidates and other politicians to address the Federal budget deficit head on.
In interviews, they said they planned to raise at least $1 million and form chapters around the country that would bring public pressure to bear on politicians to make the difficult tax and spending decisions necessary to get the deficit under control.


AST RESEARCH JOINS PC PRICE WAR AND REPORTS LOWER NET
AST Research Inc., a leading maker of I.B.M.-compatible personal computers, announced price cuts of up to 47 percent, intensifying the industry's price wars.
The company cut prices across all categories.
The average retail price of its AST Bravo desktop systems, for example, is expected to be 20 percent lower than competing Compaq Deskpro models, said James Schraith, AST's vice president of United States sales and service.
AST also reported that its fiscal fourth-quarter profit fell 9 percent, but said it was pleased because sales continued to climb despite the recession and tough competition.
During the April-June quarter, AST earned $18.6 million, or 59 cents per share, compared with $20.4 million, 64 cents per share, during the last year's fourth quarter.
Sales rose 26 percent in the quarter, from $211 million to $266 million.
Net income for the year rose 6 percent to $68.5 million, or $2.16 per share, from $64.7 million, $2.13 per share, during fiscal 1991.


Patterns
Bare-Chested in the Park
The men's spring fashion season opened in Central Park yesterday morning with birds singing, children playing and guys walking around in their underwear.
The Perry Ellis show was held in the Sheep Meadow, across from Tavern on the Green.
Fashion editors sat in folding chairs, melting in the sun.
An accordionist played "La Mer."


Air Marshal Is Losing Top Post at Thai Airline
The chairman of Thai Airways International, Kaset Rojananil, created last year's public relations disaster at the airline when he complained publicly that its women flight attendants were not pretty enough and should be hired as if they were contestants in a "beauty contest."
This year it is not just Thai feminists who are outraged by Air Chief Marshal Kaset, who is also Thailand's supreme military commander and at the center of the worst crisis at the national flag carrier in its 32 years of flying.


Harazin Works The Phones
With the first significant trading deadline of the season approaching on Friday, Mets General Manager Al Harazin said today that he is pursuing potential deals with seriousness and determination.
"I keep trying to come up with new possibilities all the time," Harazin said today.
"Maybe if you turn over enough rocks, you'll find something."


Sheehan Finally Wins U.S. Open
The United States Women's Open was the tournament Patty Sheehan would go to each year to get her heart broken.
It was where her swing and her nerves failed down the stretch, where other players made the key shots, and where she found a way to finish second in the championship she wanted more than any other.
But today, in an 18-hole playoff at historic Oakmont, Sheehan received a cosmic payback as the 35-year-old defeated Juli Inkster by two strokes to win the 47th edition of the biggest title in women's golf.


In a First, Krone Wins Belmont Meeting
Julie Krone rode past a milestone in New York's racing history yesterday when she closed Belmont Park's spring and summer meeting with more winners than any other jockey and became the first female rider to take the championship.
It wasn't the first time the 29-year-old jockey from Benton Harbor, Mich., had won a season's title.
She has been the leading jockey at Monmouth Park and the Meadowlands in New Jersey, and last winter she spent her first full season at Gulfstream Park in Florida and became the champion there.
But this was the first time she had reigned in New York, where Mike Smith held the title for the last seven meetings at Belmont, Aqueduct and Saratoga.


Classical Music in Review
Wong On-yuen  Hu-chin Player Taipei Theater
To a Westerner, the hu-chin family of Chinese string instruments might seem to allow little scope for virtuosity.
Most of them have only two strings, extending from a small drum-shaped base to large pegs at the top of a long, thin neck, and the bow hairs are permanently confined between the strings.
But Wong On-yuen revealed unimagined possibilities in his recital on Friday evening.
He played no fewer than 10 different instruments of several types, including the relatively familar erh-hu, with unfailing mastery.
The varieties of color he produced were enough to make a listener momentarily regard the four strings of Western fiddles as needless luxury.


Thompson Is Angered By Drug-Testing Policy
It got much worse for Jenny Thompson today, and the United States swimmer implied that drug-testing policies were a reason for her early Olympic heartbreak.
After failing to qualify for the finals in the 200-meter freestyle, Thompson held an impromptu pool-side news conference.
She hinted that random drug-testing procedures by FINA, swimming's governing body, might have cost her a shot at two gold medals, one Sunday because the wrong swimmer -- herself -- was tested after the 100-meter freestyle, and another today in the 200 because of the drain of the testing process.


Determined Cuomo Tells Nassau That Deal's Done
With the Legislature returning Tuesday for a rare summer session, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo sought to slam the door today on what he called a last-minute bid by Nassau County officials to change the terms of a fiscal rescue for the county that he and legislative leaders agreed to last week.
Many lawmakers from both parties characterized the dispute as merely a negotiating glitch, almost surely not enough to unravel the entire package of bills to be acted on here, including an $800 million bond act vigorously championed by the Governor as part of his economic-development agenda.


Taking Steps To Curtail The Hazards On a Road
It seems everyone here has a story about an accident they have seen or heard or had where the aptly named Breakneck Road intersects with Route 515.
Four large warning signs have been posted since 1979 on Route 515 south of the intersection, before the steep incline that ends at Breakneck Road, a result of a crash a year or two before.


CHRONICLE
HAROLD HOLZER, an expert on Lincoln who became a top confidante to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, is leaving government for the world of art.
Mr.
Holzer, who started working for Mr.
Cuomo as the press secretary for his 1977 mayoral campaign, is to become director of communications for the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
He will leave his $95,000-a-year job as vice president of the state Urban Development Corporation next month.
His new salary was not disclosed.


METRO DIGEST
EMPIRE BLUE CROSS WANTS A RATE RISE
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, which provides health insurance to 8.6 million subscribers in New York, said that its financial condition has sharply deteriorated in the last 18 months, and it warned that its reserves would run out by the end of the year.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY COUNTDOWN AT THE DAILY NEWS
With losses mounting at The Daily News, its search for a new owner is apparently reaching a conclusion, and the decision as to who gets the bankrupt paper could come quickly.
Yesterday, Conrad Black, owner of The Daily Telegraph in London, appeared before the unions in person for the first time though union leaders said he did not offer any breakthrough proposals.
B3.


Corrections
A report on Sunday in the Long Island Guide column of the Long Island Weekly misstated the date and telephone number for a tour of artists' studios sponsored by the Jimmy Ernst Artists' Alliance of East Hampton.
It is this Friday, not Saturday; the information number is (516) 725-1762.


BBDO to Promote Russian Privatization
The Russian State Committee for Privatization selected BBDO Worldwide in Moscow to handle the advertising and public relations accounts for its efforts to convert formerly state- and municipally owned industrial enterprises into private concerns.


EMPIRE BLUE CROSS SAYS MONEY WOES REQUIRE RATE RISE
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, which provides health insurance to 8.6 million subscribers in New York, said yesterday that its financial condition had deteriorated sharply in the last 18 months and warned that its reserves would run out by the end of the year unless it received another rate increase.
The company has long had financial difficulties, but yesterday it disclosed details of the severity of its problems.


Executive Changes
INTERNATIONAL MOBILE MACHINES CORP., King of Prussia, Pa., appointed William W. Erdman president and chief operating officer.
MERCK AGVET, Rathway, N.J., an animal health and agricultural products unit of Merck &amp; Co., named John M. Preston executive vice president.


Shifts at New York Fed Announced
Peter D. Sternlight, an executive vice president at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York who has been in charge of putting the Federal Reserve Board's monetary policy into effect for the last 13 years, will take early retirement at the end of September, it was announced yesterday.
E.
Gerald Corrigan, the president of the New York Fed, said in a statement that Mr.
Sternlight's decision to retire had led to a series of organizational and personnel changes at the New York Fed.


Ulster Talks Gain Major Goal: To Keep Going
The latest attempt at a negotiated settlement of the civil strife in Northern Ireland has achieved modest success in the last three months.
Leaders of the Northern Ireland political parties, both Protestant and Roman Catholic, and senior officials of the British and Irish Governments have agreed not to discuss the talks publicly.


Corrections
The Peripherals column in Science Times yesterday misstated the amount of extra memory made available for the writer's personal computer by the use of a program called QMAPS, from Quadtel.
It was about 100 kilobytes, not 1 kilobyte.


Coke Dips Into On-Line Advertising
The Coca-Cola Company, in its initial foray into advertising on an on-line, interactive computer service, is sponsoring an "Olympic Preview" on the Prodigy network, an effort meant to complement the soft-drink marketer's extensive advertising and promotional programs tied to NBC's broadcast of the 1992 Summer Olympics.
The program, which continues through Aug. 9, when the Games end, includes same-day Olympic results and statistics, a trivia contest and, of course, ad messages.


American Volleyballers Shave Their Heads in an Olympic Protest


Francis J. Prout; Consultant, 76
Francis J. Prout, a former management consultant, died on Saturday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Prout died of a heart attack, said a son, Alexander.


Fund Manager Convicted of Taking Milken Bribes
Patricia Ostrander, former manager of a $1.7 billion mutual fund at Fidelity Investments of Boston, was convicted yesterday in Federal court in Manhattan of taking bribes from Michael R. Milken in exchange for buying hundreds of millions of dollars of the junk bonds he sold at Drexel Burnham Lambert.
Mrs.
Ostrander, a pioneer among women who made it big in the financial world in the 1960's and 1970's, took the stand in her own defense last week, contending that a very profitable personal investment she made with Mr.
Milken was perfectly legal, not a bribe to channel Fidelity business to him.
Mr.
Milken also testified that he had never given her a payoff or any kind of bribe.


The Olympian Task of Feeding the Fans
You won't hear the Catalan equivalent of "Buy me some peanuts and Cracker Jack" at the Summer Olympics.
In fact, not only are nuts and popcorn banned from the stadiums and arenas (too messy and crunchy underfoot), but when the Olympics were being planned, no one was even sure if Spanish fans would want to eat while watching diving, gymnastics or pole-vaulting.


Pennzoil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Metropolitan Diary
TO be filed under "W," as in "Who's on first?"
The place is a crowded M-10 bus heading down Seventh Avenue.
Of the many conversations going on, one between two middle-aged women is heard above the din.
Their chatter becomes even more animated as the vehicle approaches the electronic billboard outside Madison Square Garden.
Woman No. 1: Oh, look! Neil Diamond is coming here in August.
Woman No. 2: Oh, I love him. His plays are a riot.
Woman No. 1: No, no. You're thinking of Neil Simon.
Woman No. 2: Oh, yes.
The one who used to sing with that other guy -- you know, what's-his-name?
Woman No. 1: No, no. That's Paul Simon. He sang with Garfunkel.
Woman No. 2: Right. His name I can remember.
. . .
Conversation between shopper and clerk, overheard by Jodie Landes at the Gap store at Lexington Avenue and 58th Street.
Shopper: Where is your sales merchandise?
Clerk: We do not run sales here at the Gap.
However, if you'll come this way I'll be happy to show you some specially marked-down items.
. . .
Dramatis personae: Nervous, middle-aged patient (me) being examined in the East Side office of one of the city's most eminent eye surgeons, a fastidious man in his mid-60's, not long on patience.
The patient's edginess is causing high but inaccurate readings for eye pressure.
Surgeon: Please try to relax.
Loosen your tie.
Think of something very relaxing or I can't get a true reading
Patient: O.K.
Surgeon, several minutes later: That's better. What are you thinking about?
Patient: The Mozart clarinet concerto.
Surgeon, animated: For heaven's sake, don't think about the first movement.
It's very fast!
Think about the second movement, the andante.
It's much more relaxing. -- DAVID J. YURICK
. . .
Dear Diary:
Waiting for the M-104 bus near Columbus Circle, I noticed that the fountain at the Columbus statue was spraying pink water.
The city must be sprucing up, I thought, as I boarded the bus.
What a town!
I put on my Walkman just in time to catch the news: "Last night, protesters poured red ink into the Columbus fountain to denounce abortion rights."
What a town! -- CHARLES MERRILL
. . .
THE WHEELCHAIR SET  The lady on my right, age 84 I would say, her hair dyed dark blond, wears a hair net.
One can tell she is wearing a hairnet because the elastic band that holds the net together is several shades darker than her hair and looks like a dark thin pencil line across her forehead.
The hairnet market still exists at Woolworth's.
The hairnet lady, looking quite alert, is in a wheelchair.
The woman attending her is sitting on a park bench, eyes closed.
She hasn't moved one iota and appears to be in a deep sleep.
The lady with the hairnet, as the wind blows softly, smiles and observes the passers-by, oh, so carefully, and resolutely stares ahead. -- HARRIET DIAMOND Dear Diary:
I'm heading south on Broadway, crossing Houston Street.
Behind me I hear a small, firm voice.
"Taxi!"
I'm in a rush so I don't turn around, but as I walk the voice seems to follow me.
I hear the following conversation:
"We're pretty far from home."
"Taxi!"
"A taxi would be expensive. Why don't we take the bus?"
"Taxi!"
"I know you hate the bus. O.K., how about the subway?"
"Taxi!"
"Do you realize a taxi is going to cost us about $10 and it will take longer than the subway?"
"Taxi!"
Curiosity finally gets the better of me and I turn around.
There is a woman dressed in old sweat pants, a smudged T-shirt and sneakers.
In the stroller is her daughter, about 16 months old, resplendent in a starched Laura Ashley jumper.
I never thought anyone under the age of 50 could suit the word imperious.
The mother notices me chortling.
"What can I tell you?" she says with a sigh.
"Her first word was 'mall.' " -- JUDITH NEWMAN
. . .
Metropolitan Diary welcomes contributions of short anecdotes, observations and light verse about life in the New York region.
Unused material cannot be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, self-addressed envelope.


SUNBEAM-OSTER PLANS TO SELL 23% IN A PUBLIC OFFERING
Sunbeam-Oster Inc., the appliance company, hopes to raise more than $300 million by selling about a quarter of the company in a public offering.
The proposed sale of 20 million shares will leave about 77 percent of Sunbeam in the hands of a limited partnership that includes the company's top managers, now based in Rhode Island.
Common shares in the offering would be priced at $15 to $18 apiece.
The controlling partnership, Sunbeam-Oster Equities, will also retain warrants redeemable for additional shares, according to a preliminary prospectus filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Sunbeam-Oster formerly operated as Pittsburgh-based Allegheny International Inc.


New Scheme Aims to Shake Hampton Loose
The way the Giants are shuttling running backs in and out of the lineup in training camp, you can hardly tell who's in and who's out, even with a scorecard.
But in the long run, if the Giants are to improve their disappointing 8-8 record of last season, Rodney Hampton will almost always have to be in.
Last year, his second in the National Football League, Hampton became only the fourth Giant to rush for 1,000 yards in one season (the others were Joe Morris, Ron Johnson and Ottis Anderson).
He achieved that despite sitting out the first two games with a sprained right shoulder.
His 1,059 rushing yards included 140 against the Houston Oilers, 137 and 99 against the Phoenix Cardinals, 104 against the Cleveland Browns and 96 against the Pittsburgh Steelers.


San Diego Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Bowman Expects to Drop Coaching Job
SCOTTY BOWMAN said yesterday that he would probably step down as interim coach of the Pittsburgh Penguins and return to the front office next season.
Bowman joined the Stanley Cup champions as director of player recruitment in 1990 but took over as coach after Bob Johnson was stricken last year with brain cancer, which took his life.
Bowman said the Penguins would be making plans for a new coach.
"I think I'll be back in my other job," he said.
General Manager CRAIG PATRICK declined to comment until he talks to Bowman.


Lawsuit Fights Manhattan Race
A lawsuit filed this week by two public-interest groups is aimed at red-flagging the Marlboro Grand Prix Indy-car race, scheduled for its first running next July in lower Manhattan.
The New York Public Interest Research Group and SmokeFree Educational Services filed the suit against the City of New York and its Department of Transportation, charging that the city failed to do a proper environmental assessment and circumvented land-use review procedure.


High Court in New Jersey Upholds Death Penalties
The New Jersey Supreme Court today moved a step closer toward the state's first execution since it reinstated capital punishment 10 years ago, ruling that a death sentence had been fairly imposed on a man convicted of hiring someone to kill his wife.
In a separate ruling today, the court upheld the death sentence of another man in the fatal beating of a woman, only the second time it has upheld a sentence in the 33 cases it has reviewed since the death penalty was reinstated.


Family to Get $1.5 Million in Slaying by Mental Patient
The family of a 9-year-old girl who was stabbed to death by a mental patient in 1989 agreed yesterday to drop a lawsuit against the State of Connecticut in return for $1.5 million.
The case was to have gone to trial yesterday.
"This enables the family to move on from this point forward," said William R. Davis, a lawyer for Catherine and Ronald Short, whose daughter Jessica was stabbed repeatedly on a Middletown street.
Authorities said the killer, David Peterson, had walked out of the minimum-security state psychiatric hospital where he was a patient.


Hope Miller Lessman, Actress and Realtor, 63
Hope Miller Lessman, a former actress and real estate executive, died on July 25 at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 63 years old.
She died of breast cancer, said her son, Lance.


Loral-Thomson Alliance To Buy LTV Unit Collapses
A short-lived alliance between the Loral Corporation and Thomson C.S.F. of France to acquire the missiles unit of the LTV Corporation collapsed today after Loral rebuffed the demands by Thomson to increase its stake in the deal above 10 percent.
Loral said it would move ahead on its own, pledging to offer "not more than $240 million" for the missile unit.
It said it expected to complete the deal in August.


Loral Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jets' Hasty Makes Right Side the Wrong Side to Test
Over the last couple of years, the left cornerback spot for the Jets has cornered the market in attention paid.
Tony Stargell started there as a rookie in 1990.
Mike Brim replaced him as a Plan B free agent last season.
This year, Erik McMillan, a two-time Pro Bowl selection at free safety, is being tried at left cornerback.
It makes you wonder who plays right cornerback for the Jets.
Opposing quarterbacks haven't been wondering, though.
They just do a lot of looking the other way when they see James Hasty over there.


Logicon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Centerior Energy reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Helping Samoan Students Beat Odds
For years, Samoan students were viewed as troublemakers at Rainier Beach High School in one of this city's impoverished and high-crime areas.
Most days, some hung around outside the school, skipping class and smoking pot.
Inside the school, others often recruited classmates into gangs.
Many dropped out.
Many more were expelled.


Review/Fashion; The Legs Here, The Lips There
A funny thing happened as Christian Dior's couture show got under way at the Grand Hotel here on Monday afternoon.
After two predictable calf-length skinny dresses, a short, full-skirted style appeared on the runway, and everybody applauded.
It bore a family resemblance to the clothes that made the House of Dior famous in 1947, though it bared the knees rather than the ankles.
Each time the short shape appeared, the applause was repeated.
Were the haute-couture customers signaling a preference for full skirts?
Or were they casting their votes for short ones, which are beginning to look like an endangered species as the fall and winter couture openings hit their stride?


Bank of Boston Names Chemical Bank Official
The Bank of Boston Corporation yesterday hired Edward A. O'Neal, a senior executive from Chemical Bank in New York, to lead the New England bank's effort to expand its consumer businesses.
Mr.
O'Neal, 48 years old, earned high marks at Chemical for his management of its consumer banking business during the mid- and late 1980's, when the Chemical Banking Corporation unit increased its share of the New York market.


Officer Who Clashed With Local Leader Put On Desk Duty
A police sergeant accused of beating a Brooklyn community leader and her adult sons during a family dispute last Thursday was stripped of his badge and gun and placed on desk duty yesterday, the police said.
A police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch, said the decision to place Sgt.
Peter Viola, a patrol supervisor in the 81st Precinct, on modified duty was "an attempt to show the community that we are sincere in our efforts to find out what, in fact, did occur that evening." But Officer Bloch added, "The actions are not prejudicial in any way."


Kerr-McGee reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; The Ecstasy Of a Medal, Then Agony
JON OLSEN thought he had won an Olympic bronze medal.
When he looked up at the scoreboard above the chlorine-blue pool after splashing through the 100-meter freestyle, his name was below that of Aleksandr Popov of the Unified Team and Stephan Caron of France.
Minutes later, as the 23-year-old American prepared to go to the medal ceremony, he heard a voice crackle across an official's walkie-talkie: Gustavo Borges of Brazil had earned the silver.
"I knew," the United States swimmer was saying now, "that pushed me down to fourth."


Tambrands Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stirring the Pot With: Ella Brennan; In a Restaurant Family, Big Mama's the Boss
ELLA BRENNAN was enraged.
Despite everything her family, the restaurant dynasty, could muster, a casino may be built in New Orleans.
A law allowing gambling was passed in spite of the family's lobbying, in spite of the community resistance they organized, in spite of every favor the Brennan family called in.
Miss Ella was
enraged
.
It was early June.
The state legislature had just approved the motion.
The telephone at the family's flagship restaurant was ringing as usual.
But the tape-recorded message that sometimes greets callers -- a praline-sweet "Hello! You've reached Commander's Palace! I'm busy right now, but if you just hold on I'll be right with you!" -- was playing more than usual.
Miss Ella had her two grown children and a passel of nieces and nephews studying the legislative record.
No one was free to answer the telephone.


Sybron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wine Talk
WHEN the bottom fell out of the wine market in 1973 and 1974, I had the good fortune to acquire several cases of Chateau Lagrange 1970 for -- is it possible? -- about $4 a bottle.
There are still a few bottles in the cellar and they are, if one opened a year ago is any indication, still delicious.
It was a recent encounter with a couple of contemporary Lagranges, the 1988 and 1989, that recalled those 22-year-old wines and the peculiar history of Lagrange itself.
We're talking here of Chateau Lagrange in St.-Julien, in the Medoc, north of the city of Bordeaux.
There are two Lagranges in Bordeaux: this famous one and the little-known Chateau Lagrange in Pomerol, one of the properties owned by Jean-Pierre Moueix.


U.S. MAPS 3 ROUTES TO CURB BAGHDAD
With the prospect of military conflict with Iraq receding, Administration officials said today that they were considering other steps to force Baghdad to adhere to its obligations under the cease-fire that ended the Persian Gulf war.
After a weekend of widening military threats, a compromise over the inspection of the Agriculture Ministry in Baghdad has deprived the Administration of an obvious focus for a coalition to confront Iraq.
Having withdrawn the threat of imminent military action, the Administration has also found itself without an clear policy for influencing President Saddam Hussein.


TV Ratings Up For Olympics
The second night of competition at the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, produced a 19.4 Nielsen rating and a 35 share for NBC during the 7:30 P.M.-to-midnight period on Monday.
After two evenings of prime-time competition, NBC is averaging an 18.7 and a 34 share, 12.6 percent higher than the network's 16.7/30 for a similar period four years ago during the Olympics in Seoul, South Korea.
Even more significant than the increased ratings, which exceed the 15.3 NBC had to guarantee to advertisers in prime time, is the higher share, showing that during competition Sunday and Monday night, an average 34 percent of all televisions in use were tuned to the Olympics.
Each rating point equals 921,000 television households.


The Wrong Space Station
The $30 billion space station, a poorly conceived project that barely survived a challenge to its existence last year, is again at a critical juncture.
The House of Representatives is scheduled to vote today on an appropriations bill that would continue the project -- and on an amendment to kill it.
A bewildering array of arguments have been spewed forth by people on both sides of the debate.
But there is only one mission for which the costly station is indispensable: biomedical studies on animals and humans to determine the hazards of long-duration space flight.
That mission can probably be done better by scrapping the current design and proceeding with cheaper alternatives.


Marist Journal; A Computer Frontier for Universities
As the worlds of computing and learning come closer together, college campuses often form a high-technology frontier.
Many colleges dote on computers, but here at Marist College, overlooking the graceful currents of the upper Hudson River and just a few miles up the road from the research laboratories of International Business Machines, computers are literally everywhere and connected to everything.


Alleging Bias, Science Group Urges Russian to Quit
The National Academy of Sciences announced today that it had asked one of Russia's most distinguished mathematicians, Igor R. Shafarevich, to consider resigning as a foreign associate of the organization because of his writings, which are widely viewed as anti-Semitic.
The move is unprecedented in the honorific group's 129-year history.
The academy sent a letter to Dr.
Shafarevich expressing its "aversion" to the "anti-Semitic" writings in his book "Russophobia." It also questioned hiring practices that purportedly exclude Jews at the Steklov Institute in Moscow, a well-respected mathematics research center where Dr.
Shafarevich heads the algebra section.


Sears Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Borden Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Topics of The Times; A Bridge and a Budget
Rarely has such a short bridge generated such a long controversy.
The span in question stretches all of 448 yards, from New Jersey's Liberty State Park to New York's Ellis Island, the historic entryway for generations of America's immigrants.
For years, the only way to get to the island was on a ferry that also goes to the Statue of Liberty, either from New Jersey or Manhattan.
But the restoration of the Great Hall on Ellis Island required a temporary bridge from New Jersey for trucks with construction materials.


Reassuring Teller Pockets the Check But Doesn't Hide It
Seeing is believing.
With that in mind, the Pittsburgh National Bank has installed five automated teller machines that will display an image of a check that has just been deposited.
"We wanted to overcome people's fear of depositing a check in a machine," said A. William Schenck, head of retail banking at Pittsburgh National.
"Showing an image of the check gives them a sense of control, and assurance that the machine has accepted the check and knows it is there."


Chinese Women Suffer Under a Brutal System; More 'Princes'
To the Editor:
Your July 1 Beijing Journal names some of the "princes," the children of China's leaders who are moving up in the Government hierarchy.
May I add a few more?


CHRONICLE
Seating the guests at the dinner given in London on Monday evening by Prime Minister JOHN MAJOR of Britain to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the accession of QUEEN ELIZABETH II to the throne was an exercise in diplomacy.
Among those who attended were PRINCE CHARLES and the PRINCESS OF WALES and two former Conservative prime ministers who are known to harbor ill will toward one another.
Sir EDWARD HEATH has made no secret of his differences with MARGARET THATCHER, and she has publicly divulged her disagreements with Mr.
Major himself.


In New York Potholes, Life Imitates Art
To the Editor:
"Mayor Benedict Koch" (Topics of The Times, July 22) assails me for doing a voice-over for a General Tire ad.
The commercial, which will air on television and in movie theaters, is a lampoon of New York City conditions set to music.
You describe it thus:


Wireless Signals Keep Retailers Humming
To shoppers browsing through the health and beauty aids section of the new Kmart store here, Leonard Carach might have looked like some alien in merchant's disguise, using a laser gun to vaporize a shelf of vitamins.
Appearances are deceiving.
The gun was a wireless computer and scanner that helps Mr.
Carach, a Kmart merchandise manager, perform routine stock-keeping tasks while he roams the store, giving him more time to talk with customers.


Theory Links Clinic Lights And a Cancer
NEWBORN babies who are exposed to extremely bright lights in hospital nurseries may have a slightly elevated risk of childhood leukemia, two researchers suggest.
They theorize that bright fluorescent lights and other types of strong illumination often used in hospitals could transform molecules circulating through some infants' blood into reactive and aggressive compounds that break chromosomes and set the stage a few years later for acute lymphocytic leukemia, the most common malignancy of children.


Interface Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 5


A Stubborn Match for Heroin Smugglers; In Bringing Drug Runners to Heel, Cathy Palmer Has Survived an Assassination Attempt
On the evening of Jan. 29, 1990, a few hours after she narrowly escaped a bullet in the gut from a booby-trapped package sent to her Brooklyn office, Cathy Palmer went out drinking with the guys she always calls "the guys," the members of Group 41, the six-year-old Drug Enforcement Administration task force that specializes in Asian smuggling.
Ms.
Palmer is a cheerfully strong-willed, redhead who wears enormous glasses and is barely five feet tall.
A self-described tomboy with the posture and gait of an athlete -- a second baseman in high heels -- she's not a figure you would automatically pick as a candidate for assassination.


Damages in Suit Challenged
Charles Glassman, the economist for the plaintiffs who totaled damages of $4 million for the eight players named in the Freeman McNeil v. the National Football League lawsuit over free agency, "abandoned" his original numbers in a deposition last November, the league's lawyers said today during cross-examination.
They also said that he did not use player performance as a component in his evaluation.
Frank Rothman, the lawyer for the N.F.L., said that Glassman, in his deposition, had offered a list of damages that varied as much as $1 million less than the $4 million he testified on Monday the players deserved.


BARCELONA
A GYMNASTICS FAREWELL
A grand Olympic tradition ended in familiar fashion as female gymnasts from the former Soviet Union won the team competition.
A SPANISH (OR IS HE?) HERO
Martin Lopez-Zubero, raised in the U.S. but competing for Spain, thrilled Spanish spectators with a gold in the 200-meter backstroke.
OFFSHORE LUXURY SEATS
Lavish parties and accomodations aboard cruise ships docked at Barcelona are these Games's version of corporate entertainment.
SportsWednesday, page B9.


Maxicare Health Plans reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


12 Angry (Bald) Men Set Out to Make Point
He is No. 9 on the scorecards and No. 1 in the departments of high-fiving, fist-pumping and trash-talking.
That's how you will have to identify Bob Samuelson from now on, because after today, he's just another big, bald guy in a crowd of lookalikes as the United States men's volleyball team pursues truth, justice and a maybe even a third straight gold medal.


Hill, Holliday Moves Infiniti Work East
Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos said yesterday that the account of the Eastern region dealers of Nissan's Infiniti luxury-car line had been shifted to its New York office from its office in Marina del Rey, Calif., where Infiniti's national account work is done.
In a telephone interview, Jonathan Mandell, who is Hill, Holliday's executive vice president and creative director in New York, confirmed reports of the transfer in this week's issues of trade publications.
He added that it had not been decided whether additional staff would be hired from outside or whether California employees would relocate to work on the account, which has billings estimated between $6 million and $8 million.


SAUDI ADMITS GUILT IN BANK TAKEOVER
A prominent figure in the secret takeover of a leading Washington bank by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International has pleaded guilty to violating the New York State bank holding company act and has agreed to pay a $105 million fine, his lawyer said tonight.
The lawyer, Plato Cacheris, confirmed a report in The Washington Post that his client, Sheik Kamal Adham of Saudi Arabia, had signed the plea agreement in New York on Monday.


LG&amp;E Energy reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brush Wellman reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Brakes in Fatal Bus Crash Called Beyond Repair
The brakes of the tour bus that crashed here Sunday were probably worn beyond repair and would not have passed inspection, a Federal safety official said today.
Six people died and dozens more were hurt when the bus hurtled out of control down a steep, treacherous two-lane road here in rural Sussex County.
The driver, Robert Campbell, 60 years old, of Brooklyn, who was critically injured in the wreck, has told investigators that the brakes gave out.


Mets Cry Enough Is Enough And End Thirtynothing Streak
In the National League East, there are the barely good, the bad and the ugly.
No great price is ever paid for losing more games than are won.
The clubs, with the exception of the Montreal Expos, have all labored most intensely in finding different speeds for going backward.
Logic hasn't applied.
Standard rules don't hold.
The are, though, a couple of absolutes.
If you are to be taken seriously as a contender, there is no way you can lose to a rookie right-hander for the worst club in the division.


USX-Marathon Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Glorious Conclusion to a Gymnastics Dynasty
A long and glorious Olympic tradition came to a sweet and proper end tonight as the six women from four former republics of the Soviet Union won the gymnastics team competition of the Barcelona Games.
As the Olympic anthem played, and the gymnasts stood proudly bedecked with gold medals hanging from their necks, it was almost heartbreaking to know such a group, now the Unified Team, can never collect again.
The former republics will go their own independent ways for Olympics of the future.


Long Island Baymen Protest Bass Ban


Raze Old Office, Nixon Says; Others Say That'd Be Wrong
Richard M. Nixon has told officials in La Habra, Calif., that if they want to tear down his former law office there, he will not stand in the way of the wrecking ball.
But like much else about the former President, the dispute seems likely to linger.
In a letter to Mayor James Flora, Mr.
Nixon broke his long silence in the dispute, which for the last four years has divided politicians from preservationists and admirers of the 37th President.
At issue is the fate of a decrepit, seismically suspect brick building in the center of La Habra, a city of 52,000 people in Orange County, midway between Yorba Linda and Whittier.


Brinkler International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bonds Gets Bonilla's Agent
BARRY BONDS, who will be one of the top available free agents in the next off season, is switching to the same agent who negotiated the contract that took his former teammate, BOBBY BONILLA, out of Pittsburgh.


LTV Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Questar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chrysler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Service Rule Stirs Debate in Maryland
On Wednesday, Maryland is expected to become the first state to require all high school students to do community service in order to graduate, a move promoted by a member of the Kennedy family who has spent the last six years pressing for the requirement and by Gov.
William Donald Schaefer.
Since the proposal is opposed by the state teachers' union, principals, superintendents, parent-teacher groups and many students, its expected passage by the 11-member state board of education on Wednesday is a testament to the political power of Governor Schaefer and the perseverance of Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, a politician who is a daughter of the late Robert F. Kennedy.


CHRONICLE
Scenes from the fall and winter couture shows, which are under way in Paris:
There is a certain element of danger in going to fashion shows.
One fan, NAN KEMPNER, bloodied her legs yesterday when she tripped on steps as she went backstage at the Palais de Chaillot to congratulate Karl Lagerfeld on his designs for Chanel.
On Sunday, SUZY MENKES, the fashion editor of The International Herald Tribune, tripped and fell as she greeted the designer Gerard Pipart, and broke a rib.


2 Active in Groups in Queens Are Found Stabbed to Death
A 62-year-old woman and a 58-year-old man, both well known for their involvement in civic activities in Queens, were found bound, bludgeoned and stabbed to death in the woman's home yesterday morning, the police said.
The police said that they suspected the pair were the victims of a push-in robbery, in which as many as three men might have gained entrance to the home claiming they were delivering flowers.


It's a First! Lopez-Zubero Strikes Gold For Spain
They sang rhythmic soccer songs for Martin Lopez-Zubero, because the Barcelona fans never before had to cope with a real swim hero: Spanish, American, or Spanish-American.
"He's American, but the medal is for Spain," said Marc Capdevila.


FRAME TECHNOLOGY WILL BUY PUBLISHING-SYSTEM CONCERN
The Frame Technology Corporation, a San Jose, Calif., producer of desktop publishing software, said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $17 million of stock to acquire Datalogics.
The closely held Datalogics, which produces specialized publishing systems for government, aerospace, automotive, financial and legal users, had 1991 revenue of about $11 million.
Terms call for Frame to issue 1 million shares for all Datalogics stock.
Frame closed unchanged at $17.50 in over-the-counter trading.
The companies expect to close the deal by the end of August.
Steve Brown will continue as president and chief executive of Datalogics, Chicago.


How to Get Rid of Pigeons, Benignly; Better Class of Birds
To the Editor:
Prof.
Renee Solomon states, "in the city, if you try to feed birds, you will get pigeons" (news article, July 11).


Dr. John E. Frost, 85; Was N.Y.U. Librarian
Dr.
John Eldridge Frost, librarian emeritus at New York University and an authority on Maine genealogy, died last Thursday at Eliot Hospital in Maine.
He was 85 years old and had returned from Manhattan two years ago to live in York, Me.
He died of cancer, said Frank Bradley, a friend in New York.


Dow in a 51.87 Rise, Its Best Since January
Ignoring news of a sharp drop in consumer confidence, the stock market vaulted upward yesterday as investors chose to focus on the fall of interest rates rather than the fall of the economy.
Hope for profits in the auto industry also helped.
In its biggest one-day gain since January, the benchmark Dow Jones industrial average rose 51.87 points, or 1.58 percent, to 3,334.07.
On Jan. 14, the Dow added 60.60 points.


Food Notes
A Greener Shade of Orange
This summer's Valencia oranges from California are coming to market with a decidedly green tinge on their skins.
Barbara C. Robison, the manager of consumer affairs at Sunkist Growers in Van Nuys, Calif., said it had nothing to do with the ripeness of the fruit.
The oranges are fully ripe, but sometimes excessively warm temperatures in the growing areas of California and Arizona cause chlorophyll to return to the skin before the fruit is picked, resulting in what is called regreening.
The flesh of the fruit is bright orange and sweet.


Tenneco Has Strong Profit For Quarter
Recording a turnaround in its long-troubled machinery unit and higher earnings at its five other businesses, Tenneco Inc. today posted a steep rise in profits in contrast to a loss in the second quarter last year.
Analysts said the profit surge validated the heavy layoffs, other cost-cutting moves and management changes that were taken by a new executive team led by Michael H. Walsh, who took command of the diversified Houston-based industrial company last September.


Markets Jump as Consumer Confidence Drops
In another setback for the struggling economic recovery and President Bush's re-election campaign, consumer confidence dropped sharply in July, the Conference Board reported yesterday.
The business group's widely followed confidence index fell 16 percent, erasing nearly half of its gain since February.
Investors reacted to the gloom of consumers with something like glee, in the belief that the Federal Reserve will keep lowering interest rates to keep the recovery from faltering.
Investors also seem convinced that inflation will remain low.


Corrections
An article on the Law page on Friday about a Florida Supreme Court decision overturning the conviction of Jennifer Johnson on charges that she delivered drugs to her newborn infants through the umbilical cord misstated her treatment record.
Ms.
Johnson's lawyer says she completed a drug treatment program after her arrest, then reverted to using drugs.
She is in a drug treatment program now.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  IRAQI MINISTRY INSPECTED  United Nations arms inspectors began a search of the Iraqi Ministry of Agriculture after Western intelligence agencies said they suspected it might also have housed some kind of administrative headquarters for President Saddam Hussein's ballistic-missile program.
A1  U.S.
WEIGHS TACTICS ON IRAQ  With the prospect of renewed military conflict with Iraq receding, Administration officials said they were considering other steps to coerce Saddam Hussein to adhere to his cease-fire obligations.
A6  Algeria seen as drifting toward social and economic chaos.
A7  MAFIA SLAYS A FOE IN SICILY  Openly scorning the Italian Government's deployment of 7,000 soldiers to counter the Mafia in Sicily, mobsters have gunned down a third foe of organized crime.
A1  A remote Spanish village honors Castro, a famous progeny.
A3  Ulster talks gain major goal: to keep discussions going.
A5  GERMANS UPSET OVER REFUGEES  German leaders are increasingly upset at their European partners for refusing to accept larger numbers of refugees from the former Yugoslavia, and will use a refugee conference in Geneva this week to urge them to change their policies.
A4  SERBS FORCING MUSLIMS TO FLEE  Serbian irregulars, continuing their campaign of "ethnic cleansing," have forced thousands of the 350,000 Muslims in western Bosnia and Herzegovina to flee, and a United Nations official warned that the exodus could swell the numbers seeking haven in Western Europe.
A4  Peru's leader says a new Congress will take office Jan. 2.
A3  Colombia dismissed four senior officers in wake of drug escape.
A3  Le Barroux Journal: A convent for those resisting modernism.
A4  National A8-13, B8  DRAMA AT THE CLAIR GEORGE TRIAL  Clair E. George heard a onetime friend and C.I.A. subordinate, Alan D. Fiers, testify against him, telling a Federal jury of the events that led to Mr.
George's indictment on charges of deceiving Congress and lying to a grand jury about the Iran-contra affair.
A1  DEMOCRATS COUNTERATTACKS  In a concerted response to White House criticism, Governor Clinton, Senator Gore and even former President Carter accused the Administration of playing politics with foreign policy.
A1  News analysis: A foreign-policy crossroads for Clinton.
A12  Bush, the Persian Gulf and the electorate.
A12  On the Trail: The Bush camp is aiming at local TV markets.
A13  Darman told Congress it was to blame for the economy.
B8  THE BRAUN CAMPAIGN REVISITED  What was expected to be a close Senate race in Illinois is beginning to look like a celebrity road tour.
Carol Moseley Braun, who would be the first black woman in the Senate, is drawing worshipful crowds virtually everywhere she goes and leading in the polls by 3 to 1.
A1  A SHOWDOWN FORESTALLED  A prosecutor excused three House Democrats from testifying before a grand jury investigating the House post office, but it is not clear how long the reprieve will apply.
A10  NEW TURN IN NEWSPAPER STRIKE  After two days of publishing in the face of stiff resistance from striking truck drivers, the Pittsburgh Press Company indefinitely suspended its effort to print and distribute the city's two newspapers.
A8  SCIENCE ACADEMY SPURNS RUSSIAN  The National Academy of Sciences announced that it had asked one of Russia's most distinguished mathematicians, Igor R. Shafarevich, to consider resigning as a foreign associate because of his writings widely viewed as anti-Semitic.
B8  16,000 BARS OF GOLD  At the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico, a search that could put a 55-year-old mystery to rest is now under way.
The search is costing $1 million, a mere pittance compared with what it seeks.
A8  Yankeetown Journal: Why are so many Florida palms dying?
A8  Education Page B7  Maryland will require high school students to do community service.
In Seattle, a program lures Samoan student dropouts back to school.
Marist Journal: A computers now link almost everything.
Metro Digest B1  BLUE CROSS'S SHAKY FINANCES  Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, which provides health insurance to 8.6 million subscribers in New York, said yesterday that its financial condition has sharply deteriorated and warned that it needs another rate increase.
A1  Business Digest D1  Living Section C1-10  A restaurant family.
C1  Feeding the fans at the Olympic  Games.
C1  Wine Talk C8  In Paris, applause at Dior C10  Health Page C12  Toward a geological explanation of the "Stroke Belt."  Personal Health: Secrets of long, happy marriages.
Theory links hospital lights and a childhood cancer.
Arts/Entertainment C14-22  Smithsonian to cut staff.
C15  Ice-T album to lose song.
C15  Theater: Stratford-on-Avon.
C15  Music: "Clemenza" in Salzburg.
C15  Word and Image: A book on campus spying.
C18  Sports B9-18  Baseball: Mets rally over Phillies.
B9  Orioles, McDonald stop Yankees.
B17  Column: Anderson on Matt Biondi.
B9  Football: Jets' Hasty has right corner covered.
B18  New scheme aims to spring Hampton.
B18  Harness Racing: Twenty-seven entries for Hambletonian.
B15  Horse Racing: It's open season at Saratoga.
B17  Olympics: Glorious finale for gymnastics dynasty.
B9  U.S. 400-meter stars criticize coach.
B14  Evans falls short of swimming gold.
B10  Obituaries D19  Tony Salerno, ex-head of the Genovese crime family.
H. Naylor Fitzhugh, an educator and pioneer in target marketing.
Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials  The wrong space station.
Fetal tissue foolishness.
Stale French-American quarrels.
Topics: Bridge and budget.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: Reagan redux.
A.
Leon Higginbotham: The case of the missing black judges.
Carlin Meyer: Women's breasts -- so what?


Murphy Oil reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Daniel Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
We are going through a phase when everything seems to be stacked against us: the economy, finances, the foreign exchange market, the Mafia, the crisis of our political parties. -- GIULIANO AMATO, Prime Minister of Italy.  [ A1:1. ]


G-I Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Western Digital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about burials at a Sarajevo cemetery omitted the reason that the decision by Svetozar Koljevic, an English professor, to remain in Sarajevo made a personal statement against the Serbian attacks on the city.
It was that his brother Nikola is deputy leader of the Serbian Democratic Party, which plans the attacks.


ALGERIA DESCENDS INTO MORE CHAOS
Western diplomats and some Algerian officials warn that the North African country is drifting toward social and economic chaos and perhaps civil war.
With attacks by Muslim dissidents multiplying weekly and the Government floundering in its attempt to shore up a collapsing economy, Algeria is experiencing a palpable breakdown in law and order and a loss of confidence on the part of the public.


Clark Equipment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Big-Time Need to Keep Achieving
FEELINGS of inferiority make the world go round.
At least, that's the view of Dr.
Charles D. Kelman, who last month received the National Technology Medal from President Bush.
The award was for innovations the New York ophthalmologist brought to cataract surgery, improvements that shaved $7 billion a year from the nation's hospital bill.


How to Get Rid of Pigeons, Benignly
To the Editor:
You report the case of Renee Solomon, a Columbia University professor who is suing her bird-feeding neighbors for false arrest, false imprisonment and slander, all of which came about because of the unwelcome attention Ms.
Solomon's bedroom window received from pigeons drawn by the feeders on the neighboring terrace (news article, July 11).
Now an answer for all New Yorkers with pigeon problems.


Personal Health
ASKING long-married couples why their marriages have endured while nearly half those around them have been torn asunder is like asking 10 blind men to describe an elephant.
The answers vary widely, but nearly always reflect mutual commitment, concern, love and respect.
For most long-married couples, "happily ever after" does not just happen.
Couples in long, happy marriages reflected this fact of life when asked what has made their relationships a success.


INSIDE
Death Penalty in New Jersey
New Jersey moved closer to its first execution under a 10-year-old death-penalty law.
The state's high court approved a death sentence.
Page B1.
Consumers Down, Stocks Up
The Conference Board's index of consumer confidence plunged in July, but investors reacted to the gloom with something close to glee.
Page D1.
Rapper to Drop Song
Ice-T said that the song "Cop Killer," which has provoked protests and threats, would be deleted from his "Body Count" album.
Page C15.


Once Again, Judge Transfers Trial of Miami Police Officer
The second trial of a Miami police officer convicted in the 1989 slaying of two black men has been moved again, this time to Orlando.
Judge William L. Gary, of Leon County Circuit Court in Tallahassee, issued the order on Monday to move the trial of Officer William Lozano.
Judge Gary said a fellow Circuit Court judge, W. Thomas Spencer, of Dade County, which includes Miami, had moved the trial to Tallahassee from Orlando without due process.


Keeping Up With the Joneses Is No Easy Task
From the time his son, Roy Jones Jr., was 5 years old, Roy Sr. has been the guiding force in his boxing education.
During the boy's formative years in Pensacola, Fla., the senior Jones would get on his knees and spar with the boy.
As the son grew older, the father built a ring in his pasture and gave him more formal instruction.
The youth took his lessons well and ended up winning a silver medal in the 157-pound division amid a controversy y at the 1988 Summer Olympics.
He also was named the outstanding boxer of those Games in Seoul, South Korea.


'Cop Killer' To Be Cut From Ice-T Album
The rap performer Ice-T said yesterday that the song "Cop Killer" would be dropped from his "Body Count" album at his request because the record company distributing the album had received death threats.
At a joint news conference, Warner Brothers Records said it would "effective immediately cease the manufacture and distribution" of the album "as it now stands" and would replace it with a version without the song and with amended artwork.
Bob Merlis, Warner's vice president and national publicity director, said that Ice-T made his decision after representatives of the label met with him last Friday and "gave him a background report on what the situation was, up to that moment."


Fremont General reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Shifts to a New Turf; Clinton Challenges Bush on His Strong Suit, Foreign Policy
For Gov.
Bill Clinton, this week's tussle with President Bush and the White House over the crisis in the former Yugoslavian republics represents a major test of his capacity to frame and articulate foreign policy.
Widely unpopular with the American electorate, unable to regain the offensive on economic policy, Mr.
Bush retains, because of his lengthy foreign-affairs experience and the American victory in the Persian Gulf war, among other things, a good deal of credibility on security matters and on foreign policy questions in general.


Nortek Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Chinese Women Suffer Under a Brutal System; Hong Kong's Plight
To the Editor:
"Shore Up Democracy in Hong Kong" (editorial, July 8) hits an optimistic note by suggesting that the new Governor, Christopher Patten, may expand democracy in Hong Kong even if mainland China objects.


Outside Receiver Named To Oversee Palace Hotel
After two years of legal squabbling, Harry and Leona Helmsley appeared close to losing the crown jewel of their real-estate empire yesterday after a court-appointed arbitration panel appointed an outside receiver to oversee management of the Helmsley Palace Hotel.
The Palace has been the center of a legal storm stemming from charges by a group of limited partners, who invested $16.8 million when the hotel opened in 1981, that the Helmsleys engaged in fraud and mismanagement.
The limited partners are a group of investors from New York, Tennessee, Germany and California, and include the actor Paul Newman.


Boston Scientific reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stale French-American Quarrels
Europe is coming together and falling apart at the same time.
And the bloodletting in Bosnia exposes the weakness of collective will on the Continent more than at any time since 1945.
Britain balks at intervening in Bosnia and Germany cannot, given its role in the last war.
How do America and France respond?
Instead of working together to keep Europe from falling apart, they reopen an outdated quarrel over NATO.
France seeks to build a new European armed force outside NATO.
The U.S. wants NATO to retain the prime role.
They need to join in framing new security arrangements across Europe and find a place for America in them.


Fetal Tissue Foolishness
Among the cruelest of all diseases to affect the elderly are Alzheimer's and Parkinson's; and among the most promising of all therapies is fetal tissue implantation.
But "promising" is exactly what it will remain as long as the Bush Administration's ban on Federal financing of fetal tissue research stays in place.
The President made a few bows to the scientific community -- and to the millions who suffer from Alzheimer's and Parkinson's -- by establishing a Government fetal tissue bank in May.
But since the program will accept only tissue from miscarriages and ectopic pregnancies -- tissue that is usually defective or diseased -- it was promptly hailed as a sham.


Scherer (R.P.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lawson Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Standard Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Elbow Woes Fuel Rumors About Montana
San Francisco 49ers quarterback JOE MONTANA wasn't on the practice field yesterday, and rumors continued to flourish around the elbow surgery that forced him to miss all of last season.
While the team went through passing drills under a broiling sun with STEVE YOUNG at quarterback, Montana was working out on a Stairmaster in the team's weight room.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Watch; On TV, Bush Sells Image as Diplomat
The televised images of President Bush huddling with his foreign-policy advisers and denouncing Saddam Hussein this week seemed like a replay of preparations for the Persian Gulf war.
But this time it is not clear how effectively Mr.
Bush can use his office to project himself as a master at international affairs.
The President's media consultants could hardly have scripted a better picture than the sight over the weekend of George Bush as Commander in Chief, an American flag draped behind him and the Presidential seal in front of him.


Coast Is Clearer for Chinese Diver
Tan Liangde of China has made an Olympic career of finishing second to Greg Louganis in the 3-meter springboard.
Today, there was no Louganis, and Tan was ahead of the new breed of American divers in qualifying for the championship finals on Wednesday.
But it wasn't easy for the world champion, Kent Ferguson of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., who didn't know after his final dive if he would be among the 12 qualifiers.
He found a quiet place in the medical emergency room to watch on television as the parade of 28 divers still in the competition completed the final round.


Bridge
A major upset marked the first day of play in the Spingold Knockout Teams competition at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals here on Monday.
Andy Goodman of San Francisco, Roger Bates of Mesa, Ariz., John Mohan of Santa Monica, Calif., Neil Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., and John Schermer of Seattle, who won the Vanderbilt Knockout title four months ago in Pasadena, Calif., lost by 33 international match points to a group from Quebec: Pierre Gaudreau, Michel Bertrand, Guy Belisle, Frederick Pollack and Sylvain Descoteaux.


A Patched-Together Bus Company With an Elusive History
Like dozens of charter-bus companies that serve poor areas of New York City, Sensational Golden Sons is a small, patched-together operation.
Working out of a small brick garage in Bedford-Stuyvesant that also listed two other charter services on its sign, the company had only one registered driver and two or three well-used buses.
Yesterday, an array of government agencies whose investigators far outnumbered the employees of the tiny Brooklyn company were trying to figure out why a bus driven by its owner crashed on a New Jersey road on Sunday, killing six people.
The investigators encountered an unanticipated obstacle that makes their inquiry particularly difficult: the company's small size.
Unable to Get Records
"We have never had this problem before," said Jeanmarie Poole, an investigator for the National Transportation Safety Board.
Investigators have been frustrated in their attempts to interview company officials, a normal first step in any accident investigation, she said.


TVKO Cuts Back On Boxing Shows
TVKO, Time Warner's pay-per-view boxing service, has laid off 10 employees and will scale back from almost a dozen fights a year to six.
The moves were made after the service lost $2.75 milion on last month's $25 million Evander Holyfield-Larry Holmes fight.


Tenneco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Music; In Salzburg, an Original 'Clemenza' That Takes Opera Seria Seriously
Just before the Salzburg Festival began, Riccardo Muti pulled out of his commitment to conduct a new production of Mozart's "Clemenza di Tito." He was said to have objected to the directors' concept of the work, but the withdrawal was also widely seen as a vote of no confidence in Gerard A. Mortier, the festival's new general director, and in the festival itself.
This is, after all, Mr.
Mortier's first season as Herbert von Karajan's successor at Salzburg.
Moreover, the production of "La Clemenza," which received its premiere last night, is the very first opera of the season.
And it evolved out of a production that Mr.
Mortier had presented when he was head of the Theatre Royal de la Monnaie in Brussels.
Mr.
Muti's rejection of Mr.
Mortier could not have been more complete.
But it also turned out to be unjustified.
Last night the production in the Kleines Festspielhaus was a triumph for all concerned: for Mr.
Mortier, who believed in it; for Gustav Kuhn, an Austrian conductor who stepped in to lead the Vienna Philharmonic sensitively in the pit; for the cast, which gave an eloquently musical performance; for the accomplished husband-and-wife directorial team, Ursel and Karn-Ernst Herrmann; and perhaps most importantly, for the idea that classic operas can be given powerfully original productions without pandering, without camp and without distortion.
This opera seria -- often mistakenly viewed as a slightly archaic anomaly in Mozart's painfully humane late works -- was treated as a full-scale tragedy, as powerful as "Cosi" in its tale of unraveling innocence.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.18
3.29
5.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.19
5.55
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.26
5.69
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.09
6.15
8.03
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.43
7.51
8.37
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.43
8.54
9.34
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.03
6.09
7.12
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Octel Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hudson Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


In Spite of the Years, Johnson Still Retains His Magical Touch
There was a moment when Sten Feldreich hesitated, thinking he might embarrass not only Magic Johnson, but himself.
It had, after all, been 14 years since they went their separate ways, Feldreich home to Sweden and Johnson to a latitude of global celebrity that only here, at the Olympic Games, have we begun to fathom.
Back home in Stockholm, a place where satellite signals now beam in images of the basketball Beatles from the United States, Sten Feldreich's 7 1/2-year-old son would be waiting for his father to return with an autograph.
Long before the startling headlines last November, his father had been telling of a long-ago friend and college basketball teammate far across the ocean at Michigan State University.
He should be able to bring home Magic Johnson's signature from the Olympics to prove it.


Germany Chides Europe About Balkan Refugees
German leaders are increasingly upset at their European partners for refusing to accept larger numbers of refugees from the former Yugoslavia, and will use a refugee conference in Geneva this week to urge them to change their policies.
But several governments, including those of France and Britain, have rejected Germany's criticism and indicated they are not willing to admit many more Balkan refugees.


Kaiser Aluminum reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Citgo Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pittsburgh Papers Halt Publication After 2 Days
After two days of publishing in the face of stiff resistance from striking deliverers and flagging public support, the Pittsburgh Press Company today indefinitely suspended its effort to print and distribute the city's two newspapers.
"The bottom line is we don't want to further endanger the public," said Jimmy E. Manis, vice president and general manager of the company.
"The whole thing just got out of hand. There was violence in the city streets, there was violence all over western Pennsylvania."


Market Place; Swaps Markets: How Much Risk?
JUST how risky are currency and interest rate swaps?
A new study, done at the request of swap dealers, indicates that losses in the growing industry have been rare, but that they still amount to more than $358 million.
The losses represent a tiny part of the trillions of dollars of swaps that have been written, and most of them came from one well-publicized problem: a decision by British authorities that allowed local governments to back out of interest-rate swap arrangements.


Dow in a 51.87 Rise, Its Best Since January
Ignoring news of a sharp drop in consumer confidence, the stock market vaulted upward yesterday as investors chose to focus on the fall of interest rates rather than the fall of the economy.
Hope for profits in the auto industry also helped.
In its biggest one-day gain since January, the benchmark Dow Jones industrial average rose 51.87 points, or 1.58 percent, to 3,334.07.
On Jan. 14, the Dow added 60.60 points.


Castro Visits His Father's Spanish Home
Galicia has long been known as a land of emigrants.
In the early part of this century hundreds of thousands of Galicians left their native land in the northwestern corner of Spain to seek their fortunes in the New World.
Few ever returned.
Today a remote village in the heart of rural Galicia honored one of the region's most famous progeny: President Fidel Castro of Cuba, the son of Angel Castro who left his village of Lancara to settle in Cuba early in the 20th century.


Serbs Said to Force Muslims to Flee
Serbian irregulars, continuing their campaign of "ethnic cleansing," have forced thousands of the 350,000 Muslim Slavs in western Bosnia and Herzegovina to flee, and a United Nations official warned today that the exodus could swell the numbers of refugees seeking haven in Western Europe.
The official, Anthony C. Land, chief of operations here for the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, said the Muslims were wedged in a corner of Bosnia and Herzegovina with Serbs on both sides.


Crisis in Italy Grows As Mob Kills 3d Foe Despite Troop Moves
Openly scorning the Government's deployment of 7,000 soldiers to fight the Mafia in Sicily, mobsters have gunned down a third foe of organized crime on the island.
Prime Minister Giuliano Amato, facing a sea of troubles after only a month in office, said today that the Government's credibility had been lost.
"We are going through a phase when everything seems to be stacked against us: the economy, finances, the foreign exchange market, the Mafia, the crisis of our political parties," Mr.
Amato said in a television interview.


Why Washington Tolerates Saddam Hussein
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal suggests in "Elections and the Gulf War" (column, July 3) that the United States victory in the Persian Gulf war was tainted because it left Saddam Hussein in power in Iraq.
This analysis fails to recognize that President Hussein's presence helps to maintain a political climate that is favorable to the United States.


Northeast Utilities reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Biondi, Evans Falter As U.S. 'Invincibility' Receives Another Blow
It was an arid day for legends of the water, for the big-name United States swimmers who were supposed to turn the Bernat Picornell Pool into a slick American medals factory.
Janet Evans, invincible in the 400-meter freestyle for six brilliant years, lost to a German travel consultant, Dagmar Hase, who considered not even coming to Barcelona.
Evans sobbed with disappointment at her silver medal and said the heartbreaking experience might help her on some future job interview.


Connecticut Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Case of the Missing Black Judges
Suppose someone wanted to steal back past achievements, rein in present gains and cut off future expectations among African-Americans about participation in the judicial process.
That person would have found it difficult to devise a better plan than nominating Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court while decreasing the number of African-American judges on the Federal bench.
The confirmation of Clarence Thomas forced the nation to pay attention to many issues, from the Senate's role in confirming Supreme Court Justices to sexual harassment of women in the workplace.
But the Thomas confirmation proceedings diverted our attention from one vital issue: Thanks to Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush, African-American judges on the United States Courts of Appeals have been turned into an endangered species and are now on the edge of extinction.


Seaboard Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


Woman and Man Found Stabbed to Death in Far Rockaway


UNC Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Serious Effort To Present Mexico's Regional Cuisines
TWO and a half years ago, when restaurants were responding to a weakening economy by grafting informal bistros onto fancier places, Rick and Deann Bayless did the reverse.
The owners of Frontera Grill, a bare-table Mexican restaurant in the River North section of Chicago, opened Topolobampo, possibly the most elegant and serious Mexican restaurant in the country.
At a time when much of the Mexican food served north of the Rio Grande still consists of combination platters glued together with melted cheese and refried beans, the Baylesses make it a point of challenging the palate with the likes of pheasant almendrado, in a typical Oaxacan sauce of almonds, tomatoes, sweet spices, raisins, olives and pickled jalapenos, served with braised quelites, Mexican greens.
It is typical of the restaurant's robust, colorful and unusual food.


Donegal Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Open Season at Saratoga Starts With the Schuylerville
New York racing rings up the curtain today on its five-week midsummer season 200 miles to the north in stately old Saratoga Springs, where 30 stakes races in 30 days will be staged at a country race track renowned for breaking rather than making champions.
Tradition will be served under the trees when the show begins this afternoon with the 75th running of the Schuylerville for 2-year-old fillies, a race won in the last two years by Meadow Star and Turnback the Alarm.
It will be followed in the next few days by similar stakes for 2-year-old colts, senior grass horses, 3-year-old fillies and, in a kind of smash ending to the first week, the Jim Dandy Stakes for 3-year-old colts on Sunday.


Why Indulge Drug Lord? Colombia Pressed to Tell
The Government of President Cesar Gaviria dismissed his Deputy Justice Minister and four senior military officers this week for partial responsibility in the escape of Pablo Escobar, a leader of the Medellin drug smuggling ring.
But it was still under pressure from allegations that it had allowed Mr.
Escobar to continue to run his cocaine business and to order murders from the luxurious prison where he was held.
An investigation completed early last week by the new Attorney General found evidence indicating that Mr.
Escobar had been allowed to receive numerous visits from collaborators from outside the prison-ranch and sent them out again to kill enemies and commit other crimes.


Artists at Work


Review/Rock; Obituary's Death Obsession And Agnostic Front's Slams
Fear of self-parody doesn't exist for Obituary.
The five-man band from Florida was magnificently loyal to its genre at the Ritz on Thursday night.
Performing in front of banners and backdrops with its menacing logo, Obituary's lead singer growled, during and between songs, in a throat-scouring rasp; its drummer played explosive rumbles on two bass drums; its guitarists spewed power chords in unison with rapid-fire bass notes.
And whenever they could, the musicians flopped their long hair, usually straight up and down, though John Tardy, the singer, whirled his in a circle like a combination of a speeded-up shampoo commercial and a circus act
Obituary is among the current leaders in death metal, a thriving sub-genre -- heavy metal with death-obsessed lyrics -- that was created by bands like Black Sabbath and Iron Maiden, honed by Metallica and Slayer and subdivided by the likes of Obituary.
The band's songs jump, usually at arbitrary moments, from mid-tempo grind to fast stomp to high-speed pummel; each shift of tempo, and there are at least two or three per song, sets off a new bout of slam-dancing.


SPS Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Music; The Contemporary And Californians At Tanglewood
The prospectus for this year's Festival of Contemporary Music at Tanglewood says a lot about how the new-music world has evolved in the last decade.
Ten years ago, when the composer Gunther Schuller directed this annual weeklong celebration of modernity within the Tanglewood Festival, the series was a fortress of sober post-tonal rationalism.
But tastes were changing, and in 1984, after braving a few seasons of opposition to his programming vision, Mr.
Schuller resigned his directorship.
Since then, the festival's image has softened, but Tanglewood has shown that an openness to competing and even antagonistic styles need not mean an abandonment of standards.
The English composer Oliver Knussen, the director in recent years, has forced Minimalist and Serialist works to rub shoulders.
His programs could seem either ecumenical or ill conceived, depending on one's sensibilities, but this approach is increasingly becoming the standard for new-music concerts.


First Mississippi reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cuba's Savon Right on Target
Felix Savon, regarded by many as the world's best heavyweight fighter this side of Evander Holyfield, made his 1992 Olympic debut tonight.
While he wasn't especially dazzling in victory, everyone who stayed to see him left Pavello Club Jovent suitably impressed.
Using his widely heralded right hand as a battering ram, Savon rained a vicious barrage of punches on Krzysztof Rojek of Poland in the second round of the scheduled three-rounder.
He forced two standing eight counts and was going for a third when the referee stepped in and stopped the bout with 1:48 remaining in round two.


Kirby Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Connors-Navratilova for $500,000
JIMMY CONNORS and MARTINA NAVRATILOVA will renew the battle of the sexes for a $500,000 prize on Sept. 25 in Las Vegas.
The two-of-three-set match will be held at Caesars Palace's 14,000-seat outdoor stadium and will be shown on pay-per-view television.
The match is billed as a winner-take-all but each player will receive an appearance fee.
In 1973, Billie Jean King beat Bobby Riggs, championing female athletes in a much-ballyhooed televised battle of the sexes in the Houston Astrodome.


Elder J. Olson, 83, A Poet and Teacher
Elder J. Olson, a poet, critic and Distinguished Service Professor Emeritus of English at the University of Chicago, died on July 25 at his home in Albuquerque, N. M. He was 83 years old.
Professor Olson died of pneumonia, said a spokesman for the University of Chicago, Jeff Makos.


H. Naylor Fitzhugh, 82, Educator And Pioneer in Target Marketing
H.
Naylor Fitzhugh, who became vice president for special markets at the Pepsi-Cola Company after a long career as a professor of business at Howard University, died on Sunday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 82 years old and lived in Yonkers.
His family said he died after a lengthy illness.


Novice Is Foiled By Loose Goggles
Raymond Anthony Papa, a 15-year-old high school student from Los Angeles, came to the Olympics as a member of the Philippines swim team.
His qualifying times were marginal in the 100-meter and 200-meter backstroke, but he hoped for a couple of memorable swims.
Papa's plans went a bit awry today when he jumped into the pool to get set for the start of his 200-meter backstroke heat.
Papa's goggles came off his face, and he fumbled for them in the water and again pulling them over his head.
He finally reached his starting mark at the edge of the pool, but the referee disqualified him for "deliberate delay."


Ex-C.I.A. Official Testifies Boss Knew About Iran-Contra Affair
In a soft but steady voice, a former senior official of the Central Intelligence Agency began offering to a Federal court jury today his version of how a one-time close friend and former superior at the agency came to deceive Congress about the Iran-contra affair.
The two former colleagues in espionage gazed across the courtroom at each other as the witness, Alan D. Fiers, told the court that the defendant, Clair E. George, was one of several agency officials who knew details of the Reagan Administration's sale of arms to Iran and diversion of the profits to the Nicaraguan rebels.


Unlikely Olympic Marathon for Becker
Boris Becker has been saying that he wanted an Olympic experience, and he got one today: a 4-hour-50-minute tennis match with a Norwegian who was totally unfamiliar to him.
Becker, ranked fifth in the world, managed to survive Christian Ruud, ranked 312th, by 3-6, 7-6 (7-2) 5-7, 7-6 (7-2), 6-3, but only after a brutal day in the hot sun that might have made him inwardly question whether a potential gold medal was worth all this.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Consumer confidence dropped a sharp 16 percent in July, the Conference Board reported.
The loss of roughly half its gain since February was another setback for the struggling economic recovery and for President Bush's re-election campaign.  [ Page D1. ]
Patricia Ostrander was convicted of taking bribes from Michael R. Milken in exchange for buying hundreds of millions of dollars in the junk bonds he sold at Drexel Burnham Lambert for a mutual fund she managed for Fidelity Investments.  [ D1. ]


Book Notes
Vidal's Secret
In a strategy usually reserved for big "you'll read it here first" works of nonfiction, Random House is keeping Gore Vidal's new novel, "Live From Golgotha," under wraps and out of sight of reviewers, booksellers and competitors, who traditionally get an advance peek at books.
The book is described in the publisher's catalogue as an iconoclastic look at the life of Jesus that includes network coverage of the Crucifixion and a visit by, naturally, Shirley MacLaine.
Mr.
Vidal demanded the secretive handling because "he knew it would be controversial and offensive to some people and he wanted it to be judged on its own merits, not by critics," said Mitchell Ivers, the managing editor for Random House's adult trade division.
"He's a cantankerous sort, and his decisions are fairly strong," Mr.
Ivers said.
"I did sort of say to him that it would be better to send galleys to get a buzz going, but he was very firm."
Mr.
Ivers said that Mr.
Vidal, who is at his home in Ravello, Italy, thinks this book is similar to what is probably his most famous novel, "Myra Breckenridge," both in size (slim, "Golgotha" at 240 pages) and "in its wild and crazy feeling."
Mr.
Vidal did allow one exception to the embargo.
He asked that one copy be sent to The Advocate, the gay and lesbian magazine.
The magazine will have a review in its Aug. 25 issue, which will be available on Aug. 11, a couple of weeks before the book is scheduled to be in bookstores.
Mark Thompson, the magazine's senior editor for the arts, said the review exclusive "came with no strings attached" and was the result of "a long history between the magazine and Vidal, whom we've interviewed and put on the cover several times over the years."
Mr.
Vidal is by no means hiding from the public.
It's merely his book that he is temporarily sequestering.
He is scheduled to be featured in an article in the September Vanity Fair and is soon to appear in the movie "Bob Roberts," starring Tim Robbins.
The Secret: Timing:
Summer has traditionally been a sleepy time for releasing books.
The long-held publishing wisdom was that big summer books got their send-off in late spring and early summer and settled comfortably onto best-seller lists for the duration of summer vacations, and that the big fall books waited until people were back behind their desks so they could build up enough steam to keep them going until the Christmas selling season.
But more and more publishers have taken to jumping the fall gun by releasing books in midsummer, and the ones they tend to favor are by authors they hope are soon to be brand names.
This maneuver has already paid off twice for HarperCollins and Anne Rivers Siddons.
Her novel "Colony" was released last month and this Sunday will be No. 6 on the New York Times best-seller list for hard-cover fiction in its third week on the list.
The publishing house first tried releasing her books in this off-season last summer, with her novel "Outer Banks," and that, too, made the list.
William M. Shinker, the publisher of HarperCollins's adult trade division, said he decided on this strategy after an earlier Siddons novel, "Kings Oak," which came out in October 1990, did not become a best-seller, even though it followed her best-selling "Peachtree Road."
"There's more of a vacuum in the market in the summer, and we try to take advantage of that," Mr.
Shinker said.
HarperCollins is hardly alone, and midsummer releases are fast becoming the industry's most open secret and imitated game plan.
Charles Scribner's Sons has "carefully orchestrated" the release of Patricia Cornwell's "All That Remains" in August "to get a pop before Labor Day and a chance to get on the list," said Barry Lippman, the president of Macmillan, which owns Scribner.
"We fully expect her to be a major hard-cover author, but the two-week window is crucial for getting a jump on the fall crush," he said.
Here are some other in-between-seasons releases scheduled soon:
*"Contents Under Pressure" (Hyperion), a suspense novel about a Miami crime reporter, by Edna Buchanan, who has written nonfiction with the same theme.
*"Sailor Song" (Viking), a novel by Ken Kesey, the author of "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest," who has not published fiction since his 1964 novel, "Sometimes a Great Notion."
*"Book" (Random House), by Robert Gurdin, a sendup of life among the literati.
Gold in Archives
The opening of secret Soviet archives has led to intense competition among publishers eager to get their hands on explosive, long-supressed documents.
Crown was the first American publishing house to announce that it had signed a contract with the Russian Intelligence Service.
It is to get exclusive access to certain files of what used to be called the K.G.B.
Yale University Press has signed an agreement for exclusive rights to published collections of documents from newly opened Russian archives, in its case, from the former Central Party Archives.
The archives, now under the control of the Russian Center for the Preservation and Study of Documents of Contemporary History, include the majority of Communist Party documents through 1953, the year Stalin died; private correspondence and diaries of leading figures in Soviet history and of ordinary citizens, and information on the history of the American Communist Party
The ordinarily understated Yale Press is crowing that its files are better than Crown's files and that its system for studying and publishing the documents is better than Crown's system.
"We have direct and unimpeded access to the material," said Jonathan Brent, a senior editor at Yale University Press, who arranged the project.
"Besides, K.G.B. files are very problematic from the standpoint of authenticity and reliability. Everybody knows that there is misinformation and false information in those files, and it's not always possible to distinguish these from the truth."
What's more, Mr.
Brent said, while Crown's exclusivity agreement will prevent other scholars and journalists from having access to the files until Crown publishes them, Yale will allow other researchers to use the information, although nobody else can publish the documents themselves.
"We want to enhance scholarship, not impede it," Mr. Brent said.
Michelle Sidrane, the publisher of Crown, refused to be drawn into a "my files are better than your files" brawl.
"I'd like to congratulate Yale University Press on the competitive challenge," she said.
"But we'll allow the scholars who review the files from the Communist Party and the scholars who review the K.G.B. files to determine whose are better." Political Books
Books about politics, about politicians, by politicians, by politicians' wives continue to pour forth like so many policy statements.
Bantam has gone back to press with the paperback of "Raising PG Kids in an X-Rated Society," by Tipper Gore, the wife of Senator Al Gore and the woman who would be Second Lady.
Times Books will publish "Putting People First: What We Will Do to Change America," a trade paperback that is more or less the official Clinton-Gore campaign manifesto on all major policy issues.
In addition, Simon &amp; Schuster has just published "Marching in Place: The Status Quo Presidency of George Bush," by Michael Duffy and Dan Goodgame, both Time magazine correspondents.
And if anyone still has a sense of humor, Penguin is publishing "The Cat Who Would Be President," by Michael Cader.


Bonds Advance in Explosive Rally
The bond market rallied explosively and long-term interest rates fell below 7.5 percent yesterday, furthering an advance that began on Monday.
A number of factors were behind the big move, traders and analysts said, including a sharp drop in a survey of consumer confidence.
But foremost seems to be a nascent notion among investors that compared with other fixed-income securities, yields on Treasury bonds represent good value.


Bankrupt Daily News Is Likely to Get a New Owner Soon
With losses mounting at The Daily News, its search for a new owner is apparently reaching a conclusion, and the decision as to who gets the bankrupt paper could come quickly.
Yesterday, Conrad M. Black, owner of The Daily Telegraph in London, appeared before the unions in person for the first time, apparently to underscore his seriousness as a prospective buyer, though union leaders said he did not offer any breakthrough proposals.


CHRONICLE
A possible movie career nipped in the bud?
Senator ALFONSE M. D'AMATO, Republican of New York, withdrew from a cameo appearance in a film yesterday, just hours before he was to go before the cameras in his Washington office.
When he was first asked to participate in the film, "Dave," which is about a Presidential impostor, he thought it would be fun, Mr.
D'Amato said.
Then he learned that the film was produced by Warner Brothers, a subsidiary of Time Warner.
Time Warner produced the album by the rapper Ice-T that contains the song "Cop Killer."


Critic's Notebook; Beggary Abounding Onstage, But Not Off, at Stratford-on-Avon
During the summer, this picturesque community is crowded with tourists from around the world, arriving daily to see the Shakespearean sites -- the playwright's birthplace (now on a walking street) as well as his tombstone -- and to see at least one play in the Royal Shakespeare Company theaters.
For the first time in several seasons, all three houses are in full operation: the main proscenium stage; the Elizabethan-style Swan, and the newly reconstructed Other Place , a comfortable black-box theater replacing the earlier temporary quarters.
These theaters are operating at 75 percent capacity even as ticket prices have escalated to a high of around $60 for the best seat in the main house on Saturday night.
The recession does not seem to have touched Stratford.
One is not likely to encounter homeless people on the street or the banks of the River Avon, unless they are youthful travelers trying to save the price of bed and breakfast.
But in a paradoxical note, beggary abounds on the various stages this season.
Mendicants are the mode as characters take to the open road in search of rewarding alternatives to the strictures of a stifling civilization.
This is especially true in two pertinent and delightful non-Shakespearean plays with music at the Swan.


Bank Rates Drift Lower In Week
Interest rates on bank accounts drifted lower in the last week, as banks continued to adjust to the sudden drop in short-term interest rates announced by the Federal Reserve on July 2.
"Normally, it takes six to eight weeks for bank rates to fall after a Fed rate cut," said Robert Heady, publisher of The Bank Rate Monitor, a publication in North Palm Beach, Fla.
But at a time when loan demands and the economy are weak, Mr.
Heady said, banks have been adjusting their rates downward more quickly than normal.


Miracle Season's Most Valuable Jersey
Six months ago, a couple from Long Island stumbled upon a pinstriped jersey supposedly worn by TOM SEAVER during his 1969 season with the Mets.
"Maybe it's real; maybe it isn't," the couple, who asked to remain anonymous, was told at a garage sale upon purchasing the shirt for $2.
Well, the jersey was real.
Very real.
Autographed by Seaver yesterday at Mickey Mantle's restaurant, the jersey is expected to sell for $50,000 at an auction next week, only two days after Seaver is inducted into the Hall of Fame on Sunday.


Anthony (Fat Tony) Salerno, 80, A Top Crime Boss, Dies in Prison
Anthony (Fat Tony) Salerno, the rough-talking, cigar-chomping boss of the Genovese crime family who rose from running numbers in East Harlem to rigging construction bids on Manhattan skyscrapers, died Monday night, Federal prison officials said yesterday.
Mr.
Salerno, who had been in failing health since entering the prison system in 1989, died of complications from a stroke that he suffered on July 18, the officials said.
He was 80 years old.


Gerber Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; BUSH ADVERTISING EFFORT TO IGNORE MAJOR NETWORKS
Officials with President Bush's campaign said today that they would open a television advertising effort next week, bypassing the major networks and emphasizing local stations.
In addition, officials at Cable News Network said the Bush campaign had bought a modest $125,000 worth of commercials to begin running Monday in its prime-time news programs.


Court Criticizes Police Department in a Sex Case
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan sharply criticized the New York City Police Department yesterday for what it said was its sexual discrimination against a female probationary officer who had charged another officer with raping her at gunpoint in 1983.
Rather than filing charges against the officer, who later retired with a full pension, the department dismissed the woman who had charged him with rape, the court said.


Eating Well
THE long arm of America's preoccupation with nutrition has reached across the Atlantic to Hungary, a country with the dubious distinction of having the highest heart-attack rate in the world.
The Soros Foundation, created in the early 1980's to support dissidents in Central Europe, is turning its attention to health education in that part of the world.
Its efforts are being directed toward nutrition, smoking, alcohol and drugs, sex and AIDS.


Rockefeller Appears Short In Senate Bid
Larry Rockefeller's Republican primary challenge to Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato appeared doomed yesterday, as he failed to file enough petition signatures to be sure of withstanding a legal challenge by Mr.
D'Amato.
Mr.
Rockefeller, a 47-year-old environmental lawyer making his first bid for public office, filed 10,774 signatures with the State Board of Elections, just 774 more than the 10,000 required to get on the ballot.
Candidates generally try to file at least twice the required number of signatures to withstand an array of technical challenges under New York's arcane election laws.


GranCare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Trenton Requires Citizen Proof for Drivers
New Jersey today resumed requiring applicants for driver's licenses to provide proof of United States citizenship, after a nearly four-week interlude in which licenses might have been issued to thousands of illegal aliens.
Within hours, two lawyers from Princeton, Bruce I. Afran and Roger C. Martindell, filed a lawsuit taking the state to court.


Tigers Have a Buyer in Mind
Mike Ilitch, owner of the Detroit Red Wings and Little Caesar's Pizza, has reached agreement to buy the Detroit Tigers from Thomas Monaghan, owner of Domino's Pizza.
The Tigers have not announced the deal, but they have sent Ilitch's name to major league baseball's ownership committee for approval.
Committee members held their initial discussion of the proposed sale in a telephone conference call yesterday.
The sale, which the owners must approve, would be the second of a major league team in less than a week.
Last Friday, John McMullen announced that he had reached an agreement to sell the Houston Astros to Drayton McLane, the second-largest stockholder in Wal-Mart.
McLane agreed to pay $115 million for the Astros and the master lease for the Astrodome.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Illinois; Black Woman's Senate Race Is Acquiring a Celebrity Aura
From the moment Carol Moseley Braun scraped to victory in the Democratic Senate primary here in March, celebrating in a gleeful boogie with supporters, it was clear that this would not be an ordinary campaign.
This was the candidate who could become the first black woman in the United States Senate, the one whose narrow triumph helped set in motion the victories of several other female Senate hopefuls and who overnight had gone from an obscure Cook County officeholder to a darling of the Democrats.


Cooper Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dinkins Confronts S.I. Secession Plan
Mayor David N. Dinkins, who is spending the week on Staten Island, yesterday confronted the borough's most charged political issue: secession.
Releasing a report showing that secession would cost borough residents almost $200 million a year, Mr.
Dinkins predicted that property taxes would soar and municipal services would diminish.
The report, by the Mayor's Task Force on Staten Island Secession, was the second this month to determine that the borough receives more city services than it pays for through tax revenues.
Earlier, the State Commission on Staten Island Secession had estimated that the borough, if it were an independent city, would have an annual shortfall of about $170 million.


U.N. Arms Team Begins a Search Of Iraq's Ministry of Agriculture
United Nations arms inspectors began a search of the Iraqi Ministry of Agriculture today for any sign the building was used as some kind of headquarters for President Saddam Hussein's program to develop ballistic missiles.
Iraq has had five days to remove any incriminating material from the building.
After keeping a 24-hour watch on the ministry since being refused access to it on July 5, the United Nations inspectors withdrew last Wednesday because of threats and harassment from Iraqi demonstrators.


Lobbying Effort Starts, With a Trade Pact Near
With President Bush himself declaring the United States was very close to reaching a North American free-trade agreement, the Bush Administration swung today into a new negotiating phase on the planned accord.
The targets: not Mexico and Canada but Democratic lawmakers who want heavy spending on worker retraining and environmental protection in exchange for their votes for the planned accord.
After Mr.
Bush urged Hispanic entrepreneurs at a Rose Garden ceremony this morning to support the pact, Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, held her fourth news conference in five days.
Mrs.
Hills touted the agreement in the White House briefing room as a "win, win, win" deal for all three countries.


Wyman-Gordon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about the former chairman of the Lucius N. Littauer Foundation, which finances research in Jewish studies, misstated his first name.
He was Harry Starr.


Le Barroux Journal; The Cloisters Call Again to Women
The winds off Mount Ventoux whip around the foothills and play tricks with the robes of Sister Teresia and Sister Scholastique as they hurry past the vines on their way to pray in an underground vault.
Inside, the sound of the convent choir soon rises clear as glass, now chanting in Latin and near-monotone, recreating the serenity and spirit of another time.
But this hidden Roman Catholic chapel in Provence is no ancient place of worship.
At present, it is a construction site.


Accounts
*
Agencies participating in the review of the Hilton Hotels Corporation's account, with billings estimated to exceed $16 million, were reported in this week's issue of Advertising Age: the incumbent, McCann-Erickson Worldwide , Los Angeles; Chiat/ Day/Mojo, Venice, Calif.; Dailey &amp; Associates, Los Angeles; Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco, and Wieden &amp; Kennedy, Portland, Ore.
Hunter Phillips, director of advertising at Hilton's Beverly Hills, Calif., office, declined to confirm the report. *
Anchor Savings Bank, Hewlett, L.I., to Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, New York, to handle its $4 million account, previously at Phillips/Alogna Associates, Garden City, L.I.
Other finalists in a review were not disclosed.


COMPANY NEWS: Life in the 1990's; Mix-and-Match Sentiments
For anyone who has ever spent hours roaming the aisles of greeting card stores reading lines of prose that never quite seem to convey the right sentiment, here's an alternative.
The American Greetings Corporation yesterday introduced Createacard, a computerized greeting card system that enables consumers to design, personalize and manufacture their own greeting cards right in the store.


Smith's Food &amp; Drug reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


The Pop Life
Sonic Commitment
Rock's fixation with authority has led it to a series of standard rebellious poses, from bad boyism -- trashing hotel rooms -- to wise-guy bohemianism.
The most visible advocates of the wise-guy school for the last 10 years have been the members of Sonic Youth.
The band has just released a new album, "Dirty" (Geffen), and like previous albums, it mixes irony with real musical experimentation.
The band, based in New York, has spent most of its career as anti-stars, underground downtown heroes, even though its last album, "Goo," was also released by Geffen, a major label.
As progenitors of several rock movements, the members have become the grandparents of indie, or experimental rock.
But that role hasn't reduced their power: the album ranks with their best, and the compositions are often complicated pieces that segue into many moods and textures.
The band has always loved the sound of the guitar, turned up and distorted, and these confirmed iconoclasts take real advantage of the electric guitar's overwhelming beauty.


Public &amp; Private; Reagan Redux
It's difficult to chart those moments when the unthinkable becomes the possible, and the possible becomes the certain.
And so it's hard to pick one event that turned George Bush into the underdog of his own incumbency.


A Floating Game of Sorts
Behind wire fences, guarded by burly men with walkie-talkies, metal detectors at the foot of every gangway, 15 cruise ships docked in the Port of Barcelona are the venue for what is fast becoming the main Olympic event: corporate sponsors feting their clients.
In the true Olympic spirit, of course, it is a competition: what ship will offer the best cabins, provide the best meals, throw the best parties.
But there are also different categories -- some companies are interested only in v.i.p.'s; others are looking to impress as many people as possible.


3 Lawmakers Avoid Testifying in Inquiry About Post Office
A Federal prosecutor excused three Democratic Congressmen from testifying today before a grand jury investigating the House post office, but it was not clear how long the reprieve would apply.
The three members of Congress, including Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, the chairman of the powerful Ways and Means Committee, said last week that they would refuse to cooperate with the investigation.


Record Number of Entries Vie for Largest Hambletonian Purse
With no clear favorite, this year's Hambletonian is so wide open it has attracted the largest number of entries in its 67-year history.
Twenty-seven horses, one more than the previous record, were entered this morning for Saturday's most prestigious event in harness racing.
The 27 horses were divided into three divisions of nine each in this morning's post-position draw to determine the 10 finalists for the Hambletonian.
The top-three finishers in each division, and the fourth-place finisher with the fastest time, will participate in the $1,104,000 final.


Legislators Begin Approving Bills as a Rare Special Session Begins in Albany
State lawmakers returned here for a rare special meeting today and began passing bills in a bid to redeem themselves for the hostile, unproductive finale to their regular legislative session earlier this month.
Virtually all of the measures agreed to by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders last week appeared certain of formal passage, including fiscal rescue packages for Nassau and Suffolk Counties that were in danger of derailment in recent days because of a variety of local squabbles.
Bond Act for Jobs
A dispute in Suffolk, for instance, over how long the county should be given to repay the money it hopes to borrow in the coming year lingered through the evening tonight.
But officials both in Albany and in Suffolk County said they did not believe it would unhinge the overall fiscal package, which Suffolk has vigorously sought to help close its deficit.


Thomas &amp; Betts Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


60-Minute Gourmet
CHEFS around the country are getting increasingly bold in their methods of cooking seafood.
They are making it very spicy and serving contrasting cool sauces; they are experimenting with fruit accompaniments (especially in Miami and other tropical areas); they are using it in such nontraditional dishes as choucroute and even pizza.
Home cooks are following suit.
For those with a barbecue grill or a broiler, this recipe is appealing on two levels.
For one, the tuna steak is coated with a mixture of curry powder, black pepper, anise, sesame seeds and salt.
You might want to try variations on this mix, but I find that the curry and the anise have a great affinity, and the pepper gives it a lively kick.
Second, the sesame seeds lend a pleasantly crunchy texture.
If you cook over a barbecue grill, the sesame seeds will take on a lovely aromatic toastiness.
Since tuna is inherently moist, no sauce is needed.


Serious Crimes Down 6.7% for New York City
Continuing a decline that began last year, reports of serious crime in New York City dropped by 6.7 percent over the first four months of 1992, compared with the same period last year, the city's Police Department announced yesterday.
The new data were embraced by a department and a City Hall eager to document the benefits that they assert have been gained by recent investments in the Police Department -- namely the huge increase in police officers and the emphasis on community policing.
And officials hope that these numbers will push the memory of 1990, when reported serious crimes hit an all-time high in New York City, into the distant past.


H. Naylor Fitzhugh, 82, Educator And Pioneer in Target Marketing
H.
Naylor Fitzhugh, who became vice president for special markets at the Pepsi-Cola Company after a long career as a professor of business at Howard University, died on Sunday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 82 years old and lived in Yonkers.
His family said he died after a lengthy illness.


A Pork Dish That Even A Nutritionist Could Love
WHILE pork may not be "the other white meat" where its fat is concerned, there is one cut so low in fat that even nutritionists recommend it for a low-fat diet.
It's the tenderloin, usually sold two pieces to a package, with a total weight of about one pound.
Use one tenderloin for dinner for two; freeze the other.
Because it is so lean, this cut of pork cooks quickly and dries out if it is overcooked.
Pork should not be served rare; you should look for a slightly pink interior.


Topics of The Times; A Vote for Children's Health
New York's State Senate has a wonderful opportunity this week to help the children of the working poor.
It can vote, as the Assembly did unanimously last month, to direct $20 million from hospital bad debt pools to a program called Child Health Plus.
Child Health Plus provides primary and preventive health insurance for children in low and moderate income families.
Since last September, when it started enrollment, the program has taken in 27,000 children.


Eastman Kodak Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Toward Solving the Mystery Of the American 'Stroke Belt'
In medieval times, apoplexy was a death that reflected the character of great and angry men, like Shakespeare's Henry IV.
In modern times, strokes are more likely to reflect ancestry and way of life.
Salty diets, high fat intake, smoking and genetic predisposition, especially in the case of blacks, all increase the risk of hypertension and stroke.
But even with all that is known, a stubborn geographical puzzle is etched in the statistics of a disease that is the third leading killer in the United States, after heart disease and cancer.
More than any leading cause of death, strokes have had a place to call home: the American South.


NAC Re Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dolphins to Stay In Robbie Hands
The long-feuding heirs of the late Joe Robbie, founder of the Miami Dolphins, reached a settlement today in Dade Circuit Court that will keep the team in family hands into the 21st century.
The agreement, which makes moot a trial that began on Monday, is contingent upon there being no objection from banks that hold $90 million in loans on Joe Robbie Stadium.
A trial would have offered a rare look at the financial workings of a National Football League franchise, but details of the settlement will be kept confidential.
The team's net value is estimated between $75 million and $80 million.


Chrysler Posts a Profit; Its Loan Talks Continue
Enjoying stronger sales of its mini-vans, trucks and Jeeps, the Chrysler Corporation today posted a second-quarter profit of $178 million, or 54 cents a share, in contrast to a loss of $212 million a year earlier.
But in addition to that positive news, the No. 3 auto maker said it had not yet been able to conclude a vital restructuring of its loan arrangements with 152 banks, although "considerable progress has been made in the negotiations." The company also said its "objective is now to reach an agreement with its banks in the next few weeks."


Books of The Times; When Academics Doubled as Intelligence Agents
Compromised Campus  The Collaboration of Universities With the Intelligence Community, 1945-1955  By Sigmund Diamond  371 pages.
Oxford University Press. $27.95.
It should not come as a surprise to readers of recent books and magazine articles about the reign of J. Edgar Hoover during the cold war that the tentacles of the Federal Bureau of Investigation extended into the nation's universities.
Thanks to the Freedom of Information Act, in recent years historians, biographers and journalists have been able to obtain Government dossiers -- heavily censored and often with pages withheld -- on individuals and organizations ranging from America's Nobel laureates in literature to members of Congress and the Supreme Court.


Viacom Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brother to Get Post at Toyota
The Toyota Motor Corporation today named Tatsuro Toyoda as its new president, succeeding his older brother, Shoichiro Toyoda.
The change, which will be made official at the annual shareholders' meeting in late September, was expected and is part of a broader reshuffling of top company management.


Shortfall Forces Smithsonian to Cut Staff
The Smithsonian Institution will lay off staff members this year because of a projected budget shortfall of as much as $40 million, the head of the institution announced yesterday.
Smithsonian officials said they could not recall any previous layoffs at the institution.
In a memorandum sent to the Smithsonian's 6,600 employees, the institution's secretary, Robert McC.
Adams, said the layoffs at the institution's museums and research operations could begin at the end of August.


Coach at Kean College Leaves
The Kean College basketball coach, RON KORNEGAY, announced he would resign after compiling a winning percentage of .649 over a five-year period at the Union, N.J., school.
Kornegay, who had a 90-49 record at Kean, will become the supervisor of physical education and athletics at Franklin High School. (AP)


Ruth Batchelor; Songwriter, 58
Ruth Batchelor, a songwriter and radio and television reporter, died on July 23 at South Miami Hospital in Florida.
She was 58 years old and lived in Key Biscayne, Fla.
She died of cancer, said her husband, Peter Kory.


U.S. Home Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chinese Women Suffer Under a Brutal System
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal enumerates the forms of torture suffered by prisoners in China in "China's Black Book" (column, July 7) and eloquently calls on our politicians, both Republicans and Democrats, to speak out against slavery and torture in China.
However, Mr.
Rosenthal, like Asia Watch, the human rights group he cites, fails to address the widespread slavery and torture suffered by women in China.
A recent study on violence against women, written by a Chinese journalist, describes the following human rights violations in China.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Adoring Or Abhoring The Camel
JOE CAMEL is turning out to be one determined dromedary.
The antismoking activists who hoped their intensified attacks on the cartoon character would put pressure on the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company to discontinue, or at least play down, its use have so far been disappointed.
Indeed, Reynolds is not only shrugging off the protests but is also forging ahead with new advertising and promotional programs that feature the caricature as prominently as before, if not more so.


Gun Charge for Officer
An East Orange, N.J., police lieutenant was arrested in the Bronx yesterday and charged with possessing two firearms, which the New York City police said he had intended to sell.
The lieutenant, identified as John Bingham, 40 years old, of 15 Cherry Street in Jersey City, was driving in his private car about 3:15 P.M., said a New York City police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.
Officers stopped him and noticed a 9-millimeter semiautomatic weapon and a .38-caliber revolver on the front seat of the car, Officer McInnis said.
The East Orange police had no comment last night.


Coastal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY NEWS
DYNCORP, a technological services concern in Reston, Va., received contracts from the State Department and the Navy valued at a total of more than $78 million.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; CLINTON COUNTERS ON FOREIGN POLICY
Rejecting White House efforts to describe him as an untrustworthy choice for voters, Gov.
Bill Clinton today accused President Bush and his aides of playing politics with foreign policy.
Mr.
Clinton said that he had been prepared for Mr.
Bush to attack his foreign policy credentials as a campaign tactic but that "I don't think we should turn every issue into a partisan issue."


Following 1937 Story of Buried Gold, Family Searches New Mexico's Sands
The mystery boils down to a single question: Was Milton (Doc) Noss telling the truth, or just a tall tale?
The answer could be worth billions of dollars.


Barkley Putting Some Spin on the Ball Off the Court
On the day the Dream Team rested and nursed its wounds, Charles Barkley's mouth continued to run in Olympic marathon form.
Angry that he has been forced by the United States Olympic Committee to discontinue a column he was writing in USA Today, Barkley claimed the U.S.O.C. is "a little jealous about how much attention we're getting."


Jones Apparel Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 5


Guides on Environmental Ad Claims
More than a year after 11 states and many manufacturers complained about misleading environmental advertising claims on products, the Federal Trade Commission issued national guidelines today for defining terms like biodegradable, recyclable and compostable.
Though they are voluntary, the guidelines are the most specific directions the Government has ever issued on what is and what is not a misleading environmental advertising claim.


Protective Life Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Tentative Japan Is Giving Trust-Busting a Try
In the first criminal prosecution under its antitrust laws since 1974, the Japanese Government has put eight Japanese manufacturers of plastic food wrap on trial, charged with conspiring to raise prices.
Other than the defendants, the party with perhaps the most riding on the case is the United States Government, which sees the trial as a sign that its latest trade strategy is working.
It is a strategy that has many doubters, but Washington remains optimistic that it can use antitrust laws, both its own and Japan's, to help open Japan's markets for American goods.
American officials reason that better antitrust enforcement will reduce collusive relationships among Japanese companies that tend to exclude foreigners, allowing all companies to compete on their merits.
That could provide a more general approach to opening Japan's market, rather than hammering away at restrictions industry by industry.
Threat of Prosecution
To that end, the Justice Department said in the spring that it would consider prosecuting foreign companies for practices that hurt American exporters.
While the Justice Department insisted it was not aiming at any particular country, the announcement sent a wave of fear through Japanese businesses.


Corrections
Because of a typographical error a letter from The Jerusalem Post July 16 misstated the newspaper's policy.
It should have read, "but we do allow the settlement movement to have its say in our pages," not "its way."


Cooper Holders Meet In Anger and Sadness
Anger and sadness marked the annual shareholders meeting for the Cooper Companies, held at the Marriott East Hotel in New York City yesterday, as the contact lens and medical products company elected directors.
One of their major tasks will be to cope with a Federal investigation that could lead to Cooper's indictment on criminal insider trading charges.
The anger came from shareholders who raised a host of questions about the company's mounting legal problems.
Those include the Federal inquiry into junk-bond trading by Gary Singer, Cooper's former co-chairman, now on unpaid leave.
They also include lawsuits filed by Bruce Sturman, Cooper's other former co-chairman, who says he was dismissed for blowing the whistle on the bond-trading scheme.


Amy Fisher Freed on Bail; Judge Imposes Restrictions
Amy Fisher, the Long Island teen-ager awaiting trial in the shooting of the wife of her alleged lover, was released on a $2 million bond yesterday after being imprisoned for two months, unable to raise bail.
In approving the bond, Judge Marvin Goodman of Nassau County ordered the 17-year-old Ms.
Fisher to appear in court in Mineola today where he will set restrictions forbidding any contact with Mary Jo Buttafuoco, the woman who was shot.
The protection order also will bar Ms.
Fisher from seeing Mrs.
Buttafuoco's husband, Joseph.


Yankeetown Journal; Looking On, Helpless, As Palm Trees Die Off
The dirt road to Dr.
David Ohlwiler's weekend home winds around trees thought to be 100 years old or more.
Visitors to the 430 acres of forest and salt marsh must often stop their cars for tortoises crossing the rocky path that eventually opens onto a small clearing where the Ohlwiler house sits on stilts.
From his glass-front living room, Dr.
Ohlwiler can gaze at hundreds of trees, some bearing feeders for birds or squirrels.
But in the distance he can also see a stand of dead palm trees, all missing their crowns.


Chinese Women Suffer Under a Brutal System; 'Keep Your Mouth Shut'
To the Editor:
Re A. M. Rosenthal's July 7 column: I am a lawyer at a firm that handles immigration matters.
Many of our clients are Chinese citizens, ranging from landbound peasants and factory workers to intellectuals and professionals.
One thing they speak of in common is the ready threat of the Chinese Government to use force and coercion to maintain control over their minds and bodies.


Yankees Are On Verge Of New Showalter Pact
Joseph Molloy, the Yankees' managing partner, said yesterday that Manager Buck Showalter would sign a contract extension today if final details could be worked out.
The 36-year old rookie manager has piloted the Yankees to a 47-52 record and has received extensive praise from his players and team executives.
He even has been mentioned as a managerial candidate with the Colorado Rockies or Florida Marlins, the National League expansion teams for next season.
Now he is close to being rewarded with a healthy raise and a commitment from the Yankees.


Delmarva Power &amp; Light reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Borg Finds a Winning Touch
BJORN BORG pumped life into his comeback drive last night with a 6-3, 6-4 victory over GEORGE BEZECNY in the first round of the U.S.
Pro Tennis Championships at Brookline, Mass.
Borg, who won three U.S.
Pro titles at Longwood Cricket Club in the mid-1970's, delighted a capacity crowd of 7,500 in a highly publicized match that lasted only 73 minutes.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; SHARP EDGE TO PRESIDENTIAL BASEBALL CARDS
President Bush smiled as he operated the cutting machine during a campaign stop at a baseball card factory in this Wisconsin town on Monday, slicing up promotional cards depicting phases of his own life.
The sets of 20 cards showed Mr.
Bush as a boy, as a World War II pilot, during his political career and with his family.


USX-U.S. Steel Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Congressman Decides to Quit Ethics Panel
In a decision that caught colleagues and members of his staff by surprise, Representative Gary L. Ackerman, Democrat of Queens, today resigned from the House of Representatives' ethics committee.
Mr.
Ackerman, who has been accused of trying to tarnish the prospects of potential rivals by leaking a list that identified them as among the worst abusers in the House bank scandal, said he decided to resign to prevent a recurrence of such charges.


National Data Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Maxxam Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Voluntary I.B.M. Layoffs Up; $1.2 Billion Charge Is Seen
I.B.M. announced yesterday that voluntary job cuts would reduce its work force by at least 32,000 employees this year, far higher than a previous company estimate of 20,000.
The additional costs in terms of benefits and buyout payments for those leaving the company will result in a $1.2 billion charge against earnings for 1992.
Late last year, when I.B.M., the world's largest computer maker, announced a sweeping overhaul and estimated that up to 20,000 employees would leave in 1992, it took a charge of $3 billion.


Ragan (Brad) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


McDonald Gets Tough And Puts Yanks Away
Everything about Ben McDonald's pitching last night said early shower.
The Yankees had six hits in the first three innings and were primed to send the Oriole right-hander searching for shampoo.
Instead, the Yankees slipped on offense and let their chances slide down the drain.


Greco-Roman Wrestler Caps Comeback With Silver
Dennis Koslowski's yearlong comeback ended in bittersweet fashion tonight when the 32-year-old wrestler lost to Hector Milian Perez of Cuba in the gold medal match of Greco-Roman heavyweight competition.
Koslowski, who hadn't allowed a point in four previous matches, dropped a 2-1 decision in overtime to Milian, who became the first Latin American athlete to win a gold in Greco-Roman competition.


U.S. 400-Meter Stars Quarrel Over Relay Personnel
A simmering dispute among several members of the United States men's Olympic track and field team and the head coach, Mel Rosen, intensified today when two leading 400-meter runners criticized the coach, one calling him "unprofessional" and "inconsistent" and the other accusing him of lying.
The remarks, by Steve Lewis and Danny Everett at an afternoon news conference, came as a result of their continued unhappiness over Rosen's intention to include Michael Johnson on the 1,600-meter relay team.
Despite the fact that he has been the world's leading runner at 200 and 400 meters for two years, Johnson competed only in the 200 at the Olympic trials last month in New Orleans.


No Politics, Just Power For the Pocket Hercules
The Pocket Hercules does not need to carry all that weight anymore.
It was quite enough for Naim Suleymanoglu to win another gold medal tonight.
He is a two-time Olympic champion at the age of 25.
He said he did not need a world record or a searing feud with another country.
He flexed his muscles three times in public, a matter of seconds, and called it a night with a combined total of 705 pounds.
That was well below his 1988 record of 755 pounds, but more than five times his featherweight class (132 pounds or 60 kilograms).


Harsco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ply-Gem Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Peru's Chief, Vowing Democracy, Sets Date for a Revived Congress
Promising a "full return to democracy," the President of Peru announced today that a new Congress would take office Jan. 2 and that mayoral elections would be held Feb. 7.
President Alberto K. Fujimori has come under steady pressure to reverse his April 5 decision to close Peru's courts and Congress.


CNN Criticizes News Anchor
Cable News Network said last night that it had criticized its business news anchor, Lou Dobbs, for making promotional videos for Wall Street firms and accepting fees for his efforts.
Mr.
Dobbs's outside activities were disclosed last week by The Wall Street Journal, which said he was paid $5,000 to $10,000 each for the promotions for such companies as Shearson Lehman Brothers, Paine Webber Group, and the Philadelphia Stock Exchange.


Ionics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Luxottica Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. Unit in Iraq Attacked
Gunmen have attacked a United Nations barracks in the Kurdish city of Sulaimaniya in northeast Iraq, the Iraqnian news agency reported today.
It quoted Iraqi Kurds in Sanandaj, Iran as sayiny that no one was wounded in the Monday attack by an "unidentified armed group," but that the barracks were heavily damaged.
The Kurdish rebel leader, Jalal Talabani, has said Iraqi secret police were behind such attacks, a charge Baghdad denies.


Consolidated Edison Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brunswick Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


London Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


How Does Your Garden Show?
THOMAS WOODARD and his partner, Blanche Greenstein, are the kinds of antiques dealers who like to be first with new kinds of objects.
They pioneered the sale of Bakelite radios and fueled the taste for Shaker wares.
For a while, along with their choice quilts, they've championed what they call "garden embellishments."
This summer's selections have just been put on display at the Thos.
K.
Woodard gallery, 799 Madison Avenue (between 67th and 68th streets), and will be on view through Aug. 21.


Hills Is Said to Consider Delay in Trade Pact Vote
Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, told Congressional leaders Tuesday night that she would probably give Congress extra time next year to vote on a free-trade agreement with Mexico and Canada, people who attended the meeting said today.
Kathleen A. Lydon, a spokeswoman for Mrs.
Hills, said late tonight that Mrs.
Hills had agreed to "take as much time as necessary" to craft legislation putting the free trade pact into law, but that Mrs.
Hills had not agreed to a delay of any specific number of days.


Tough Cash-Machine Bill Is Approved
New York City banks will be required to install the toughest security systems in the nation at automated teller machines under a bill the City Council passed overwhelmingly yesterday.
Despite a no-holds-barred lobbying effort by big banks, the Council voted, 40 to 3, to pass the measure.
The law is expected to be a bellwether for other local governments considering such measures.


Debate the Real European Issues
The bitter exchange between the Clinton and Bush camps over Bosnia this week marked one of the rare instances foreign policy has touched the Presidential campaign.
Yet even this was no real debate.
The press secretary, Marlin Fitzwater, tried to paint Mr.
Clinton as a dangerous amateur for suggesting he would not rule out selective air strikes against Serbian targets.
But the Democratic candidate actually hewed closely to the overcautious Administration line on the Yugoslav crisis.


American Educational Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


B.C.C.I.'s Remorseless Web
Criminal and civil charges filed yesterday against Clark Clifford and Robert Altman add yet another sorry dimension to the Bank of Credit and Commerce International's worldwide scheming.
Mr.
Clifford and Mr.
Altman, Washington lawyers and power brokers of the first order, were indicted on charges of taking bribes and lying to cover up the bank's illicit U.S. operations.
They flatly deny the charges, but their assertion that they were innocent dupes has long been suspect.
The truth will now be resolved in court.
B.C.C.I. was founded 20 years ago by Pakistanis with Middle Eastern capital.
It was operating in some 70 countries -- including the U.S. -- when banking authorities shut it down last year.
Its claim to be a bank for the third world was mere pretense, hiding activities involving drugs, money laundering, bribes and even terrorism.
One indictment charged that it paid "huge" bribes to regulators and central bankers in 10 foreign countries -- 7 in Africa -- resulting in frauds against the World Bank and other international agencies.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
BATTLES between adolescents and their parents over dress and appearance seem to be a tradition passed on from generation to generation.
Children's insistence on not only what to wear but also the right to make that choice serves a very useful purpose in their emotional and social development.
But in many families, those developmental issues sometimes get lost among the details of pierced ears or spiked hair.
"Adolescents are going through immense bodily changes," said Dr.
Richard M. Lerner, the director of the Institute for Children, Youth and Families at Michigan State University in East Lansing, who has studied adolescence and physical attractiveness.
"They feel that they don't have any control over those changes. One way of taking control of how you look is through style of dress. While you may not have control over whether you get acne, you do have control over what you wear."


Trial in Three Deaths Unfolds Slowly, Painfully, in Bronx
The case against Alejandro Henriquez is unfolding slowly and sadly.
In a Bronx courtroom sit the weeping parents of a young woman and two girls, now dead; the theatrical defense lawyer, and his opponent, the prosecutor who seems calm but for the nervous cigarettes he smokes in the hallway.
The trial has all the elements of a heart-wrenching whodunit.
The evidence, after two weeks of testimony, is almost entirely circumstantial, an edge for the defense from the start.


The Man in the Iron Cage: A Russian Horror Story
After three months, only a handful of spectators gather daily in the large pink-colored courtroom, and the caged defendant is usually led out after a few minutes.
But even the monotonous drone of the legal routine oozes unspeakable horror.
On trial in Courtroom No. 5 of the Rostov Oblast Court is Andrei Chikatilo, a nondescript 56-year-old clerk who is accused of slaughtering, mutilating and cannibalizing at least 53 young men and women over a dozen years.


People
*
Nancy Rice, the longtime Minneapolis agency executive who recently joined DDB Needham Chicago as a group creative director, was named a senior vice president. *
Samuel D. Ostrow, president of the corporate public affairs division of the Rowland Co.
U.S. , New York, was promoted to the new position of chief executive.


William Cotton; Teacher, 76
William Cotton, a photographer and a teacher for many years at the Walden School, a private school in Manhattan, died on Monday in Brandon, Vt.
He was 76 years old and lived in Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Mr. Cotton died of a heart attack, said his wife, Cornelia.


Review/Music; The Less Ubiquitous Mozart
Gerard Schwarz paddled the Mostly Mozart Festival toward the edge of the mainstream repertory on Saturday evening, when he conducted a program at Avery Fisher Hall that included Mozart and Beethoven works that were less ubiquitous than others in those composers' catalogues.
Mr.
Schwarz was abetted by two soloists, the pianist Rudolf Firkusny and the cellist Lynn Harrell.
Mr.
Firkusny gave a patrician reading of Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 16 in D (K. 451), and Mr.
Schwarz supported him with an orchestral component that was full of thoughtfully articulated dynamic nuances.


General Dynamics Sets More Cuts Tied to F-16
The General Dynamics Corporation said yesterday that it would trim 5,800, or 29 percent, of the jobs at its military aircraft division in Fort Worth.
The cuts include 1,500 employees that General Dynamics had previously said would be cut by next spring.


Alliance Capital Management L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Police Review Board Says Public Complaints Are Up
The head of the Civilian Complaint Review Board said yesterday that the board received 19 percent more complaints through the first six months of 1992 than in the same period last year.
The announcement of the figures comes as the Police Department finds itself on the defensive on a variety of issues -- from corruption to the possible use of excessive force in recent incidents in Washington Heights and in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
And the department immediately tried to put the best face on the rise in complaints.
Commissioner Lee P. Brown said that a large influx of officers was responsible, including many young officers who he said tended to be "more aggressive."


COMPANY NEWS
AHOLD, a Dutch-American food retailer, and Jeronimo Martins &amp; Filho S.A., a Portuguese food producer and retailer, announced a joint venture to work together in the Portuguese retail food market.
FLIGHT SAFETY INTERNATIONAL INC., Flushing, Queens, an aviation and marine training concern, sold its interest in Aeroformation, a joint venture in Toulouse, France, to its partner, Airbus Industrie, for $12.6 million.


Lufthansa, Japan Air Cut Some Routes
Two leading foreign airlines have decided to retrench, after finding the skies over the United States as turbulent as American carriers have found them for several years.
Lufthansa German Airlines said yesterday that it would suspend service to Charlotte, N.C., and Philadelphia effective Oct. 25, while Japan Airlines said Tuesday that it plans to suspend service to Seattle on Nov. 1.
Both carriers cited a sluggish United States economy for their lagging revenue in those markets.


Critic's Notebook; The Disappearance of Ice-T's 'Cop Killer'
Pressure groups everywhere can rejoice now that Ice-T has bowed to the protests of police associations and others and agreed to remove "Cop Killer" from his first heavy-metal album, "Body Count." A parental-advisory label wasn't enough to satisfy music critics with badges; neither was the removal of the album from the shelves of hundreds of stores.
The song had to go.
Ice-T fought no law, but "the law," or some of its guardians, won.
"Cop Killer" is not a pretty song.
Its narrator puts on gloves and a ski mask, picks up his 12-gauge shotgun and announces: "I'm 'bout to kill me somethin'/A pig stopped me for nuthin'!" Later, in a call-and-response, Ice-T asks, "What do you wanna be when you grow up?" and the reply comes, "Cop killer!" Ice-T has described the song as a fictional narrative, from an enraged, malevolent character's point of view, a common conceit in speed-metal songs.
In Metallica's "Master of Puppets," for instance, the narrator is a drug addiction. ("Taste me you will see/More is all you need," the song goes.)


Albert Nerken, 79, an Engineer, Industrialist and Philanthropist
Albert Nerken, a chemical engineer, industrialist and philanthropist, died last Thursday at his home in Brookville, L.I.
He was 79 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Nerken, who dropped out of college but later returned to complete his studies, went on to found Veeco Instruments and guide its growth into an international company.
He retired as its chairman in 1989 when it was sold for more than $250 million.


Data Switch Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Economic Scene; More Concrete, More Growth?
YOU did not read it here first: public capital spending is in.
Bill Clinton wants Uncle Sam to invest an extra $20 billion annually to "develop the world's best communication, transportation and environmental systems." Even the hard-line free marketeers left in the Bush Administration, the ones who reread Ayn Rand at bedtime, seem reconciled to sweetening private investment in toll roads and bridges with Federal matching funds.


Franklin Bank N.A.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Board Urges Fiscal Shifts In New York
New York City will face budget gaps and service reductions for many years unless the Dinkins administration reorganizes city government, the state agency that monitors the city budget said in a report issued yesterday.
The agency, the State Financial Control Board, said Mayor David N. Dinkins had done more to recognize the city's long-term financial problems than any mayor in two decades.
But the board also contended that Mr.
Dinkins had failed to develop a plan to restructure the city's expenditures and tax revenues to achieve what fiscal experts call "structural balance" -- a stable relationship between the size of local government and the size of the local economy.


Starbucks Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Washington Gas Light reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
A big gift for a small college: ALEX KATZ, the painter, has announced that he will donate 414 of his works to the Colby College Museum of Art, in Waterville, Me.
The gift, which encompasses more than 30 years of work, includes 15 large and 40 small paintings, 32 completed portrait drawings, 146 small drawings in pencil and ink, 7 cutouts, 5 cartoons and 169 prints.
The choice of Colby was based in part on Mr.
Katz's affinity for Maine.
He studied at the Skowhegan School of Painting and Sculpture and has built a home in Lincolnville where he spends summers; he received an honorary degree from Colby in 1984.
"I always wanted to give back to the state," he said in an interview from Lincolnville this week.


Renovating? No Sweat: Grab a Chair, Watch TV
THE housing market may rise or collapse, but television home shows seem to be recession-proof.
And why not?
Do-it-yourselfing has obvious appeal in tough times: not only does it save money, but it takes one's mind off matters less manageable than drywalls.
And if you have no prospect of turning your shack into a mansion soon, the next best thing is to watch somebody else accomplish it in half-hour installments.
A lot of people do.
A spokesman for the popular "This Old House" put the weekly audience at about seven million.
Whether or not such demonstrations hold more water than a leaky basement, here is a report on what the hammer-and-drill crowd is up to these days. 'This Old House'
This PBS staple, around since 1979, is the "Masterpiece Theater" of home shows.
Much of the work goes on downstairs, but most of the renovators, restorers and conservators who appear on the show plainly belong upstairs, despite the standard dark shirts and jeans.
The man who will dig you a septic tank (for $15,000 or $20,000) talks like a professor.


William Sabella, 47, An Educator on AIDS
William Sabella, coordinator of AIDS counseling and education at Yale-New Haven Hospital, died on Saturday at his home in North Haven, Conn.
He was 47 years old.
Mr. Sabella died of complications from AIDS, said Prof. Alvin Novick, his companion.


Review/Fashion; Saint Laurent Overcomes The Anguish
With fewer than half the styles he usually shows, and amid speculation that the days of the haute couture were numbered and rumors that he was upset because the company that bears his name backed another designer's ready-to-wear collection, Yves Saint Laurent showed a superb collection this morning.
Even his mother, Lucienne Saint Laurent, loved it.
"I never know what my son is doing, so I had the same wonderful surprise as everybody else," she said backstage after the show, where she kissed him 13 times.


FOOTBALL Tagliabue to Take the Stand
The wait for testimony by Commissioner Paul Tagliabue is essentially over.
The players' lawyers in the McNeil versus the National Football League suit over free agency rested their direct case this afternoon.
Tagliabue will be the N.F.L. lawyers' first witness called Thursday morning.
Tagliabue is expected to testify for all of Thursday and probably on Monday when the trial resumes (Friday is a day off in the trial.) Expected to follow Tagliabue on Tuesday is General Manager George Young of the Giants.
Other league witnesses next week will include Bobby Beathard, the general manager of the San Diego Chargers, and Chuck Noll, the former Pittsburgh Steelers coach.


Ipalco Enterprises reports earnings for 12mo June 30


No Headline
Today's indictment spells out that this massive fraud was not just a criminal fraud scheme, as we charged last year, but a sophisticated and corrupt criminal enterprise, organized from the top down to do just this -- accumulate money and gain the power and prestige that the money provided. -- ROBERT MORGENTHAU, Manhattan District Attorney, on Clark Clifford's indictment in the B.C.C.I. case.  [ D10:4. ]


Dumping, Stolen Trucks and All, in New Jersey
With the cost of trash disposal skyrocketing, New Jersey officials are fighting a new kind of illegal dumper: a thief who steals a truck trailer, loads it with garbage that he is paid to haul away and simply abandons the trailer and its contents wherever it is convenient.
Twice in the last month the convenient spot was Liberty State Park, about two miles from the Holland Tunnel and just off the New Jersey Turnpike, where trailers have been found with household and office trash that investigators say came from New York City.
Similar events have been repeated about 50 times around New Jersey in the last three years, state officials say.


Weldwood of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
Vatican and Israel Seek Ties
After decades of strains over the Palestinians and other issues, Israel and the Vatican announced that they were forming a commission to pursue full diplomatic relations.
Page A7.
Legal Opening for Haitians
A Federal appeals court effectively voided an order by President Bush that all fleeing Haitians be stopped at sea and taken back home.
Page A9.
Work Halts at Burial Ground
The Federal Government suspended excavation at the site of a colonial-era cemetery for black New Yorkers in lower Manhattan.
Page B1.
Illegal Dumping, Truck and All
New Jersey is fighting a new illegal dumper: a thief who steals a truck, loads it with garbage and abandons it wherever convenient.
Page B1.


Bethlehem Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA: Swimming; American Male Swimmers Come Back in Waves
It was enough to stir any cold warrior from his Olympic slumber.
Here was a Russian, Yevgeny Sadovyi, a member of the revitalized Unified Team, setting a world record of 3 minutes 45.0 seconds in the 400-meter freestyle, winning his third gold medal of the Olympics.
Now, at a post-race news conference, this brilliant athlete was shaking his shaved head in sympathy at the crumbling United States swimming dynasty.


Datron Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Escagenetics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Members of Ku Klux Klan Rally in Queens


LIN Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


United Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Evergreen Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Showalter Stays in Pinstripes
Deep down, Buck Showalter never wanted to leave the Yankees.
Deep down, Joseph Molloy never wanted anyone else to manage the Yankees.
Yesterday, they made sure Showalter would not leave when the team's manager and managing partner jointly announced, to no one's surprise, that the rookie skipper had agreed to lead the Yankees for the next three seasons.
The contract extension for Showalter, who is earning about $160,000 this season, is guaranteed through 1995 and worth about $1 million.


Executive Changes
ABERNATHY/MACGREGOR GROUP, New York, which provides crisis and transaction communications and investor and financial public relations, named Tim Metz managing director.
AMERICAN INDEMNITY FINANCIAL CORP., Wilmington, Del., an insurance holding company, named J. Fellman Seinsheimer 3d president and chief executive.


Tuesday Morning reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Bancorp (Vincennes, Ind.) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Trenton Court Says State Can Bar Insurers Who Quit Auto Coverage
The State Supreme Court ruled today that the state could force any insurance company that stopped writing automobile policies to drop all other business in New Jersey.
Writing for the court, Justice Gary S. Stein said it was "thoroughly persuaded that the public interest advanced by the regulation substantially outweighs its adverse effect" on insurers.
The ruling affects every insurance company doing business in New Jersey, although the case before the court involved only Twin City Fire Insurance, a subsidiary of the ITT Hartford Insurance Group.
A Florio 'Cornerstone'
The decision is an important victory for Gov.
Jim Florio's administration and its efforts to force insurance companies to comply with the state's automobile-insurance law, which has been under nearly constant legal attack since it went into effect two years ago.


Linkon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Vital Gauge in Reactor Found Prone to Error
Federal regulators said today that 37 nuclear power plants around the country were using error-prone instruments to measure the depth of cooling water.
The instruments could lead to operators' errors in a nuclear accident, making any such accident far worse.
Utilities that own the reactors acknowledged the problem but played down its significance.
All the reactors in question were manufactured by the General Electric Company and boil water directly in their cores.


Delchamps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Union Files A Grievance
Four weeks after Commissioner Fay Vincent summoned three Yankee officials to a meeting about their testimony in the Steve Howe hearing, the Players Association yesterday filed a grievance against Vincent and the 26 major league clubs seeking to "protect the integrity" of future hearings.
Michael Weiner, assistant general counsel of the association, said the union wanted the arbitrator, George Nicolau, to bar the commissioner from repeating his action and to have a notice sent to all major league employees telling them that testifying truthfully at a grievance hearing cannot result in discipline.


Melamine Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Orioles' Mix Proves Deadly to the Yankees
Arthur Rhodes, a rookie pitcher, baffled the Yankees with his fabulous left arm.
Cal Ripken Jr. tortured them with his defensive presence and precise hitting.
Cal's brother Billy Ripken buried them with a rare homer.
It was a splendid combination for the Baltimore Orioles and another agonizing evening for the Yankees, who were beaten, 6-0, at Yankee Stadium last night.


Sports of The Times; Even Cuba Sometimes Wins Ugly
BASEBALL has just been admitted as a full medal sport in the Olympics, but after last night's horror show of a 9-6 victory by Cuba over the United States, we can expect an emergency meeting of the International Olympic Committee early today to re-evaluate this sport.
Round about the ninth error at midnight, even team handball was looking good.
The Cubans are proud and capable athletes who play in the hermetically sealed world of amateur baseball.
They have won 19 world titles and 9 Pan-American Games.
It can be assumed they know where Tony Perez and Luis Tiant and Tony Oliva went.
The huge 90-mile gap between Cuba and mainland Florida gives every U.S.-Cuba baseball game a bit more salsa than a sedate baseball World Series between fellow professionals, but that is no guarantee against a lengthy, sloppy and even testy game, with both sides ducking inside pitches.


Abaxis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Glavine Gets 16th, Wins 10th in Row
Braves 5, Astros 3
ATLANTA, July 29 (AP) -- Terry Pendleton's tie-breaking seventh-inning home run allowed Tom Glavine to become baseball's first 16-game winner this season as the Atlanta Braves posted a 5-3 victory over the Houston Astros today.
The victory snapped a three-game losing streak for the Braves, who had tied a club record by winning 13 straight before that.
Glavine (16-3) won his 10th decision in a row, longest of his career and best in the majors this year.
He hasn't lost since May 22, when he was beaten by Montreal.


Tolland Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Masco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Imasco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Steinbrenner Offers Aid to Swimmer
George Steinbrenner, here in his role as a vice president of the United States Olympic Committee, has found his people at these Games: the American swim team in general and Ron Karnaugh in particular.
Karnaugh's father, Peter, suffered a fatal heart attack during the opening ceremonies on Saturday.
Steinbrenner acknowledged today that he would assume financial responsibility for getting Karnaugh through medical school.


DDB Needham Gets A James River Pact
The James River Corporation yesterday awarded its consumer paper products account, which had been divided between Scali, McCabe, Sloves and Lintas New York , to DDB Needham New York .
The decision, which involved brands like Northern bathroom tissue, Brawny paper towels and Dixie paper plates and cups, followed an intensive review that in the final stages pitted DDB Needham against Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York.
Billings were estimated at $15 million, but as often occurs after an account changes hands, that figure was revised upward, to perhaps as high as $25 million to $30 million.


Clearly Canadian Beverage reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quebecor Printing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nicaragua Gay-Bashers
To the Editor:
"Newest Storm in Nicaragua: Anti-Gay Law" (news article, July 10) omits how the Nicaraguan parties voted June 11, when the National Assembly passed Article 205 of the revised penal code, which would penalize lesbians and gays even for exercising the right to free speech.


Hall (Frank B.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Books of The Times; Who's Afraid of the Big, Bad Wolves?
The Ninemile Wolves  By Rick Bass  Illustrated. 165 pages. Clark City Press. $22.95.
"They say not to anthropomorphize -- not to think of them as having feelings, not to think of them as being able to think -- but late at night I like to imagine that they are killing: that another deer has gone down in a tangle of legs, tackled in deep snow; and that, once again, the wolves are feeding. That they have saved themselves, once again."
So writes Rick Bass -- a nature writer, novelist and unabashed admirer of wolves -- at the opening of "The Ninemile Wolves" about the return of the wolf to the state of Montana after an absence of some 60 years.


D&amp;N Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CellPro Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Accuses Bush of Dodging Responsibilities
Weaving various threads of his attack on George Bush into a newly coherent and more deeply personal whole, the Democratic Presidential nominee, Bill Clinton, today accused Mr.
Bush of the most basic of shortcomings, the failure to accept responsibility for his actions.
Mr.
Clinton's speech here, although cast in carefully uninflammatory terms and delivered without histrionics, went subtly beyond the scope of most political oratory in attacking his opponent not for specifics of his Administration's actions but for his very nature.
It indicates that the Democratic nominee understands that the contest between him and Mr.
Bush will be an unusually personal one and is likely to pivot on the public's evaluation of the basic worth of each man.


Amy Fisher's Bond Upheld Despite Prosecutor's Outcry
Amy Fisher was smiling when she entered the Nassau County Courthouse this morning, but she was soon in tears after a prosecutor asked that her $2 million bond be revoked less than a day after she was released from the county jail.
Complaining to Judge Marvin Goodman, the prosecutor, Fred Klein, said he had not been told a movie company provided $60,000 of the $100,000 paid to a bond company to post the bail.
He said the money should be set aside for Mary Jo Buttafuoco, whom Miss Fisher is accused of shooting in a fit of jealousy over Mrs.
Buttafuoco's husband, Joseph.


ILC Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Baghdad Said to Sponsor Attacks on Aid Missions
The Iraqi Government of Saddam Hussein, in an apparent effort to drive foreign relief workers out of the Kurdish-controlled areas in the north, is behind a series of car bombings and grenade attacks against international aid organizations, United Nations officials, Western diplomats and Kurdish leaders say.
The campaign, which has seen plastic explosives placed under the vehicles of aid workers and rocket propelled grenades fired on their living quarters, comes as Iraq refuses to renew an agreement that provides for the stationing of 500 United Nations guards and 600 aid workers in the north.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
SUMMER is a good time to refinish furniture and other woodwork because ample ventilation can be easily supplied to avoid the dangers of harmful fumes.
It is also high season for antiques sales and flea markets, where many items are bought that later end up as amateur refinishing projects.
Here are some alternatives to the messy task of stripping paint and other finishes from furniture and woodwork, and some tips that can make the process easier.
First, determine whether stripping is necessary or desirable.
Leaving original finish on furniture virtually always increases its value.
Before even cleaning a piece that you think might be valuable, have it examined by an appraiser, a museum conservator or a similar expert.


Phillies Close Door on Mets With a Loud Slam
The eighth-inning grand slam crashed into the bullpen in left.
The ninth inning then expired without a threat.
The Mets were 6-3 losers to the Phillies and suddenly a fourth-place club in the National League East.
The afternoon's only remaining electricity crackled quietly in the clubhouse.
Players inquired about trade rumors.
General Manager Al Harazin, unmoving, unsmiling, stared out from the corner.
The clock to the major league trading deadline was ticking and everyone heard it.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; A BUSH COMMERCIAL THAT WILL NOT BE MADE
It turns out that the idea of having Kevin Costner and James S. Brady appear in television commercials for President Bush starting next week was nothing more than wishful thinking on the part of his campaign's media advisers.
Campaign officials recently circulated scripts of possible advertisements featuring Mr.
Costner praising Mr.
Bush's environmental record and Mr.
Brady, Ronald Reagan's former press secretary, giving a testimonial for Mr.
Bush.


Heekin Can Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 14


Interpublic Group of Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fischer &amp; Porter reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Northern Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Designing Tall
Q.
I would like to add some color and height to the back areas of my garden but don't want shrubs.
What flowers do you suggest? -- Andrew R. Cohen, Chicago.
A.
When it comes to design, more gardeners are starting to appreciate the importance of contrasting flower size.
"No matter how narrow your border, you shouldn't be scared to add height," said Page Dickey, author of "Duck Hill Journal: A Year in a Country Garden" (Houghton Mifflin, 1991, $19.95).
"And there are certain flowers that I value not only for their individual beauty, but for their vertical lines."


Northrim Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Iraqi Athletes Are Struggling
For an athlete, the Olympic village is the ultimate escape, a biosphere in which sports is the international language and goodwill is more than an experiment.
For some, it can be even more.
As home for thousands of athletes and officials from the 172 nations in the Barcelona Games, the village becomes a respite from the turbulence at home and a chance to connect with the world beyond it.


BARCELONA: Basketball; Bird Stars, Jordan Pouts And U.S. Wins Again
His Olympic spirit having never wavered, Larry Bird's body finally rejoined the Dream Team tonight.
He ran, passed, shot and scored, and you know his back must have been feeling pretty good because he even took a dive while chasing a loose ball.
Germany was easily vanquished, 111-68, but the mystery regarding Bird's future was unresolved.
Actually, it was probably deepened by the best Bird performance -- a game-high 19 points plus two assists and three steals in 20 minutes -- since the United States Olympic basketball team assembled last month in southern California.


Giant, 3-D Billboard Planned For Hole at Midtown's Heart
On a vacant lot at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street -- yes, there is a vacant lot at one of Manhattan's busiest crossroads -- an 85-foot-high, three-dimensional, multimedia, walk-through billboard would rise next year, under plans announced yesterday.
The structure, a glass-and-aluminum grid about the height of a nine-story building, would be sponsored by a foreign government or multinational corporation, said the project's developer, George N. Stonbely, president of Spectacolor Inc.


Timberland Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Inverness Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FOOTBALL Tagliabue to Take the Stand
The wait for testimony by Commissioner Paul Tagliabue is essentially over.
The players' lawyers in the McNeil versus the National Football League suit over free agency rested their direct case this afternoon.
Tagliabue will be the N.F.L. lawyers' first witness called Thursday morning.
Tagliabue is expected to testify for all of Thursday and probably on Monday when the trial resumes (Friday is a day off in the trial.) Expected to follow Tagliabue on Tuesday is General Manager George Young of the Giants.
Other league witnesses next week will include Bobby Beathard, the general manager of the San Diego Chargers, and Chuck Noll, the former Pittsburgh Steelers coach.


Meanwhile, East of Barcelona . . .


Cabot Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


PacifiCare Health Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Centurion Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stein Mart reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Samuel M. Brody, 65, Architect Of Housing Complexes, Is Dead
Samuel M. Brody, a leading New York City architect who with his partner, Lewis Davis, designed some of the city's best-known housing complexes, died yesterday at the Memorial Sloane-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 65 years old and lived in Brooklyn Heights.


John Kornblith, 67; Held 38 McDonald's In New York Region
John H. Kornblith, chairman, president and chief executive of the Twenty-First Century Corporation, one of the largest franchise holders of McDonald's fast-food restaurants in the world, died on Monday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 67 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Kornblith died of lung cancer, said Joan Lotz, a company spokeswoman.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Appalachian Power Co., Roanoke, Va., a unit of American Electric Power Co., filed a shelf registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $100 million of debt securities.
*
BellSouth Telecommunications Inc., a unit of BellSouth Corp., Atlanta, is offering $300 million of 7 7/8 percent debentures due Aug. 1, 2032, at 98.559 to yield 7.995 percent, through Morgan Stanley.
Callable after 10 years, the debentures are rated Aaa by Moody's Investors Services and AAA by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


New York Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA: Soccer; A Tie Isn't Good Enough To Keep the U.S. Alive
After 90 minutes of exhausting soccer and with a 2-2 tie against Poland to show for their efforts, the young American players had to wait and agonize for two more hours here tonight before knowing if they had an Olympic future.
Kuwait had to beat or tie Italy for the United States to qualify for the quarterfinals for the first time in 10 Olympic appearances.
And the game was being played later in the evening in Barcelona, 200 miles northeast of here.


International Microelectronic Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Jefferson Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Petroleum Helicopters reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Accounts
*
Western Publishing Co., New York, to Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore, New York, to handle advertising for its adult board games like Pictionary and Balderdash, previously at Ogilvy &amp; Mather , Chicago, which remains as agency of record as well as the creative agency for Western's juvenile and family products.
Warwick bested the incumbent and Frankenberry, Laughlin &amp; Constable of Milwaukee in a review for the account, with billings estimated at $4 million to $7 million. *
Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor, New York, declined to participate in a review of the Midlantic National Bank account, with billings estimated at $3 million to $5 million.
The agency, which had worked for the bank, based in Edison, N.J., since 1977, cited a growing relationship with Dreyfus Corp., New York, as a potential conflict.


Bridge
All of the favored teams survived in the Spingold Knockout Team Championship here on Tuesday as the field was cut to 32 from 64.
But in the other major event at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer National Championships -- the Women's Knockout Teams -- there were two major upsets.
The top-seeded group of Nancy Passell of Dallas, Nell Cahn of Shreveport, La., Stasha Cohen of Glen Ridge, N.J., and Susan Green of Alexandria, Va., were defending champions, and the first three won the world title in Yokohama, Japan, last October.
Teamed with them were Pam Wittes of Los Alamitos, Calif., and Randi Montin of Alamo, Calif., who won the Pan American title in Corpus Christi, Tex., last month.


Adaptec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


At the Travel Agency, A Lawyer Finds a Niche
ELIZABETH PEREZ could have gone anywhere, and she did.
A graduate of Harvard Law School, she has worked as a corporate lawyer and a political aide in this country, and a television reporter abroad.
But her schooling and her experiences led her back to Harlem, where she grew up, and to the tiny law office upstairs from a storefront travel agency on Broadway, where she serves as lawyer, adviser and counselor to many of her Hispanic neighbors.


Greenwich Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Skimming Off a Bit of Americana
THE STORE NEXT DOOR is a mini-temple of innovative objects nestled next to the Whitney Museum of American Art.
Situated at 943 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, the shop sells an eclectic assortment of American wares -- from picture frames to T-shirts and jewelry.
A new arrival on the shelves has been getting a lot of attention: the milk bottle.
Kaarin Lemstrom-Sheedy, the shop's buyer, said, "I have a home in the Berkshires and I like to poke around the local flea markets." Vintage glass bottles from the once numerous dairies caught her eye.


Gencare Health Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Time for a Siesta


A Skyline Of Fantasy And Wood
SHE calls them towers and, like the brooms in the "Sorcerer's Apprentice," their number just keeps multiplying.
Through Sept. 7, 28 of Liz Whitney Quisgard's three- to seven-foot-high sculptures will be on view at Broadway Windows, the gallery in a storefront at Broadway and 10th Street, sponsored by New York University.
"They're dense, sort of like New York architecture is dense," said Ms.
Quisgard, who also does paintings depicting authentic architectural sites, to which she brings an element of fantasy in colorful surface decoration.
"To leave anything plain is not in my nature," she said in describing what she calls a menagerie, the assemblage of acrylic-painted plywood structures like the one above.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
The Dow Jones industrial average soared 45.12 points, or 1.35 percent, after gaining 51.87 points on Tuesday, and the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 set a high by closing at 422.23, up 4.71 points.
In the first 90 minutes of trading on the Big Board, 100 million shares were exchanged and the Dow rose 44 points.  [ Page D1. ]
The bond market rally stalled as prices of Treasury notes and bonds ended with modest declines in heavy trading.
The selloff came after traders had pushed yields on long-term issues to their lowest level of the year.  [ D20. ]  Money market fund yields dropped slightly in the latest week with tax-exempts at 2.18 percent.  [ D11. ]


West Fraser reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cintas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Growing
IT was raining in my Maryland garden last weekend, so I decided to stay in New York and see what the city plants were up to.
I've just moved into an apartment in the West Village, and I wanted to get a few moonflowers growing on my fire escape.
I sit out there and watch the river in the mornings.
But the view from the roof is the best.
It's so good, I'm afraid somebody's going to take it away from me.
This is my garden in the city.
I don't have any plants on the roof yet, and maybe I don't want any.
The openness of sky and water is such a release, like running down to the very edge of the ocean.
Just watching the clouds darken as the sun goes down over Jersey City and the ventilation pipes of the building next door blacken against the purplish sky is like being in a garden of a very different nature: a garden of space and movement that is free of clutter.


Perot's Fiscal Medicine: Tastes Bad but Could Work
The economic plan made public by Ross Perot after he decided not to run for President is a careful document that represents a consensus among economists on some policies to rejuvenate the nation's economy, while in the many areas where no consensus exists, it navigates a middle course between left and right.
In seeking to eliminate the budget deficit in five years, Mr.
Perot seized upon the few policies where there is general agreement among liberal and conservative economists: reining in runaway spending on Medicare and Medicaid, slashing subsidies for large corporate farmers and making deeper cuts in the military budget.


Halifax Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Acxiom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Atlantis Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; BARBARA BUSH TO ADDRESS CONVENTION
Barbara Bush will deliver a prime-time address at the Republican National Convention next month.
An administration official said she would speak at the Houston convention on Aug. 19, the night President Bush will be renominated.


Archive Corp. reports earnings for 13wks to July 3


Fulton Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Court Reverses Convictions In an Ulster Political Killing
Three Protestants serving life sentences after being convicted of murdering a Catholic man in Northern Ireland nearly nine years ago were freed today after their convictions were overturned on appeal.


Italian Government Survives Test
Italy's month-old Government survived a test in Parliament today, but two senior officials, including the Foreign Minister, quit the Cabinet, touching off a new imbroglio.
Embroiled in an internal dispute with his own Christian Democratic Party, Foreign Minister Vincenzo Scotti decided to resign midway through discussions with his Iranian counterpart, Ali Akbar Velayati, showing his visitor how much affairs of the party outrank affairs of state.


Prices Drop as Bond Rally Stalls
The bond market rally stalled yesterday as prices of Treasury notes and bonds ended with modest declines in heavy trading.
The selloff came after traders had pushed yields on long-term issues to their lowest level of the year.
Prices of securities were up by as much as 5/8 point early in the session, fueled by European buying and continued purchases by investors moving funds out of the mortgage-backed securities market.


What Makes French Farmers So Angry
To the Editor:
"France Blocks the Way" (editorial, July 9) betrays a lack of understanding of the human ramifications of sweeping international agreements.
Farmers throughout France have risen in almost desperate protest against the transformation in Europe's agricultural policies that you don't think goes far enough.
In the Gers, where this protest began, some 2,000 of 11,000 farmers have been forced to leave the land in the last eight years -- and this in only one out of the country's 96 departments.


Honecker Flown to Berlin to Face Criminal Trial
After taking refuge in the Chilean Embassy in Moscow for the last seven months, Erich Honecker, the former East German leader, was flown today to Germany, where he faces trial on corruption and manslaughter charges.
Arriving in Berlin at dusk, he was taken in a black limousine to the city's central detention center.
His lawyers said they would seek to have him freed pending trial.


Review/Dance; Paul Taylor Devises Some 40's Nostalgia
No one shinnied up the palm trees.
But every other inch of the Winter Garden was filled on Tuesday night when Maxene Andrews and the Paul Taylor Dance Company shared the bill in the Arts and Events Program series at the World Financial Center.
The redoubtable Miss Andrews got the evening off to a fine start with a rollicking performance of the Andrews Sisters classic "Bei Mir Bist du Schoen," paused for a sortie into a Boswell Sisters song that inspired three little girls who dreamed of emulating them, and wrapped that big voice of hers tenderly around "All of Me."
Interspersed among the many songs was wry commentary on the "bad movies" and great songs and singers Miss Andrews and her sisters, Patty and LaVerne, were associated with in their long career.
The patter had most of the megawatt sparkle of Miss Andrews's stage presence, and the singer shepherded her audience through the performance with the amusing air of an indulgent mother giving her charges their marching orders.
Some of the best bits came from Miss Andrews's delightful pianist, Phil Campanella.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Senator Al Gore
TODAY: 10 P.M., ABC, "PrimeTime Live," interview. (Channel 7 in New York)


Review/Theater; Shelling Peas and Roasting Reputations
There are no actual pies on stage in "Pie Supper," which is a pity because the cast could have raised the level of humor considerably in this silly and boring play by throwing them in one another's faces.
Le Wilhelm has tried to write a nostalgic comedy in which a group of women make preparations for a farewell pie supper in 1959 for 52 residents of a small town in the Missouri Ozarks who, for reasons never explained, are migrating to California.


Rally's Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 5


Indiana United Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Little Movies Trying To Be Bigger Movies
This week, "Sister Act" breezed past the magic $100 million mark in box office receipts, while "Batman Returns" and "Lethal Weapon 3" edged up on $150 million.
Meanwhile, "Howards End," a small, quiet film based on the E. M. Forster novel and produced by Ismail Merchant and directed by James Ivory, crept past $10 million nearly five months after it was released.
"Howards End" stands a good chance of grossing $20 million by the time its distributor, Sony Pictures Classics, ends the film's slow, slow rollout in March 1992.
That figure would put it in the company of "Sex, Lies and Videotape" and "Cinema Paradiso," the art-film equivalents of "Terminator 2: Judgment Day" and "E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial."


Envoy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hugh Sylvan Stix, 85, Art Gallery Founder
Hugh Sylvan Stix, who for many years owned and managed the Artists' Gallery on East 57th Street in Manhattan, died on July 21 at Cabrini Hospital.
He was 85 years old.
He died of cancer, said Miriam Kahn, his companion.


Maclean Hunter reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
For 15 years, RICK MOONEN has spent most of his time at the stove, cooking at famous restaurants like La Cote Basque, Le Cirque and, for the last four years, the Water Club, where he is the executive chef.
But now he is fighting mad.
So on Tuesday, he and 34 other chefs threw off their toques and went to Washington to announce a boycott of genetically engineered foods, as part of the Pure Food Campaign organized in May by the Foundation on Economic Trends in Washington, a nonprofit organization that monitors the biotechnology industry.


Plymouth Five Cents Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Midwest Resources reports earnings for 12mos June 30


Orioles' Mix Proves Deadly to the Yankees
Arthur Rhodes, a rookie pitcher, baffled the Yankees with his fabulous left arm.
Cal Ripken Jr. tortured them with his defensive presence and precise hitting.
Cal's brother Billy Ripken buried them with a rare homer.
It was a splendid combination for the Baltimore Orioles and another agonizing evening for the Yankees, who were beaten, 6-0, at Yankee Stadium last night.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Gilberto Santa Rosa  Village Gate
Gilberto Santa Rosa, one of Puerto Rico's most popular young singers, was an unusual booking for the Village Gate's Salsa Meets Jazz series, which usually features driving dance bands rather than pop hit makers.
On Monday night, Mr.
Santa Rosa turned out to be a little bit of both, crooning a lover's sentiments over brisk bomba and mambo rhythms.
In his repertory, which he does not write, Mr.
Santa Rosa often plays the part of a spurned or importunate lover, appealing for a second chance in a fond baritone.
Like typical salsa, the songs have two parts, a tuneful first half that gives way to a pushier vamp, with Mr.
Santa Rosa improvising against a refrain from his two backup singers; they also share synchronized dance steps.
Mr.
Santa Rosa's arrangers toy with the salsa convention, having instruments drop out now and then or adding short interludes.
And often trombones and baritone saxophone introduce one melody line, then trumpets layer on another, a strategy shared with the Dominican Republic's merengue bands.


Transportacion Maritima Mexicana reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


MTS Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Tale of 'Howards End': Shuttling the Stars Around
"Howards End" is hardly "Batman Returns." But it is the latest film to make a successful leap from cult status into a broader market.
To promote it, Sony Pictures Classics turned to a public relations concern to develop a publicity campaign that would support the film throughout its planned yearlong run.
"We had certain advantages going in," said Samantha Dean, the president of the company that bears her name.
This may be a bit of understatement when your film stars Anthony Hopkins and Vanessa Redgrave.
Ms.
Dean worked her stars hard, deploying them, like warheads, at strategic intervals as the film made its way across the country.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Houston Oilers
Your players have just flown half way around the world and have landed in Tokyo tired, bedraggled and suffering from jet lag.
So what do you do?
Get them out on the practice field and run them ragged, of course.
That, more or less, was the prescription of Coach Jack Pardee yesterday when the Oilers arrived in Japan for Sunday's exhibition game against the Cowboys and promptly headed for a 25-minute practice.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Latest Bump on Campaign Trail: Republicans Berate a Bush Aide
After weeks of bad news, President Bush's campaign manager went to Capitol Hill today to assure House Republicans that everything would be fine soon and received a round of harsh criticism for for painting what the lawmakers saw as an unbelievably rosy picture of the campaign.
By the account of participants, the meeting changed from a cheerleading session led by Vice President Dan Quayle and the campaign manager, Frederic V. Malek, to the latest in a string of political bumps for the White House.
This came on a day when the Bush team had planned to use a barrage of press releases and a revised campaign schedule to give the appearance of a reinvigorated campaign.


Horsham Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wheeling-Pittsburgh Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Drug to Aid Birth Is Found Ineffective and Risky
A drug widely used in the United States to prevent premature births is ineffective and can have dangerous side effects that on rare occasions kill pregnant women, a study has found.
The drug, ritodrine, made by Philips-Duphar of the Netherlands, was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 1980, after smaller studies indicated it might effectively halt premature labor.
But the new study, the largest ever conducted on the suppression of premature birth, indicates that these studies may have been misleading.


Poison Algae Linked to Fish Die-Offs
Scientists say they have found that "phantom" algae are responsible for mysterious mass kills that have destroyed millions of fish.
The toxic algae, which have not been given a scientific name, were found in the Pamlico and Neuse estuaries in North Carolina.
They appear in the water as if out of nowhere, kill hordes of fish in estuaries and fish farms by releasing poisons, and just as quickly disappear.


Hutchinson Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Equitable of Iowa reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Barra Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Was Sewage Plant A Blunder From Start?
To the Editor:
"What's the Good of Lawsuit on Sewage Plant" (letter, July 1) by Sanford Evans of the New York City Department of Environmental Protection seems to prove the need for a lawsuit to curb the smell over the Upper West Side from the North River Sewage Treatment Plant.
All the palliatives he describes depend on the dubious success of the last one.
Many New York City engineers, of whom I was once one, know a simple, immediate remedy.
A graph from "City-Wide Combined Sewer Overflow Study," a 1986 Environmental Protection report, shows the effects on the Hudson River of the North River plant.
With no treatment at all, this robust tidal river can keep itself clean and sustain the state-mandated 4 milligrams per liter of dissolved oxygen.
Fish can proliferate.


BankAtlantic reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA: Volleyball; Japanese Women Beat U.S.
When a United States team takes the court for an Olympic volleyball match, there are a couple of things that can be counted on.
One is that the match will go five sets and the other is that there will be a crowd of bald-headed guys around to shout and incite the crowd.
Today, the United States women began their Olympic tournament against Japan, the same nation that gave the United States men such fits.
But this time, the result was indisputable, as Japan rallied to a 13-15, 15-11, 15-12, 8-15, 15-13 victory that prompted Japanese Coach Kazunori Yoneda to say, "We have obtained a miracle."


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  FINDING FAULT WITH BRAKES ON BUS
The head of the team inspecting the mangled tour bus that crashed and burned Sunday in Vernon, N.J., said that crucial components of the brake system were missing or "seriously degraded" on all three axles.
Frank Ghiorsi of the National Transportation Safety Board declined to formally characterize the crash as a brake failure until the board has interviewed all witnesses, including survivors of the trip that began in Brooklyn.
But he added, "I think the facts speak for themselves." B4.
NEW YORK CITY  SECURITY PLAN FOR BANK MACHINES
New York City banks must install the strictest security measures in the nation at automated teller machines under a bill the City Council passed overwhelmingly.
Banking executives said the bill would cost them tens of millions of dollars and could lead to the closing of some of the 1,038 sites in the city.
They also predicted the measures would not deter crimes.
B3.
SUBWAYS AFFECTED BY HOLE IN BRIDGE
Transit officials have rerouted subway service on three different lines because inspectors found a hole the size of a quarter under tracks on the Manhattan Bridge.
B3.
MORE COMPLAINTS ABOUT THE POLICE
The Civilian Complaint Review Board says it has received 19 percent more complaints about the behavior of police officers in the first six months of 1992 than over the same period last year.
The Police Department, on the defensive on a range of issues, immediately tried to put the best face on the news.
B2.
A walk-through billboard for Fifth Avenue.
B2.
Report calls for city to reorganize.
B2.
Harlem Journal.
B3.
REGION  FLORIO WINS; INSURERS LOSE
The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that the state can force any insurance company that stops writing automobile policies to drop all other business in New Jersey.
The decision is an important victory for Governor Florio's administration and its efforts to enforce the state's automobile insurance law.
A1.
CUOMO HAS A BLUE CROSS PROBLEM
With its grim warning that it will run out of reserves by the end of the year unless it gets a 12.4 percent rate increase in October, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield has placed Governor Cuomo and the state Insurance Department in a very difficult position.
News analysis, B6.
TEARS IN THE COURTROOM
Amy Fisher was smiling when she entered the Nassau County Courthouse but was soon in tears when a prosecutor asked that her $2 million bond be revoked less than a day after she was released from the county jail.
But the judge reaffirmed the bail arrangement for the Long Island teen-ager, who is accused of shooting Mary Jo Buttafuoco in a fit of jealousy over Mrs.
Buttafuoco's husband.
B4.
TRYING TO STOP SMOKERS FROM STARTING
Governor Cuomo and legislative leaders reached agreement tonight on a package of measures to deter teen-agers from smoking, including bans on many vending machines and on free distribution of tobacco.
B6.
New York agency's contracts faulted.
B4.
Chronicle B6


No Hint of Arms Found in Iraqi Ministry
United Nations arms inspectors finished searching the Ministry of Agriculture today without finding incriminating material related to President Saddam Hussein's efforts to develop weapons of mass destruction.
"We didn't find any 687 directly related material," the chief inspector, Hachim Biermann of Germany, said at a news conference afterward, referring to Security Council Resolution 687, which linked the cease-fire at the end of the Persian Gulf war to the elimination of Iraq's most dangerous weapons.


Aid but Not Homes Offered To Refugees From Balkans
Officials from 61 nations joined today in condemning the warfare that has driven 2.3 million people from their homes in the former Yugoslavia, but they had difficulty agreeing on any proposals to shelter the refugees or to help them return.
However the United Nations received a $114.5 million more in pledges to help deal with the exodus, Europe's biggest refugee crisis since World War II.


Appeals Court Overturns Bush's Order on Haitians
A Federal appeals court in New York yesterday effectively voided President Bush's executive order of May that all Haitians fleeing their homeland be halted at sea and escorted back to Haiti.
The court said that Haitians stopped at sea must be given the chance to state their reasons for fleeing Haiti, and to pursue political asylum in the United States if they appeared to have well-grounded fears of persecution.


Centocor and Xoma Settle Patent Fight
Centocor Inc. and the Xoma Corporation said today that they had agreed to settle their long-running patent litigation over prospective drugs for the treatment of septic shock.
Centocor agreed to pay Xoma royalties if it wins approval to sell its HA-1A sepsis drug in the United States.
The drug is sold as Centoxin overseas.
The companies did not specify how much the royalties would be, but Centocor said they would amount to less than the 40 percent of net sales sought by Xoma, which makes a competing drug called E-5.


Eastern Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CFS Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Calendar: Touring The City
Neighborhoods and Markets  92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; (212) 996-1100.
On Sunday from 1 to 4 P.M., there will be a walking tour of houses and haunts on the Lower East Side where the writers Isaac Bashevis Singer, Sholom Aleichem and John Dos Passos once lived.
Other walking tours include the Hunts Point Market (Wednesday); Harlem, focusing on culture and politics at the turn of the century (Aug. 9); Ellis Island (Aug. 16) and an early morning tour of the Fulton Fish Market (Aug. 21).
Fees range from $15 to $20.
Advance registration required.


Shell Canada Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cities Shouldn't Subsidize Sports Millionaires
To the Editor:
"Take Me Out to the Cleaners" by Andrew Zimbalist (Op-Ed, July 14), on major-league baseball's ripoff of cities, has brought to the surface an issue too little discussed.


Barefoot Inc.Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Met as Mall
If there is one museum display in New York that children love as much as, if not more than, the dinosaur eggs at the Museum of Natural History, it's the Egyptian Wing of the Metropolitan Museum.
There's something about mummies and canopic jars, sarcophagi and sacred cats that sets the youthful heart to thrumming.
Furthermore, it goes on thrumming into adulthood -- which is why a visiting former New Yorker strolled the Egyptian Wing last Sunday.
She, and a million others.


Yields of Money Funds Dip As Pace of Declines Slows
Money market fund yields dropped slightly in the latest week, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
But the steady erosion of rates that began with the Federal Reserve's most recent actions has about played itself out among taxable funds, said Walter S. Frank, chief economist at IBC/Donoghue.
Yields on tax-exempt funds were flat to very slightly down.
The seven-day simple yield was 2.18 percent in the latest week, unchanged, and the seven-day compounded yield was 2.20 percent, down a basis point.
The 30-day simple yield declined 6 basis points, to 2.19 percent, while the 30-day compounded yield declined 8 basis points, to 2.21 percent.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percent.


Cognitronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brown Joins Giants and Gets Busy
The Giants reduced their collection of unsigned and absent players today by signing Derek Brown, the Notre Dame tight end they took in the first round of the pro football draft in April.
Ten days into training camp, they still have eight unsigned veterans and one unsigned draftee, and Coach Ray Handley said he was especially upset by the absence of three of those veterans -- Bob Kratch, Lewis Tillman and Bobby Abrams -- all backups.


A Run on Ice-T's Album
Music fans were snapping up copies of Ice-T's "Body Count" album yesterday in the wake of the rap artist's request that Warner Brothers Records stop distributing the album until a new version, without the song "Cop Killer," is produced.
Ice-T's announcement on Tuesday touched off a run on the remaining copies of the album at record stores in several cities.
Some buyers said they were banking that it would someday become a valuable collector's item.
At the Tower Records store on Broadway at 66th Street, one customer, Ron Varga, said he was buying the album to show support for Ice-T.


E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


McDonald &amp; Co. Investments reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Lyondell Petrochemical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


He Just Might Have Your Number
THESE days Victor Arranz is spending lots of time on the phone.
The 31-year-old industrial designer has spent the last two years making telephones.
But not just standard telephones.
Mr.
Arranz's telephones, which really work, are more akin in size and appearance to furniture.
"I take the telephone's three circuits, then I build onto them," Mr.
Arranz said.
He makes every part, including old-fashioned-looking dials, and buttons and receivers.
They are carved in wood and painted to look like plastic.
"The idea is to make things that look like I found them," he said.


Worthen Banking Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


IES Industries reports earnings for 12mo June 30


United Westburne reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sovereign Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tootsie Roll Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


McDermott International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Webb (Del) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lifetime Hoan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Albany Drug Agency Is Accused Of Sidestepping Bidding Rules
The New York State Inspector General yesterday accused the agency responsible for drug prevention, treatment and rehabilitation of improperly awarding $600,000 in consulting contracts to friends and business associates.
In a 62-page report, the Inspector General, Joseph A. Spinelli, cited improprieties by officials of the Division of Substance Abuse Services and said they had repeatedly sidestepped state rules on granting contracts.
Mr.
Spinelli said he had sent his findings to the United States Attorney's office in Albany to determine whether Federal law had been broken.


U.S. Banknote reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Saratoga Opens With Slew of Surprises
The stately old Saratoga Race Course opened its 125th season today, and promptly lived up to its reputation as the house of upsets.
It's the place where Man o' War and Secretariat and Affirmed all lost at the peak of their careers, where four jockeys were thrown from their mounts on opening day a year ago, and where a horse even fell and got wedged under the starting gate for 20 minutes.
The misdeeds today weren't cosmic, but they also weren't comic.


United Industrial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA: Gymnastics; Era Ends With Men's Triumph
The Unified Team gave the old Soviet gymnastics system a last hurrah tonight as its men completed a sweep of the team competition at the Barcelona Olympics by winning the gold medal 24 hours after the women had.
The six athletes from four republics made short work of the field, which they led by a substantial margin over China and Japan after the compulsory round on Monday and nearly double that amount after the optionals tonight.
China held on to win the silver medal, and Japan took a third consecutive team bronze.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  HONECKER LOSES HIS REFUGE
After holding up for months in the Chilean Embassy in Moscow, Erich Honecker lost his refuge and was flown to Berlin.
The former leader of the old Communist East Germany faces trial on corruption and manslaughter charges.
A6  HORROR AT RUSSIAN TRIAL
Even the monotonous legal routine oozes horror at a trial in a southern Russian city.
A 56-year-old clerk is accused of slaughtering, mutilating and cannibalizing at least 53 young men and women.
A3  NO EVIDENCE AT IRAQI MINISTRY
United Nations inspectors finished searching the Agriculture Ministry in Baghdad without finding incriminating material related to President Hussein's efforts to develop weapons of mass destruction.
A8
An inspector says the ministry dispute could have been avoided.  A8
Officials say Baghdad is behind the attacks in the Kurdish region.
A8  DEBATE ON YUGOSLAV REFUGEES
Officials from 61 nations joined in condemning the warfare that has driven two million people from their homes in the former Yugoslavia.
But they had difficulty agreeing on any proposals to shelter the refugees or help them return home.
A6  JUDGE VOIDS ORDER ON HAITIANS
A Federal appeals court effectively voided an order issued in May by President Bush that all Haitians fleeing their land be halted at sea and escorted back home.
A9  VATICAN AND ISRAEL PLAN TIES
After 44 years of ambiguous and often strained relations, the Vatican and Israel announced that they were forming a joint commission to negotiate full diplomatic ties.
A7  ITALY'S LURCHING CABINET
Hours after Italy's fragile month-old Government survived a test in Parliament, two officials, including the Foreign Minister, resigned.
A6  National A10-22  CLIFFORD IS INDICTED
Clark M. Clifford and his protege Robert A. Altman were charged by the Federal Government and New York State with taking bribes from B.C.C.I. and helping it to hide its ownership of Washington's largest bank.
A1  THE SHEIK AND HIS DEAL
The deal that Sheik Kamal Adham of Saudi Arabia struck with B.C.C.I. prosecutors requires him to tell what he knows about the still-evolving scandal.
The question now: Exactly what is that?
A1  BUSH URGES ACTION ON BAILOUT
Breaking nearly four months of silence on an issue that both parties would prefer to postpone until after the elections, the President told Congress that its delay in approving more money for the bailout of the nation's savings and loan industry was costing the taxpayers $4 million to $6 million a day.
A1  FOR BUSH, ANOTHER BUMP
The President's campaign manager tried to assure House Republicans that everything would soon be fine with the Bush re-election drive.
They responded with a scolding for his painting what they saw as too rosy a picture.
A1
On the Trail: Barbara Bush will address the convention.  A21
Clinton said Bush spurned responsibility for his actions.  A20
The '92 campaign has brought a new Al Gore to the stump.  A20
News analysis: The Perot plan for economic recovery.  A21  WARNING ON BIRTH DRUG
A study found that ritodrine, a drug widely used in the United States to prevent premature births, is ineffective and can have dangerous, even fatal, side effects.
A21  'MOVING FAST AND FURIOUS'
Alan D. Fiers, a leading witness against his onetime C.I.A. associate Clair E. George, told a Federal jury of a frantic effort to get the agency's story straight as details of the Iran-contra affair first became public six years ago.
As his second day on the stand drew to a close, Mr.
Fiers broke down in sobs.
A10  HOUSE BACKS SPACE STATION
Rejecting arguments that the country could not afford the space station, the House voted $1.73 billion to help develop it.
A17  DANGER AT NUCLEAR PLANTS
Federal regulators said nuclear power plants around the country were using error-prone instruments to measure the depth of cooling water.
The instruments could lead to operators' mistakes in the event of a nuclear accident, making any such accident far worse.
A14  Mojave Journal: Where old airliners, and new ones, go to die.
A10  Metro Digest B1  NEW JERSEY INSURANCE CASE
The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that the state could force any insurance company that stopped issuing automobile policies to drop all other business in New Jersey.
A1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-11  Renovating?
No sweat: grab a chair, watch TV.
C1  Fashion: Saint Laurent overcomes the Anguish.
C1  On the pop culture trail with Nick Tosches.
C1  Where to Find It C2  Growing C2  CurrentsC3  Home Improvement C4  Garden Q. &amp; A.  C5  A sushi bar built for two and their friends.
C8  Calendar C9  Parent &amp; Child C11  Arts/Entertainment C12-20  Small films try to be bigger.
C13  Making Karen Ziemba plain.
C13  Behind Ice-T's "Cop Killer." C13  Theater: "Pie Supper." C20  Music: Infrequent Mozart.
C14  Pop and Jazz Roundup.
C16  Dance: Paul Taylor Company.
C13  Word and Image: Book: "Ninemile Wolves." C17  Home Video C18  Sports B7-16  Baseball: Phillies slam Mets.
B7  Orioles rookie shuts out Yankees.
B15  Showalter's contract extended.
B15  Glavine wins his 16th.
B14  Columns: Vecsey on Olympic baseball.
B7  On Baseball.
B15  Football: Jets and Taylor agree to terms.
B16  Giants sign first-round pick.
B16  Olympics: China emerging as an Olympic superpower.
B7  U.S. men's swimmers make waves.
B7  Career move pays off for diver.
B8  U.S. women lose in volleyball.
B8  Bird leads way over Germany.
B9  Discounts and free previews for the Triplecast.
B9  Iraqi athletes are struggling.
B12  Chesnokov upsets Edberg.
B13  Obituaries D24-25  John Kornblith; held 38 McDonald's in New York Region.
D24  Samuel M. Brody, architect.
D25  Dr.
Durant Waite Robertson Jr., a Chaucer scholar.
D25  Albert Nerken, an engineer, industrialist and philanthropist.
D25  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Debate the real European issues.
B.C.C.I.'s remorseless web.
Fit enough to serve -- in prison.
The Met as mall.
Letters  Leslie H. Gelb: An embrace spurned.
Tanya Melich: Will the Democrats stand up for choice?
David A. Kay: Giving in to Iraq.


Hooper Holmes reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Long Island Lighting reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


If It Glisters, It Might Just Be Plated
IT'S tempting to call Ruben Mirensky an alchemist, though he doesn't really turn base metals into gold.
It just seems that way.
Mr.
Mirensky, who owns the All Plating Corporation, in the Willamsburg section of Brooklyn, is in the metal-plating business.
And by stripping, polishing and plating, he makes objects in steel, zinc or other base metals look like brass, copper, or even gold.
After years of use, objects like doorknobs, hinges, lamp bases and faucets often need a good polishing or plating.
Machine polishing, which companies like Mr.
Mirensky's also do, is appropriate if an object has simply become dull or pitted.
But if the veneer has worn off, replating is necessary.


Warnaco Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Trimedyne Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA: Diving; Lenzi's Career Change Turns Into Gold Mine
Six years after he disappointed his parents by telling them he was giving up wrestling to be a diver like Greg Louganis, Mark Lenzi emulated his idol by winning the Olympic gold medal today in 3-meter springboard diving.
Lenzi got the gold, and proved there is life for American divers after Louganis, by avoiding the mistakes that foiled his chief rivals on the seventh of 11 dives at the Mountjuic pool.
And when he could have relaxed and nursed a lead, on the final dive, he cleanly executed his most difficult plunge of the competition.


U.S. Suspends Digging at Site Of Cemetery
Bowing to pressure from Congress and City Hall, the Federal General Services Administration reversed itself late yesterday and said that it was suspending excavation on part of the site where a 34-story office tower is being built over a colonial-era cemetery for black New Yorkers.
The decision was a clear victory for Mayor David N. Dinkins, who asked the General Services Administration last week to stop excavation and construction on a portion of the site, in lower Manhattan.
The Mayor said he was concerned that the disinterment of bodies found there was being conducted without proper safeguards or an approved research design.
A Local Rejection
Three days later, William J. Diamond, the regional administrator of the General Services Administration, rejected the Mayor's request.


In South Africa, Promises of More Police Aid


First American Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


4 Indicted Officers Off the Force
Two of the five New York City police officers charged with operating a cocaine ring through their beats in Brooklyn have been dismissed from the force and two others have resigned, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said yesterday.
One of the officers, Michael Dowd, who has been accused of being the ringleader in the group, was dismissed for insubordination on July 14 after he failed to appear at a departmental hearing, Mr.
Brown said, and another officer, Kevin Hembury, was dismissed on July 2, also for what the department termed insubordination.
Two other officers, Daniel Eurell and Philip Carlucci, have resigned, while the fifth, Thomas Mascia, remains suspended.


Anheuser-Busch Tries Light Humor
Anheuser-Busch is introducing a campaign that uses humor to try to reinforce beer drinkers' resolve to ask specifically for a Bud Light.
"Make it a Bud Light" is the theme of four television commercials, created by DDB Needham Chicago , that began running last night during NBC's coverage of the Summer Olympics.
The theme replaces a campaign called "Everything else is just a light," which depicted attractive young men and women engaged in athletic pursuits that often enabled them to flaunt tanned, toned bodies.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
BOSTON CELTICS -- Signed Chris Ford, coach, to a multi-year contract extension.
PORTLAND TRAIL BLAZERS -- Signed Rick Adelman, coach, to a contract extension through the 1994-95 season with an option for the 1995-96.
Continental Basketball Association
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Signed Ron Matthias, forward.
Football  National Football League
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Signed Keith Jones, running back, to a one-year contract.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Agreed to terms with Eugene Chung, offensive tackle.
NEW YORK JETS -- Agreed to terms with Troy Taylor, quarterback.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Derek Brown, tight end.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Announced that Shawn Vincent, cornerback, left camp.
Hockey  National Hockey League
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Signed Corey Hirsch, goaltender.
TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Signed Jock Callander, righ wing; Jason Lafreniere, center; Stephane Richer, defenseman, and Mike Greenlay, goaltender.
VANCOUVER CANUCKS -- Named George McPhee, director of hockey operations; Mike Penny, director of player personnel, and Jack Birch, scout.
Signed Jiri Slegr and Jassen Cullimore, defensemen.
Horse racing
NEW YORK STATE RACING AND WAGERING BOARD -- Suspended William Wright, trainer, indefinitely for testing positive for cocaine use on July 15, 1992.
Olympics
U.S.
GYMNATICS FEDERATION -- Announced the retirement of Bela Karolyi, coach, after the Barcelona Olympics.


In Home Health reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Society for Savings Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Marriage Is New But Will It Last Past The Honeymoon?
Earlier this season, 5-year-old Allie Showalter had a question for her father.
"We don't win as much as we used to, do we?" daughter asked.


PS Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Acme United reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Succession at Toyota Expected and Praised
It came as no surprise when Tatsuro Toyoda was named the new president of the Toyota Motor Corporation today.
Of course he is the younger brother of the current president, Shoichiro Toyoda, and a member of the family that has controlled the company since its founding.
But even aside from that, Toyota executives and some auto analysts insist, Mr.
Toyoda is the right man for the job.


Aide Says Misunderstanding Caused Crisis in Iraq
A senior United Nations inspector said today that the dispute over access to a Government building in Baghdad began with a misunderstanding, and suggested that the crisis might have been avoided.
Speaking at a seminar here on arms-verification issues, the inspector, who insisted on not being identified by name, said the monitors did not know that the building was Iraq's Agriculture Ministry when they demanded to search it on July 5.
Had they known, he suggested, the inspectors probably would have adopted a less confrontational approach that might have avoided the dispute, which led Washington to threaten air strikes against Iraq.


Gain in Trade-Gap Talks With Japan
Trade negotiators from the United States and Japan made some progress in efforts to reduce the trade imbalance between the nations, American officials said tonight.
But in at least two key areas of concern to the Americans, the Japanese did not make any new commitments.
The talks, described as difficult by the American officials, were the second annual review of the Structural Impediments Initiative, a continuing process in which the two countries are telling each other how to reform their economies.


Winthrop Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Spear Financial Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hickok Electrical Instrument reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA
MEDAL RUSH BY U.S.
Early flops by American swimmers were washed away by a world record and gold medals.
CHINA IN SPOTLIGHT
With 17 medals won so far, China is firmly establishing itself as an Olympic superpower.
LIFE AFTER LOUGANIS
Mark Lenzi, who gave up wrestling to learn to dive like Greg Louganis, won a gold medal.
SportsThursday, page B7.


Honecker Returns to Germany to Face Trial


THE B.C.C.I. Scandal; Charm for Plebeians and Patricians
How could a man like Clark M. Clifford with an illustrious career that hinged on his probity and judgment get into so much trouble?
It was not for the fame and the glory.
This is someone who counseled every Democratic President since Harry S. Truman, the only one present at the creation of United States policy against the Soviet Union who stayed around long enough to watch Communism collapse.
He played poker with Winston Churchill on the train to Fulton, Mo., for Churchill's Iron Curtain speech.
He masterminded Truman's come-from-behind victory over Thomas E. Dewey in the 1948 election.
He was John F. Kennedy's personal lawyer and Lyndon B. Johnson's Secretary of Defense.
He advised Edmund S. Muskie in the 1972 campaign and went on special diplomatic missions for Jimmy Carter.
And he was still prominent enough in 1989 for Speaker of the House Jim Wright to retain him when Mr.
Wright was being investigated by the House Ethics Committee.
A Millionaire Many Times Over
It was not for the money.
Over the years, Mr.
Clifford's legal clients included corporate giants like Standard Oil, Du Pont and Phillips Petroleum, like A.T.&amp; T., RCA, T.W.A. and ABC.
In the 1960's, he was said to be the first Washington lawyer to earn $1 million in a year.
By the 1980's, he was a millionaire many times over.


When Homeliness Is in the Eye of the Beholder
Onstage, there is a Biblical deluge.
There are sunrises, sunsets and summer skies alight with stars.
But the grandest illusion of all in "110 in the Shade," the New York City Opera's loving revival of the 1963 Broadway musical, is also the most difficult: to make Karen Ziemba look plain.
For plain she must be, in her critically applauded, starring performance as Lizzie Curry, the young woman who takes care of her father and brothers and feels destined to be an old maid in a provincial dust-belt town.
The next performance at the New York State Theater is tomorrow night.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Coke Imports Overseas Ads For the Olympics Broadcasts
USUALLY, when consumers don't understand what is being said in a television commercial, the agency responsible can expect to lose the account.
A series of spots running during NBC's coverage of the Summer Olympics, however, are intended to create just that effect.
The spots, which will appear through the end of the Games on Aug. 9, were produced by McCann-Erickson in New York for the Coca-Cola U.S.A. division of the Coca-Cola Company, the largest Olympic advertiser.


Abbey Healthcare Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Abiomed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Cities Shouldn't Subsidize Sports Millionaires; Public Trust Betrayed
To the Editor:
Andrew Zimbalist's July 14 Op-Ed article is right on the mark.
Major-league ball clubs are privately owned businesses whose books are not open to public review, and their treatment of their host cities borders on extortion.
That the New York Yankees pay New York City less than $1 million a year in rent after the city spent more than $100 million to refurbish Yankee Stadium is reprehensible.


Intercontinental Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Taylor Signs but Status Is Questionable
Troy Taylor has agreed to terms and the Jets reserve quarterback is expected to be in training camp Thursday in time to sign a new contract and end his 16-day holdout.
Leigh Steinberg, the California-based agent for Taylor and guard Dave Cadigan, a first-round draft pick in 1988, said Cadigan is also close to coming to terms.


Home Video
Rating the Films
Customers may not be aware of it, but many video stores play their own rating game.
Each week The Movie Monitor is sent to 5,000 stores nationwide by Entertainment Resource Associates of Glen Rock, N.J.
It grades movies that are about to be bought by stores for rental.
The Monitor assesses films according to genre, star power, reviews, box-office performance and how long the film can be expected to continue renting.
The ratings send strong signals to dealers: stock up on the winners and avoid the losers as assiduously as they were ignored at the local cineplex.


Horizon Financial Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


I-Stat reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Merchants Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ford Posts $502 Million Net, But Stock Dips on Outlook
The Ford Motor Company today posted a $502 million second-quarter profit, compared with a loss last year of $324 million, and its revenue rose 12.5 percent.
The results were Ford's best in two years, but company executives expressed caution, noting that the nation's economic recovery and those of key overseas markets remained fragile.
And that caution was clear among investors, as Ford stock fell $1.50, to $44.25, in New York Stock Exchange trading, on a day when the Dow Jones industrial average rose more than 45 points.


BARCELONA: Equestrian; Eight-Time Competitor Falls From Contention
When not riding horses, Michael Plumb wears his blue Boston Red Sox cap almost everywhere.
But maybe the Red Sox should wear a replica of his United States Olympic equestrian helmet.
He's accomplished more than the Red Sox have.
Of the thousands of United States Olympic athletes, this 52-year-old horse trainer and riding instructor from Hamilton, Mass., has been on more Olympic teams than any other American: eight, including the 1980 team that boycotted the Moscow Summer Games.
And if not for a broken collarbone suffered in a fall, he probably would have been on the 1988 team.


Being Boswell to Dean Martin
WHEN Nick Tosches told friends and acquaintances that he wanted to write a book about Dean Martin, most of them looked skeptical and said: "Dean Martin? Is he still alive?" Yes, he's still alive, Mr.
Tosches would answer patiently.
Actually, a good deal of his fascination with the entertainer came not only from the fact that Mr.
Martin is still alive, but also from the way he is living out his autumn years.
Today, at 75 years old, Dean Martin, star of stage, screen and television variety hour, spends most of his time alone in a big house in the Bel Air section of Los Angeles watching old cowboy pictures.


Editors' Note
An article in Business Day yesterday about national guidelines issued by the Federal Trade Commission to define terms used in environmental advertising listed an office at the F.T.C. where the guidelines could be obtained.
Because of heavy demand, the F.T.C. has established a separate telephone number for requesting copies.
It asks that callers use (202) 326-3753.


Market Place; A Way to Invest In Russia's Oil
WITH the opening of the former Soviet bloc to the West, perhaps the greatest financial opportunity is in the oil sector.
Russia has huge oil reserves that modern technology could develop, and across the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, a whole new world of consumers is developing.
But how does an individual investor participate?
With caution, say experts.
But one company, Elf Aquitaine, is putting itself forward as an investment vehicle.
"We are at home in Russia," said the chairman, Loik Le Floch-Prigent, on a visit to New York earlier this year.
Paris is closer to Moscow than New York is to Los Angeles, he pointed out.


Giddings &amp; Lewis reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Horizon Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Running Mate; Polished and Focused, Gore Is Settling Into His New Role
Four years ago, when Senator Al Gore first ran for national office, he was as leaden on the hustings as a wintry sky, droning on interminably at every stop.
He was forced to quit the race long before the primaries ended.
But in Campaign '92, there is a new Al Gore -- crisper, animated, more to the point, leavened with a bit of impish humor.


Western Capital Investment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Blue Cross Dilemma; If New York State Refuses Rate Rise, It Risks Lawsuit or an Insurer in Crisis
With its grim warning that it will run out of reserves by the end of the year unless it gets a 12.4 percent rate increase in October, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield has placed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the state's Insurance Department in a very difficult position.
Mr.
Cuomo has repeatedly said that with new legislation intended to shore up Empire, the state's largest insurer and the country's largest Blue Cross plan, the company would get no more rate increases this year.
But if he sticks to his promise, he leaves himself open to a lawsuit by Empire and to the chance that the company will fall into a much deeper financial morass.


Gasoline Retailers Protest Over Taxes
Representative of owners of gasoline stations near Indian reservations said today that the station owners will advertise startlingly low prices -- 44 cents per gallon less than usual.
But they will continue to sell gas at the usual price, he said.


Eastern Utilities Associates reports earnings for 12mo June 30


PRESIDENT URGES CONGRESS TO ACT ON S.&amp; L. BAILOUT
Breaking nearly four months of silence on an issue that both parties would prefer to postpone until after the elections, President Bush warned Congress today that its failure to approve more money for the savings and loan bailout was costing taxpayers $4 million to $6 million extra a day.
The White House could not avoid the politically painful subject any longer because of a legal stipulation that Administration officials testify twice a year before Congress on the bailout.


Brakes on Wrecked Bus Were Missing Many Parts
The head of the team inspecting the mangled tour bus that crashed and burned here on Sunday said today that crucial components of the brake system were missing or "seriously degraded" on all three axles.
The inspector, Frank Ghiorsi, the Northeast regional director for highways of the National Transportation Safety Board, said the right rear wheel spun freely even with the brake applied.


Airport-Rail Links Will Take Some Planning
To the Editor:
It is not surprising that the plans of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey for airport access have run into initial flak from an Administration in Washington allergic not only to rapid transit but also to this region (news article, July 9).
Let us hope that this does not once more endanger a chance to remedy a series of blunders that have few parallels in transportation planning.


PHP Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Indictment Charges Clifford Took Bribes
New York State and Federal prosecutors filed criminal charges yesterday against Clark M. Clifford and his protege, Robert A. Altman, that included helping the Bank of Credit and Commercial International hide its illegal ownership of Washington's largest bank and taking bribes from B.C.C.I.
The charges against Mr.
Clifford, the prominent Washington lawyer who served as campaign adviser to Harry S. Truman and as Secretary of Defense under Lyndon B. Johnson, and Mr.
Altman were part of broader indictments that raised new accusations of B.C.C.I.'s illegal activities worldwide.


Nu-Med Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


CRI Insured Mortgage Assoc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Katy Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA: Notebook; Archer Given a 2d Shot At Winning First Medal
Richard (Butch) Johnson is a professional competing in the Olympics.
But he doesn't worry about shoe contracts and he's more than happy to live in the Olympic Village with seven other athletes.
Johnson is a professional archer.
"Well, there really is no such thing as professional archery. All it means is that you shoot for money," he said.
"You don't make a lot of money, you definitely have to have a regular job. My best year I made $15,000."


American Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA: Boxing; Griffin Fights the Power and Wins Again
Montell Griffin is brutally frank, unshakeably confident and boxes with a flair that occasionally drives his coaches crazy.
Take tonight, for example.
In his opening fight at the Summer Olympics, against France Mabiletsa of Botswana, Griffin, a 5-foot-7-inch, 178-pound light- heavyweight, stayed outside when Coach Joe Byrd of the United States told him to dig in and played to the crowd when Byrd told him to focus on the match.


Nets and Mills Hit Snag Over Pact and Weight
Contract negotiations between the Nets and forward TERRY MILLS have become weighty, in more ways than one.
According to the Nets' general manager, WILLIS REED , Mills weighed a hefty 271 pounds last week after a workout with the team strength coach, RICH DAlATRI .
Mills, a restricted free agent who is seeking a contract worth between $1.5 and $2 million for next season, has had weight problems in the past.
While Reed insists he wants Mills in a Nets uniform next season, he also wants Mills to get into better shape.


Elmira Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gateway Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ISRAEL HAS TALKS ON TIES TO VATICAN
After 44 years of ambiguous and often strained relations, the Vatican and Israel announced the formation of a new, joint commission today to negotiate full diplomatic ties.
Pope John Paul II's spokesman, Joaquin Navarro-Valls, described the joint commission of senior officials, which held its first meeting in the Vatican today, as a "first clear and optimistic" step toward full relations.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Levellers  Marquee
At the Marquee on Monday night, Levellers were like a little army.
A five-piece band from England that harnesses the rigorous lift of Celtic music into smooth, striding rock, Levellers used music as a call to arms.
The singer, Mark (all the members go by just their first names), fiercely strummed his acoustic guitar as he sang earnest songs about oppression, alienation and the dream of freedom.
The drummer, Charlie, laid down an ineluctable military beat.
The bassist, Jeremy, stomped his feet and twirled a headful of dyed-red waist-length dreadlocks, while Jon, a tall, emaciated fellow wearing skinny black jeans and a top hat, bent his frame over a fiddle that he sawed with fierce intent.
The fifth member, Simon, switched back and forth between guitar, harmonica and an electrified mandolin.
Levellers' obvious point of reference is the Pogues, the British band that revved up traditional Celtic music to punk velocity.
But where the Pogues were all ragtag abandon and high-speed frenzy, Levellers are succinct and streamlined.
The intensity of their political opinions is demonstrated on their second album, "Levelling the Land" (Elektra): "There's only one way of life/And that's your own," Mark declares in "One Way," the band's most anthemlike anthem, with the capital A written as an anarchy symbol on the lyric sheet.


Albany Lists Schools It Says Need Help
Eleven schools in New York City and one in Rochester have been alerted by state officials that they have had a pattern of declining achievement and need help in upgrading their instructional programs.
The schools identified yesterday are Junior High School 43 in District 5 and Public School 128 in District 6 in Manhattan; P.S. 40 in District 7, Public School 93 in District 8, Public Schools 28 and 104 in District 9 and Public School 91 in District 10, all in the Bronx; J.H.S. 324 in District 16 and P.S. 219 in District 18 in Brooklyn, and P.S. 143 in District 24 and P.S. 197 in District 27 in Queens.
The Rochester school is School 9.


Massbank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wrigley (Wm.) Jr. Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Park Electrochemical Corp.  reports earnings for 13wks to May 31


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Volkov Moves Ahead  Aleksandr Volkov, who passed up a chance to play at the Olympics because he didn't think he was good enough, put his game together yesterday in the United States Pro championships.
The 25-year-old pro from Russia opened his drive for the $50,000 first prize with a straight-set, second-round victory at Longwood Cricket Club in Brookline, Mass.
Volkov, the tournament's third-seeded player, defeated D. J. Bosse of South Africa, 7-5, 6-2.
The victory by Volkov, who moved up when second-seeded Aaron Krickstein withdrew because of injury, came one day after 36-year-old Bjorn Borg bolstered his comeback attempt with a 73-minute, 6-3, 6-4 victory over George Bezecny of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The first-round victory was Borg's 19th straight at the Longwood Cricket Club.
Borg won 18 straight matches while capturing United States Pro titles in 1974, 1975 and 1976. (AP)


Computer Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Industry Group to Seek Faster Computer Circuits
Four of the nation's largest and most innovative high-technology companies announced yesterday that they were forming a consortium to take on one of the toughest tasks confronting computer makers: speedily transferring the solution of a problem from the part of the computer that does the solving to the part that can remember the answer.
The agreement announced yesterday by A.T.&amp; T., General Electric, Honeywell and I.B.M. is intended to foster research over the next 30 months to address this computing challenge with fiber optics.


Indictment Charges Clifford Took Bribes
New York State and Federal prosecutors filed criminal charges yesterday against Clark M. Clifford and his protege, Robert A. Altman, that included helping the Bank of Credit and Commercial International hide its illegal ownership of Washington's largest bank and taking bribes from B.C.C.I.
The charges against Mr.
Clifford, the prominent Washington lawyer who served as campaign adviser to Harry S. Truman and as Secretary of Defense under Lyndon B. Johnson, and Mr.
Altman were part of broader indictments that raised new accusations of B.C.C.I.'s illegal activities worldwide.


Dow Soars By Another 45.12 Points
Almost giddy over the way interest rates have been sinking, the stock market is climbing sharply again.
Investors, it seems, are banking on the economy's potential and ignoring its current illness.
In a flurry of active trading, investors have pushed the Dow Jones industrial average up nearly 100 points since Monday.
Buyers hurried into the market yesterday, analysts said, as more became persuaded that this week's sudden surge may become a lasting summer rally.


Quayle's Just the Tip Of Misspelling Iceberg
To the Editor:
Much fun has been made of Dan Quayle's spelling of the word "potato"; and how indeed could the Vice President's political opponents be expected to resist such a rich opportunity for sport?


COMPANY NEWS: Floppy-Disk Domesticity; Betty Crocker In Megabytes
Cooks take note.
Betty Crocker, the wholesome fictional character created by General Mills in 1921, has been whipping up a high-tech recipe for extending her career well into the 21st century.
The ingredients still include flour, sugar and a pinch of salt.
But now fold in a computer disk.


IG Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fit Enough to Serve -- in Prison
Give Mario Biaggi the chutzpah award for 1992.
His bribery conviction in the Wedtech scandal ought to have ended his political career, especially one built on support for law, order and local police.
Yet he insists on running for Congress again after talking his way out of prison.
In April 1989 the former Congressman from the Bronx began serving an eight-year term for accepting $1.8 million in stock and cash to seek government contracts for the Wedtech Corporation.
He was also convicted of accepting a free Florida vacation from Meade Esposito, the Brooklyn political boss.
Along with the prison term, the judge imposed a fine of $242,000.


Teamsters Leader Says Oversight By Government Hampers Union
Seven months after a Government-engineered election swept him into the presidency of International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Ronald R. Carey has begun to bristle over the Government's intention to continue its efforts to purge the union of corruption and links to organized crime.
"If anything, they should be working their way out of this union," Mr.
Carey said today at a news conference at the union's headquarters here.
"We're doing all the things that have to be done to straighten this union out."


Foreign Affairs; An Embrace Spurned
Bill Clinton spent considerable time in the last week trying to support George Bush's efforts on Iraq and Bosnia, the world's current flashpoints.
The White House responded to these endorsements by calling the Democratic nominee "reckless" and unfit to manage America's security.
One trembles to contemplate the adjectives the White House will hurl at the Arkansas Governor when he actually takes issue with the President's foreign policy.


House Approves $1.73 Billion for Space Station
The House voted today to keep $1.73 billion in the budget to develop the Freedom space station, rejecting arguments that the country cannot afford such high-priced scientific programs when the Federal deficit is out of control.
Proponents of the $30 billion space station argued that it would provide an indispensable stepping stone for exploring Mars and the outer heavens and would enhance biomedical research into the health complications of long-range space flight.


Franco-Nevada Mining reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Burlington Industries Equity Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Trimas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tokyo Journal; Akihito's Travel Plans: No Kowtowing to China
Yosuke Kuwabara took a taxi to Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa's house in a residential neighborhood of Tokyo on Tuesday morning, began shouting slogans, and then did what a dedicated rightist is supposed to when he believes the Emperor of Japan is about to be humiliated: He took out a knife and began slitting open his stomach.
Mr.
Kuwabara did not get very far with his attempt at ritual suicide.
The police say the wound was not deep and he will live.
But his protest was vivid enough to force an embarrassing dispute into the headlines.
The issue is whether to send Emperor Akihito for a brief visit to China, even if he is obliged to apologize before the cameras for deeds Japan committed, in the name of his father, a half-century ago.


Former Spy Weeps at Iran-Contra Trial
The powerful strains and tensions wrought on the Central Intelligence Agency by the Iran-contra affair were thrust into full view today as a former agency official wept on the witness stand as he testified in Federal District Court against his former superior.
Alan D. Fiers, a tall and rangy one-time football star at Ohio State University and former spy in several dangerous overseas posts, dissolved into tears near the end of his two days of testimony against Clair E. George when he was questioned about their once-close relationship.


Ford Motor Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Noble Affiliates reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bel Fuse reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bayside's Popular Strip of Contention; Bell Boulevard Is Known for Night Life -- and Trouble, Too, Queens Neighbors Say
Around midnight, just as the crowd of revelers started to thicken, three young women emerged from a bar and swayed carefree along the tree-lined sidewalk, explaining in inebriated giggles that when it came to night life, nowhere, not even Manhattan, compared to Bell Boulevard in Bayside, Queens.
"You don't have the traffic, you don't have the drugs, you don't have the bums you have in Manhattan," one of them, Randy Schiffman, said.
"It's a different class. You've got the suburbs coming here."


BARCELONA: Roundup; Chesnokov Upsets Edberg and Enjoys Doing It
Free from the shackles of the totalitarian expectations that had haunted him in his previous Olympic experience, Andrei Chesnokov today was light of foot and sure of hand as he produced the first major upset of the Olympic tennis event, eliminating the second-seeded Stefan Edberg, 6-0, 6-4, 6-4.
"In Seoul in 1988, I felt a lot of pressure," said Chesnokov.
"Maybe it was because behind me there were people saying, 'O.K., you have to do good. You have to reach the quarters or the semifinals.' This time, I am so much more relaxed. Now I feel like a guy coming to play a tennis tournament, to experience the Olympics."


Mojave Journal; Mirage? No, an Orphan Airline Fleet.
If airlines can be said to die, then this is their graveyard.
At the airport in this small desert town, 70 miles north of Los Angeles, about 200 passenger aircraft sit idle, remnants of a boom that has long since busted, leaving behind a worldwide glut of airliners.
The planes, some brand new, rise incongruously out of this sun-scorched landscape, like a 20th-century Stonehenge.
From little propeller-driven commuter planes to massive Boeing 747's, they wait in neat rows for better times to return.


Xerox Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dr. Durant Waite Robertson Jr., Influential Chaucer Scholar, 77
Dr.
Durant Waite Robertson Jr., Murray Professor emeritus of English at Princeton University and a medievalist widely regarded as this century's most influential Chaucer scholar, died on Sunday at a retirement home in Chapel Hill, N.C.
He was 77 years old.
He died after a period of declining health, said Prof.
John V. Fleming of Princeton's English department.


Albany Bills On Smoking Are Revived
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders reached agreement tonight on a package of measures to deter teen-agers from smoking, including bans on many vending machines and on free distribution of tobacco products.
The accord is similar to one that unraveled in the final night of the regular legislative session earlier this month.
This time, with many anti-smoking advocates singling out the Republican-led State Senate for having killed the earlier bill, the Republicans' concern about further reproach appeared to have overcome militant opposition from tobacco lobbyists to any stiffening of the laws.


American Biodyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Zapata Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


T. Rowe Price Assoc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


International Shipholding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Protein in Cow Milk May Set Off Juvenile Diabetes
Many cases of juvenile diabetes may be triggered by an immune response to proteins in cow's milk in infants who are genetically disposed to the disease, researchers said today.
A study by researchers at the University of Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children raises the possibility that children with a genetic disposition to diabetes might be able to avoid the disease if their parents eliminate milk and dairy products from their diet for several months after birth.


Cruise America reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Circuit Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Integrated Health Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chips &amp; Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


After Plea Bargain by Sheik, Question Is What He Knows
Two weeks ago, New York City prosecutors sat down with lawyers for Sheik Kamal Adham, a former chief of intelligence in Saudi Arabia, and told them their client was running out of time: he was about to be indicted in the multibillion-dollar fraud and conspiracy case surrounding the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
"We didn't know the magic date, but we knew it would be soon," said Plato Cacheris, one of Sheik Kamal's attorneys.


On Sale! Triplecast Reduces Prices
The Olympics Triplecast, which is proving advance speculation that too few people would buy the unprecedented pay-per-view service, moved yesterday to pump up sagging buying by lowering prices and offering a free preview.
NBC and Cablevision, the partners in the venture, said they had authorized cable systems to drop the price of the one-day Triplecast option from $29.95 to $19.95 and sell this Saturday and Sunday, which feature track and field and women's and men's gymnastics finals, for a combined price of $29.95


Falconbridge Gold reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Robert dePalma, 56; Was Vice Chairman Of Rockwell Corp.
Robert A. dePalma, vice chairman of the board of the Rockwell International Corporation died yesterday in Pittsburgh.
He was 56 years old and lived in Mount Lebanon, Pa.
Mr. dePalma died of cancer, said William B. Blanning, a company spokesman.


China, Using Profit Motive, Joins Olympic Powers
Reveling in the spotlight focused on the XXV Summer Games, China has emerged as an Olympic superpower and is challenging for a share of international sports prestige long accorded only to the United States, Germany, and the former Soviet Union.
With three more medals today, including a surprising gold in the women's 100-meter butterfly and silvers in men's springboard diving and men's team gymnastics, China has won 17 medals in the first 5 days of the Games.
The only countries with higher totals are the United States and the Unified Team, made up of athletes from the 12 former Soviet Republics.
The Chinese are running at double their medal rate of four years ago in Seoul, South Korea.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; A QUICK TRIP TO NEW YORK FOR GORE
Senator Al Gore took a break from the campaign trail yesterday afternoon and to come to New York for an evening of fund-raising at the Regency Hotel.
Campaign officials said the money brought in by the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee would be used to help elect state and local candidates around the country.


Apple South Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Conseco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Small Hole Closes Manhattan Bridge to Trains
Subway service across the Manhattan Bridge was suspended last night until Friday morning after state investigators found a small hole in a severely rusted beam that helps support the subway tracks, the City Department of Transportation said.
The suspension of service forces about 250,000 subway riders to use other routes between Manhattan and Brooklyn.
It also raises further questions about the safety of the 83-year-old bridge, which has a history of structural problems.
Although automobile traffic on the bridge will not be affected, the bridge had previously been closed to cars about a dozen times over the last year.


Even City Hall Has Moved to the Mall
In a fight to survive, suburban malls, those sterile shrines of consumption, are starting to reflect a broader spectrum of activity as they rent to clients who would have been unthinkable a few years ago.
While some real estate and marketing experts say the new diversity has social value, the trend is altering mall economics and upsetting some traditional retail tenants in the process.
Faced with a glut of space and an arid retail climate, developers are taking in churches, libraries, medical clinics, police departments and even car dealerships, often at below-market rates.
The day may soon be at hand when condom stores and adult-video-and-book dens move in, too.


H. David Meador; Art Director, 47
H.
David Meador, an art director at the D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles advertising agency in New York, died Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 47 years old.
Mr.
Meador lived in Manhattan.
He tested H.I.V.-positive five years ago and died of pneumonia, said Linda Mays, his executor and friend.


Art That Can Weather a Storm
WELL-KNOWN interior decorators like David Easton and Albert Hadley encouraged Peter Fasano to apply his skills an as artist to fabric design.
He listened and not only developed a range of fabrics, but has also gone on to paint fabrics to be used in outdoor settings.
A market umbrella made from one of his designs -- an abstract, American quilt-inspired pattern in 10 colors -- is Mr.
Fasano's piece de resistance.
"The fabric is an acrylic," said Mr.
Fasano, who lives in Great Barrington, Mass.
"It has to be able to be rained on."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.27
5.65
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.17
5.51
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.24
5.65
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.10
6.09
7.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.43
7.43
8.33
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.44
8.43
9.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.00
6.03
7.11
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


First United Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Film -- Gas Food Lodging; Rueful Women, Rootless Men In a Dreary Western Town
THE Film Forum has brought more excitement to moviegoing in the past two weeks than Hollywood has delivered all summer.
The theater's second fine sleeper in a row, after Carl Franklin's "One False Move," is Allison Anders's debut feature "Gas Food Lodging," a look at three vibrant, restless women in a dusty Western town.
Imagine "The Last Picture Show" shot in color and shaped by a rueful feminine perspective, in a place where women are hopelessly anchored while the men drift through like tumbleweed.
The becalmed town of Laramie, N.M., is the setting in which Nora (Brooke Adams), a hard-working waitress with a knowing, generous grin, has tried to bring up her two unruly daughters.


Albany Approves Fiscal Package for Suffolk and Jobs Bond Act
After bickering and lurching back and forth all day, the New York State Legislature finally passed a number of cleanup items on its agenda today, including an $800 million jobs bond act and a fiscal package for Suffolk County, and prepared to go home for the rest of the year.
The Suffolk bill would grant the county a one-year fix for its ailing economy by allowing it to raise its sales tax by half a cent, to 8.5 percent, and to borrow enough money to close its budget gap.
In addition to that, and to the bond act, the State Senate passed a number of health-related bills that had already been passed by the Assembly, including one that would extend a program to provide health care to uninsured children.


Black Republican Is Appointed District Attorney for Boston Area
Gov.
William F. Weld appointed a little-known black lawyer today to be District Attorney of the county that includes Boston, in a move intended to improve race relations in the city and shake up Boston's entrenched political and law-enforcement worlds.
Governor Weld's choice, Ralph C. Martin Jr., will be the first black to hold the job of Suffolk County district attorney.
Moreover, Mr.
Martin, who switched his political affiliation today from independent to Republican, will be the first Republican to hold the job in memory in a Democratic stronghold and the only official to represent his party in the county.


Shave and a Haircut Is Worth 2 Victories
The Spanish press was cheering, the Olympic committee volunteers were on their feet swaying and singing and the flags were flapping even without a breeze inside the Pavello de la Vall d'Hebron.
If there is any question what a homecourt advantage looks like in volleyball, the tape of today's game between the United States men's team and Spain could be called on for reference.
Of course, it was another close shave for the American hairless ones, who went their customary five sets before defeating the lightly regarded Spanish team, 15-6, 14-16, 12-15, 15-10, 15-11.
The Spanish men have never taken part in the Olympic volleyball tournament before and are doing so this time by invitation as the host nation; the United States is merely the two-time defending gold medalist.
What, pray tell, does it take to make this United States team play well?


Diner's Journal
Carmine's
If the new Carmine's on West 44th Street, off Times Square, were a play, it would be giving "Guys and Dolls" a run for its money.
No sooner had the culinary curtain lifted on this Italian production more than a month ago than all 250 seats were full -- twice nightly.
Carmine's is a spinoff of the original on Broadway at 90th Street in Manhattan.
Both the decor (dark wood and photo-festooned) and the menu (essentially Neapolitan, with everything served family style) are similar.
Portions are so colossal that most patrons share, resulting in an average check of about $20, including beverages.
Swordfish tilts the scale at 20 ounces ($32), a pork chop the same ($24 for two chops), and if you haven't eaten in a week, you might try the 38-ounce porterhouse ($36).


CHRONICLE
When VICTOR KAMBER, a Democratic political consultant, received a letter from Vice President DAN QUAYLE inviting him to a fund-raising party this week for Representative GUY VANDER JAGT, Republican of Michigan, he seized the opportunity to spotlight what Mr.
Kamber says is a contradiction between the Vice President's words and deeds.
Mr.
Quayle has been an outspoken proponent of limiting United States representatives to six terms and senators to two.
Mr.
Vander Jagt has served for 13 terms.


Brown Must Become More Than a Receiver
Now that Derek Brown has reported to the Giants' training camp, he must carve out a job for himself.
Today, his first full day on the field as a professional football player, he started to learn blocking techniques, terminology and all the other things that he and the Giants hope will make him a useful player this year.
Brown, a tight end from Notre Dame, was the Giants' first-round choice last April in the National Football League draft.
On Wednesday, nine days after training camp began, he signed a four-year contract for perhaps as much as $4 million.
He then set out to make his mark on a team that needs help at tight end.


California, Land of Crises, Mingles Despair and Hope
Nothing seems amiss from outside the high chain-link fence on Conant Street as mechanics labor under the Southern California sun to prepare the hulking MD-11 and MD-80 passenger jets at the Douglas Aircraft plant here for airlines in China and Indonesia.
The gleaming jets have long been proud symbols of California's economic and technological prowess.
But at the plant gate around the corner, Kent Fulfer displayed another, newer and less appealing symbol of California: his layoff notice.


Tagliabue Plugs Line On N.F.L. Restrictions
In his first day of testimony in the Freeman McNeil v.
National Football League free-agency lawsuit, Commissioner Paul Tagliabue today argued in favor of league rules that he said maintain competitive balance and keep the N.F.L. financially healthy for players, owners and fans.
"Our league is a joint and common venture of the teams," Tagliabue said.
"It is unique because the teams join together to present one product, the National Football League, and they compete on the field but join together in a business sense to share the revenues, the profits and the losses."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; A More Vigorous Bush Tries To Halt Losses in California
Once this was solid Bush country.
Now it is the belly of the beast, and President Bush entered it today, still searching for a formula to revive a suddenly and ominously flagging bid for re-election.
Mr.
Bush began a two-day visit to conservative Orange County for what may prove a bellwether of his campaign's ability to pull out of a national slump that so far has defied eight months of strategizing and sometimes hapless politicking.


Perot's Plan: Too Much Pain, Too Little Gain
Inside-the-Beltway Democrats are rushing to embrace Ross Perot's five-year plan to end the budget deficit.
They include Charles Schultze, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers under Jimmy Carter, and Leon Panetta, the House Budget Committee chairman.
U.S.
News &amp; World Report said this week that most economists probably agreed with the former candidate's tough approach to a balanced budget.
Not me.
The plan is bold but imprudent.
It mixes excellent ideas with others that are dubious, even harmful.
It attempts too much, too soon.
In a rush to turn today's $350 billion deficit into an $8 billion surplus, it risks wrecking the economy.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Bass America Inc., a unit ofBass P.L.C., is offering $250 million of 6 3/4 percent debt due Aug. 1, 1999, at 99.78 to yield 6.79 percent, through Morgan Stanley.
The noncallable issue is rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Art in Review
'Paper' Fawbush Gallery 76 Grand Street SoHo Through Aug. 15


No Headline
We are basketball players, and this is the last time for us to play together.
These are not Communists.
This is not the Red Army.
These are my friends. -- IGOR MIGLINIEKS, a Latvian playing basketball for the Unified Team.  [ B9:6. ]
It is not normal for them to play for another state.
People are not in agreement with what they are doing. -- JRNIS LUSIS, the Latvian track coach.  [ A1:3. ]


Art in Review
'Paper' Fawbush Gallery 76 Grand Street SoHo Through Aug. 15


Military Chiefs Admit Need To Curb Sexual Harassment
Four contrite military chiefs came to Capitol Hill today and acknowledged that they needed to do more to stop sexual harassment.
But when lawmakers tried to take advantage of the moment and press for women to be allowed combat roles, which have generally served as a ticket to military advancement, all of the chiefs either waffled or declined.


Immovable Object; Granite Regime of Saddam Hussein Seems Little Worn by Political Storm
Two years after he invaded Kuwait, President Saddam Hussein remains a formidable figure in this part of the world, defying the United Nations and stirring up Arab feeling against the conservative Persian Gulf monarchies that joined the United States in trying to overthrow him.
His army may have been vanquished, and there have been unconfirmed reports about plots from within the army against him.
Indeed, today President Hussein realigned his cabinet by shifting the Foreign Minister, Ahmad Hussein, to the Finance Ministry and replacing him with Mohammed Said al-Sahhaf, the official Iraqi News Agency said, without explaining the change.


Review/Film; What Evils Are Lurking In Her Father's Heart?
A gentle, respectable old man is accused of having been a Nazi war criminal.
At first his grown daughter fiercely believes he is a victim of mistaken identity, but eventually she wonders whether her beloved father is hiding unfathomable depths of evil.
Does this story sound familiar?
It is the exact plot shared by "Music Box," Costa-Gavras's 1989 film, and "Father," an Australian film made at about the same time.
"Father" opens today at the Quad.
With Max von Sydow as the father and Carol Drinkwater as the daughter, the Australian film is more earnest and less slick than "Music Box," which featured Jessica Lange, Armin Mueller-Stahl and a richer visual style.
But it is just as shallow, blending questions about guilt and evil with pedestrian family melodrama.


Martin L. H. Reymert, Gallery Founder, 56
Martin L. H. Reymert, a theater director and a founder of the Shepherd Gallery on Madison Avenue, died on Wednesday at his home in Paris.
He was 56 years old.
He died of cancer, said his sister, Randi Olsen, of Platteville, Wis.


Sikh Militant Killed in Police Raid in India
One of India's most wanted Sikh militants, who the police said had a role in as many as 1,000 killings, has been killed in Punjab, officials said today.
Top police officials said the Sikh, Gujrant Singh Budhsinghwala, the chief of the Khalistan Liberation Force, was killed in a raid on Wednesday at the industrial township of Ludhiana.


Fine Dining On a Budget: Stratagems For the 1990's
LET'S face it, the special $19.92 lunches that many fancy Manhattan restaurants have been serving since the Democratic National Convention are a great deal.
Some restaurants have extended the plan through Labor Day, and it's not hard to imagine them offering it through the end of the year.
But what happens then?
Crusty cynics, those who ask "What's in it for them?" about anybody offering a bargain, know the answer to this question.
They see the obsolescence built into the $19.92 price.
They can predict with confidence that when 1993 rolls around, canny restaurateurs will take their $19.92 lunches and -- all together now -- Raise the Price!


Older Americans, Dangling
When it came up for a four-year renewal last fall, the Older Americans Act was a shoo-in.
And why not?
Practically every clause in the bill has proved to be a genuine success since it was first passed in 1965 as part of Lyndon Johnson's Great Society program.
Almost half the act's $1.4 billion budget goes to meals for the elderly.
Other money helps support senior centers and feeds senior volunteers in primary and secondary schools.
The act also fights abuse of older people and helps keep millions of the elderly unemployed afloat by paying them modest wages to perform community service.


Enjoying the Benefits of Austerity
Hard times have taught corporate America a powerful lesson: the art of cost-cutting and productivity gains.
Many companies were able to earn better-than-expected profits in the second quarter by honing such skills, making themselves sharper competitors.
What remains to be seen is whether they will continue to apply those hard-learned lessons when consumers start buying again in earnest, making profits easier to come by.


William Mathias, 57, Composer Of an Anthem for Prince Charles
William Mathias, a Welsh composer, pianist and teacher, died on Wednesday at his home on the offshore island of Anglesey in the Irish Sea.
He was 57 years old.
He died after a brief undisclosed illness, said Oxford University Press in New York.


New Schedule in Cubs Case
The Chicago Cubs' lawsuit against National League realignment and the commissioner's appeal of a preliminary injunction against the Cubs will proceed on a parallel course and could be decided by the end of August.
Judge Suzanne Conlon of the United States District Court in Chicago yesterday denied Commissioner Fay Vincent's motion to delay proceedings in her court while he appealed the preliminary injunction she granted the Cubs.
But Judge Conlon set up an expedited schedule that matches the schedule in Vincent's appeal to that of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit.


RU-486: We Need Prudence, Not Politics
It has been 70 years since Margaret Sanger claimed that science would make woman "the owner, the mistress of herself." But the spirit of her words lives on.
Lawrence Lader, a Sanger biographer, helped organize the showdown over a woman's attempt to import RU-486, the French abortion pill banned in the U.S., after asking himself what Margaret Sanger would have done.
Sanger broke the law, went to jail, staged a hunger strike and engaged in just about every publicity stunt imaginable to advance the reproductive rights of women.
She understood the news value of civil disobedience, even if the cause lost in court.


No Headline


Omnicom Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY NEWS: Dollars for Dialing; A.T.&amp; T. Is Offering $50 To Entice Rivals' Clients
In the $29-billion-a-year market for long-distance phone service, $50 seems small.
Maybe that's why A.T. &amp;T. can offer some customers of MCI and Sprint $50 to switch back to A.T.&amp; T.
Not 50 cents.
Not $5, but $50 --- enough to buy groceries for a family of four for half a week, or 200 diapers, or 45 gallons of gasoline, enough to drive round trip between San Francisco and Los Angeles.


Imperial Holly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Film; In Italy, A Lourdes For the Soul
"Enchanted April" revolves around the appealing notion that a trip to Italy, specifically to a medieval castle with a glorious view of the surrounding countryside, will cure any ills.
The voyagers are four colorfully incompatible Englishwomen who all discover, to their delight, that travel can indeed be a broadening experience.
Each has changed visibly for the better by the time this soothing, picturesque film arrives at what is quite literally a rosy ending.
"Enchanted April" was directed by Mike Newell ("Dance With a Stranger") and based on a 1922 novel by Elizabeth von Armin.
But it actually unfolds on what has come to be thought of as Merchant-Ivory-Forster territory.
The ladies are well bred, the scenery is lovely and the dialogue is polished and polite.
It helps that the same villa in Portofino where Miss von Armin wrote the novel has been used to fine effect as the film's principal setting.


Isuzu Denies That It Plans To Stop Manufacturing Cars
Isuzu Motors Ltd. cannot seem to shake off rumors that it may withdraw from the passenger car business.
Today, the company issued a strong denial of a front-page report in Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Japan's leading business newspaper, that it is considering ending passenger car production.
Such rumors have been popping up because Isuzu is experiencing huge financial losses.
At the same time, Japan's overall automobile industry is suffering lower sales and profits, which is leading to a shakeout of smaller suppliers.


A Koch Soapbox (Sort Of) For the Civic Answer Man
They gave Edward I. Koch a box on a street corner to expound from yesterday afternoon, and he was as voluble as ever.
There were a few arched brows when the Times Square Business Improvement District and the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau chose to place the former Mayor in a seven-foot-high steamer trunk, turned on end, from which he doled out tourist brochures and extolled the virtues of his city.


Morton International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Photography; A Civil War Image Maker's Belated Recognition
Much of our image of the bloody reality of the Civil War is based on photographs taken or published by Alexander Gardner (1821-1882).
Working first for Mathew Brady and later on his own, Gardner photographed many of the most important battles of the war, and his "Photographic Sketch Book of War," a two-volume collection of photographs he published in 1866, provides a comprehensive record of the terrible damage inflicted during the conflict.
Despite this, argues Brooks Johnson, the curator of photography at the Chrysler Museum in Norfolk, Va., historians have tended to give Gardner less than his full due as a recorder of the war.
In "An Enduring Interest: The Photographs of Alexander Gardner," now at the International Center of Photography, Mr.
Johnson offers a valuable overview of Gardner's career and makes a strong case for his importance.


Courier and Agassi to Play in Davis Cup
JIM COURIER and ANDRE AGASSI, winners of the three Grand Slam tournaments so far this year, have been selected to play singles against Sweden in the Davis Cup semifinals, the United States Tennis Association announced yesterday.


U.S. SAYS AIRLIFTS FAIL SOMALI NEEDY
United States disaster experts who made a one-day visit to Mogadishu, Somalia, said today that emergency airlifts proposed by the United Nations would not solve the problem of how to get food to tens of thousands of starving people.
The director of the United States Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance, James R. Kunder, said after the visit to Mogadishu on Wednesday that the major barrier to helping the hungry was the continuing fighting between rival clans in Mogadishu, the Somali capital.


U.S. Military Planes Join Search For Escaped Colombia Drug Lord
United States military planes joined the manhunt for the drug baron Pablo Escobar today, flying repeated surveillance runs over this city and over suspected refuges in the surrounding Andean mountains.
American intelligence information was fed to an air base near here where Colombian helicopters repeatedly lifted off today on search missions.
Situated in Rionegro, the billionaire criminal's birthplace, the base has become the operations center for the hunt for Mr.
Escobar, who escaped from a prison near here a week ago.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day last Saturday about steps taken by companies to comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act misattributed one entry.
It was another company, not Pacific Telesis, that employed a nearly blind machinist and a construction worker with one leg and provided devices that enabled them to work more effectively; Pacific Telesis cited those as examples of things companies would be doing because of the act.


Noranda Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Books of The Times; When the Emperor Turned Into a Short, Fat Man
The Emperor's Last Island  A Journey to St.
Helena  By Julia Blackburn  277 pages.
Pantheon Books. $22.
"How far is St. Helena from the field of Waterloo?" wrote Rudyard Kipling.
"A near way -- a clear way -- the ship will take you soon./A pleasant place for gentlemen with little else to do."


Explosion in Munitions Factory in Israel Kills 2, Wounds 40


Rikers Official to Be Investigated on 3d Sex Harassment Complaint
New York City's Correction Commissioner has ordered an investigation of the chief of jail security on Rikers Island after a woman who contends that he struck her filed a sexual harassment complaint, the third such complaint against the chief since 1991.
The complaint was filed by Capt.
Deborah Sutton against the security chief, Danny L. Trapp, correction officials said.


TV Networks Did a Poor Job at the Convention; Alone Together
To the Editor:
Thanks to my press pass, which allowed me into the Democratic National Convention at Madison Square Garden, I have experienced what community in America is all about these days.
The second night, arriving around 8:30 P.M. and unable to get a seat, I stood in the upper-tier aisle to hear Jimmy Carter and Jesse Jackson.
But the acoustics were terrible, and many people were talking right through the speeches, so I couldn't understand what the speakers were saying.
I couldn't see them either, except on giant video screens.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 589 money market mutual funds increased by $4.16 billion, to $510.29 billion, for the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 216 institutional funds increased by $4.72 billion, to $200.40 billion.
The assets of the 283 general-purpose funds were down by $389.2 million, to $171.04 billion.
The 90 broker-dealer funds decreased by $172.4 million, to $138.85 billion, the institute said.


Corrections
Because of a transcription error, a front-page article on Tuesday about the fatal bus accident in Vernon Township, N.J., misidentified a New York City housing project where the bus driver, Robert Campbell, had worked.
It is the Seth Low Houses in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn.


Urban Aid Plan at Core Of Competing Tax Bills
The Senate will be debating competing visions of how to stimulate depressed cities and towns when it considers, perhaps as early as next week, the tax bill approved by the Finance Committee on Wednesday night.
The bill would also provide certain individual tax benefits by restoring deductible I.R.A.'s for all taxpayers and giving tax credits to first-time home buyers.
At the same time, limitations on deductions for upper-income taxpayers would be made permanent.


South African Is Happy To Just Be in the Running
Yes, Elana Meyer says, she does get tired of answering questions about politics and, yes, she would rather be running through the trees back in Stellenbosch, South Africa.
But it's all right, because everywhere the 10,000-meter runner looks, the world returns a smile of welcome to South Africa.
"It's just amazing to be part of the international arena, just to be here," Meyer, who represents her nation's best hope here, said today as she and five other members of South Africa's track and field contingent met with reporters at the athletes' village.


Wendy's International reports earnings for Qtr to July 5


500 Officers Protest 'Scapegoating' in Brooklyn
Chanting "No justice, no police!" -- a variation on a civil-rights rallying cry -- about 500 off-duty police officers demonstrated outside a Brooklyn precinct yesterday against what they called unfair treatment of police officers accused of beating a community leader and her grown children.
"I want to welcome you to Fort Scapegoat," Phil Caruso, president of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, told the crowd as he gestured toward the 81st Precinct in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
"There's a pattern emerging in this city where the police officers are getting scapegoated and the criminals are getting royal treatment."


Officer Took Drug Payoffs, U.S. Charges
Michael Dowd, the former New York City police officer whose arrest on cocaine trafficking charges spurred four separate investigations of corruption in the New York City Police Department, was arrested yesterday on Federal charges that he received huge weekly cash payments from drug gangs over a three-year period.
In exchange, prosecutors said, he provided the gangs with protection against police raids as well as with stashes of guns and police badges.
Mr.
Dowd was arrested in May by the Suffolk County police along with four other active officers and one retired officer on charges that they bought and sold cocaine, sometimes through their beats in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Dowd was arrested again yesterday at his home on Long Island following an investigation by United States Attorney Otto G. Obermaier.
He had been out on bail and was dismissed from the department earlier this month.
Integral Part of Drug World
Although there had previously been suspicions and allegations that Mr.
Dowd might be cooperating with drug gangs, his arrest yesterday represents the first time he was charged with actually assisting and protecting drug dealers.
While Mr.
Dowd and the five other officers had been considered rogue officers operating almost as private entrepreneurs, the new charges paint a broader picture of an officer who was an integral part of the drug world.
Prosecutors also said informants had told them that other officers had also been receiving payoffs.


Dancer Has a Record in Mind
The clip on his tie is a horseshoe filled with diamonds, and the ring on his left hand was given to him upon his induction into the harness racing Hall of Fame in 1969.
Stanley Dancer removed the ring and proudly showed it off as he spoke about the Hambletonian.
Dancer celebrated his 65th birthday last week by training horses and sitting in the sulky.
He drove harness racers at three different tracks and county fairs.
But his biggest race in recent months will come Saturday afternoon in the most prestigious event in harness racing.
That's when Dancer will be aiming at a record fifth Hambletonian triumph when he directs Guardian Angel in the 67th edition of the race.


Why Slovaks Choose Their Own Way
To the Editor:
"Enter Slovakia, Exit Havel" (editorial, July 18) omits a very significant fact: Vladimir Meciar was democratically elected Premier of the Slovak Republic.
Your news articles about him usually don't omit references to the "former Communist" (many Communist Party members joined purely for their careers, not for the ideology) and "former pugilist" (his athletic background has nothing to do with his politics).
The implication that the benighted Slovaks were unable to make an informed political decision when they went to the polls is insulting.
East-Central Europe, tasting the bittersweet freedoms of the Western world after the bland diet of Communism, is struggling to define its national borders without the dubious help proffered over the centuries by the Hapsburgs, the Allies or the Soviets.
The Slovaks have proclaimed their sovereignty and wish to be independent as a natural conclusion to 72 years of opposition to Czech domination of Slovakia's economic existence.


Mets' Race Sluggish but It's a Race
Interested in the National League East title?
Take a number and take heart.
And then take about 85 triumphs.
It's the division in which every club has a shot, but no club has a clue whether it has a good shot or long shot.
Before last night's games, only four and a half games separated the National League East's first five clubs: the Pirates, the Expos, the Cubs, the Mets and the Cardinals.
The Mets, the millionaires club that has done its philanthropic best to give away every good chance at a run for the top, were an indistinct fourth in that undistinguished pack.


Critic's Choice/Blues; Riffs From the Juke Joints of Mississippi
Mississippi comes to New York this weekend at programs that offer rare rural blues and a rediscovery of jazz performers' blues roots.
Tonight and tomorrow three Mississippi bluesmen perform at Tramps; on Sunday a jazz-meets-blues series opens at the Brooklyn Museum.
While the documentary film "Deep Blues" visits Mississippi juke joints, its New York City opening goes one better and brings juke-joint performers in person.
Two of the film's bluesmen, Junior Kimbrough and R. L. Burnside, are to appear at Tramps, 45 East 21st Street, the Flatiron district, (212) 727-7788.
Both come from rural Mississippi, and both play electric guitars.
Their blues styles hark back decades, with modal scales and wayward bent notes, to the eerie, earthy music that came out of Mississippi and changed the world's culture.


Equimark And Integra Plan Merger
Two Pittsburgh banking companies, Integra Financial and Equimark, announced a merger yesterday that would put the combined company in a strong position to compete with the Mellon Bank Corporation and PNC Financial, the two dominant banks in the area.
The merger is a reminder that among the nearly 12,000 American banks lies ample opportunity for combinations that will create new organizations with the size to compete with large regional companies.


Katharine B. Lenhart, A Civic Benefactor, 89
Katharine Bradley Lenhart, a volunteer active for decades in civic and social causes, died on Sunday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She was 89 years old and lived in Manhattan and Waterford, Conn.
Her family said she died after a brief illness.


In Los Angeles Riots, a Witness With Videotapes
Of the thousands of people who filled the streets in the Los Angeles riots last April, one resident of the area, Timothy Goldman, is finding himself in the role of official witness to the violence.
An unemployed 33-year-old former Air Force officer who likes to play with video cameras, Mr.
Goldman lived within blocks of where the rioting began on April 29 and was able to tape the outbreak of looting, arson and beatings.
Among other things he captured on tape was the beating of a truck driver, Reginald Denny, who was pulled from his vehicle in the attack at an intersection.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Defends Position on Iraqi War
For the second time this week, the festering matter of Saddam Hussein intruded into the 1992 Presidential race, as Bill Clinton found himself unexpectedly on the defensive today in attempting to answer Republican accusations that he had misrepresented himself as an early supporter of the use of force against the Iraqi dictator.
Mr.
Clinton had called a news conference on the lawn of the Governor's mansion here in hopes of scoring a few quick points against President Bush in light of economic figures released today that show the nation's recovery weaker than Mr.
Bush has been inclined to admit.





United and Continental Post 2d-Quarter Losses
Two more airlines reported quarterly losses yesterday, while another leading airline said it would raise its fares in September.
The UAL Corporation, parent of United Airlines, said it lost $95.1 million in the second quarter and Continental Airlines Holdings Inc. reported a $99.2 million loss.
The figures demonstrated anew that the weak economy has been an equal opportunity disaster for airlines.


Erasmo La Marca, Importer, 50
Erasmo La Marca, an importer and exporter of Italian-made shoes who operated a fashionable store on Manhattan's East 57th Street, died on Monday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 50 years old and lived in Manhattan and Bridgehampton, L.I.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


Pet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sounds Around Town
Nick Cave and Bad Seeds
Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds, the Ritz, 254 West 54th Street, mid-Manhattan, (212) 541-8900.
In the wide-screen, supersonic, Technicolor world of rock-and-roll, Nick Cave is film noir.
His grim persona comes complete with a curl of cigarette smoke; his vision is bleak and whisky-soaked, and his music screeches and crashes like an unclean getaway.
At weaker moments, his dramatic excesses and wordy obsessions may turn unwittingly comic.
But when he holds back and deals out his poison in careful doses, as in "Jack the Ripper," from his latest album, "Henry's Dream" (Elektra), his humor is all black.
Mr.
Cave casts shadows around love and sees danger around every corner.
And in the brief, priceless moments when he gets tender, he is as cold and thrilling as a last caress.
Show time is tonight at 9.
Remaining tickets are $17.50.


Courtroom Anguish As France Tries 4 Over Tainted Blood
In a packed courtroom at the Palace of Justice, legal arguments were pushed aside this week as bereaved parents, spouses and the hemophiliac patients themselves recounted how blood transfusions tainted with H.I.V. had ended many lives and still threatened others.
Over the last six weeks, the trial has stirred outrage in France as few other modern court cases have.
Four senior health officials, all doctors, are charged with knowingly allowing the blood to be used for transfusions in 1985 even though they had been told it was infected with the virus that causes AIDS.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
TODAY: 5 P.M., C-Span, tape of speech yesterday in Orange County, Calif.
Gov.
Bill Clinton
TODAY: 5:30 P.M., C-Span, tape of speech Wednesday in New Orleans.
SUNDAY: 9:30 A.M., WNYW-New York, "The McCreary Report," interview. (Channel 5 in New York.)


Sounds Around Town
Echoes of the Past
Warren Bernhardt Trio, Tavern on the Green, off Central Park West at 67th Street, Upper West Side, (212) 873-3200.
The most vitalizing influence on Warren Bernhardt's piano playing was Bill Evans, to whom he was very close from the time they met, in 1962, until Evans's death, in 1980.
But two earlier pianists also had a lasting effect on Mr.
Bernhardt: Erroll Garner and George Shearing.
Echoes of all three will crop up in Mr.
Bernhardt's playing tonight and tomorrow.
He will be accompanied by the bassist Jay Anderson and the drummer Jeff Hirschfield.
They play from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M. in the Chestnut Room.
There is no cover charge and no minimum.
Al Grey Sextet
Al Grey Sextet, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, near Gramercy Park, (212) 533-7902.
Between starring engagements as a guest artist with other groups, the trombonist Al Grey is building his own sextet into a clearly focused group with an identity of its own.
Mr.
Grey's son Mike, who is also a trombonist, has been a member of his group for quite some time, along with Joe Cohn, the son of the tenor saxophone star Al Cohn, and the bassist Steve Novosel.
But the group has acquired fresh force with the addition of Rob Sheps, who plays tenor saxophone and flute, and the drummer Cindy Blackman, who is blossoming under Al Grey's guidance and encouragement.
The group plays tonight and tomorrow at 8, 10 and midnight, and on Sunday at 8 and 10.
The cover charge is $12.50 and the minimum is $7.50.


Ryland Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Teheran to Seize the Planes Iraq Sent to Iran for Safety
Iran has decided to expropriate 132 military and civilian Iraqi planes that sought refuge in several Iranian cities in the final phase of the Persian Gulf war to escape destruction at the hands of allied forces last year, Saudi and Kuwaiti officials here say.
The number of the Iraqi planes is much larger than reported earlier, when accounts put the number at 60, including Russian-made MIG fighters and Sukhoi bombers as well as several European-made civilian planes and American Boeing 747's.


Passengers Recount Scene of Fearful Calm in Flaming Plane's Cabin
The first inkling passengers had that something was wrong with Trans World Airlines Flight 843 was a dull orange glow flickering on the cabin's videoscreen as the plane roared along Runway 13-right at Kennedy International Airport about 20 minutes before 6 P.M.
Then the nose rose only slightly, and the plane jerked to the left, jostling passengers.
Smoke suddenly filled the cabin, followed by flames.
"I couldn't move my legs anymore because I was so scared," said Lewelyn De Guzman, a 45-year-old passenger from Daly City, Calif., traveling with her daughter, Desiree.
"I could see death. I could see flames."


No Headline


Lawyer Convicted In Tax Fraud Case by Brooklyn Jury
Harvey Myerson, a prominent lawyer who was earlier convicted of defrauding clients, was found guilty yesterday of conspiring to defraud the Internal Revenue Service and filing a false income-tax return.
The prosecution contended that he charged some of his corporate clients for legal work that was never done, disguised the payments as fees for other lawyers and surreptitiously obtained more than $1 million for himself without paying taxes on it.


American International Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Quayle's Words Show Plan for Attacking Clinton
It has been difficult in recent weeks to hear Vice President Dan Quayle's words above the static about his job security and his views on abortion, not to mention his spelling skills.
But what has been obscured by the din is an early blueprint of the Bush-Quayle campaign's strategy, particularly its plans for attacking Gov.
Bill Clinton.
The formula telegraphed by Mr.
Quayle in his speeches, interviews and news conferences relies on the predictable labeling of Mr.
Clinton and his Vice-Presidential nominee, Senator Al Gore, as tax-and-spend liberals.
But Mr.
Quayle also has experimented with a more subtle subtext aimed at reinforcing doubts about Mr.
Clinton's character.


Review/Film; She's Hunting Vampires, And on a School Night
Those who look for political import in prom-queen movies may be interested to note that Buffy (Kristy Swanson), the cheerleading, bubble-headed heroine of the blithe teen-age comedy "Buffy the Vampire Slayer," kicks and backflips her way to martial-arts mastery before the story is over.
As for other things worth noticing, you may be too old to appreciate one of this film's main selling points if you're distracted by its efforts to enhance Luke Perry's hair.
Luckily, there are better reasons for watching "Buffy the Vampire Slayer," a slight, good-humored film that's a lot more painless than might have been expected.
Ms.
Swanson's funny, deadpan delivery holds the story together reasonably well, as does the state-of-the-art Val-speak that constitutes most of Buffy's dialogue. (The screenplay, uneven but bright, is by Joss Whedon.) "Excuse me for not knowing about El Salvador -- like I'm ever going to Spain
anyway
," sniffs Buffy at the mall. "I can't believe I'm in a graveyard hunting for vampires with a strange man," she whines later,
"on a school night."


Giants' Roberts Is Hospitalized
William Roberts, the Giants' ninth-year offensive lineman, was hospitalized today with high blood pressure and an increased heartbeat.
A Giants' official said the condition did not appear to be serious.
Roberts will turn 30 next Wednesday.
Before this afternoon's practice, he said he did not feel well.
Giants medical personnel checked his blood pressure and heartbeat, then took him to Morristown Memorial Hospital for further tests and an overnight stay.


Namath Says Nagle Has Traits of a Leader
Joe Namath, the last great Jets quarterback, will be watching Browning Nagle closely over the next five weeks to see if Nagle has enough stuff to become the next great Jets quarterback.
Namath, the Hall of Famer who led the Jets to their only Super Bowl victory in 1969, was at the team's camp today to watch practice.
As a member of the WPIX-Channel 11 team that will televise four of the Jets' five preseason games, Namath said he would be a fixture at the Jets' camp for the next month.


Thermo Electron reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


In Mayfield (Pop. 817), Every Job's a 1-Man Job
WEDNESDAY was garbage day for the Mayfield Department of Public Works, so Bart Landers went and picked up all the trash along the five and a half miles of streets here.
Tuesday was fixing potholes, Monday was mowing and groundskeeping for the Mayfield D.P.W.
Bart Landers was on the job.
"Plus you never know what else will come up," said Mr.
Landers.
"There are days I'm this deep in mud," he added, pointing to his broad chest.
"There are days I'm strolling around in shorts. If you get a water leak, of course that's got to be priority No. 1. When it snows, that's rough. If it takes three straight days of plowing, then you're in the saddle for three days."


The Art Market
Sotheby's vs. Christie's
The age-old battle over who has a greater share of the auction market, Sotheby's or Christie's, became particularly ferocious on Wednesday when both companies announced their end-of-season figures.
Each auction house reported that despite a decline in earnings from last year, the market is in a slow recovery.
But Christie's, it appears, included so-called private treaty sales -- in which the auction house finds a buyer without putting an artwork on the block -- in its season totals, something it has never done before.
And Sotheby's did not.
As a result, Christie's is proclaiming a gain in its market share.
Sotheby's, on the other hand, is accusing Christie's of distorting its figures and trying to manipulate the market.
"By combining private treaty sales and auction sales and comparing them to our numbers, which do not include private treaty sales, Christie's is comparing apples and oranges," said Michael Ainslie, the president and chief executive officer of Sotheby's Holdings, the parent company of the auction house.
"We think what they have done is very inappropriate."


Hospital Hopes Loans Make Good Neighbors
The Hill section of New Haven is one of the city's most despondent.
Occupying a bell-shaped wedge that begins near a cemetery and ends near the waterfront, the Hill reflects the harm that poverty, drug abuse and violence can do.
It was here, for example, that a kindergartner was shot in the head last month when his school bus drove into a streetside gun battle.
It is also here that Yale-New Haven Hospital, a renowned institution in the world of medicine, tends to patients in clinics and surgical theaters.


291 Escape Burning Jetliner at Kennedy Airport
A Trans World Airlines jumbo jet taking off for San Francisco veered from a runway in flames at Kennedy International Airport late yesterday afternoon, but the 291 passengers and crew members were swiftly evacuated and 57 people on board were reported to have sustained only minor injuries.
The fire, which was reported at 5:42 P.M., apparently erupted in the cargo bay or tail engine, but its cause was not immediately determined.


Athletes at the Gay Games Face No Commercial Clutter
ALL week there has been grumbling about the relentless commercialization of the Summer Olympics, the onslaught of advertisements, promotions and "official" products that threaten to overshadow the pomp and pageantry of the Games.
At the same time, the organizers of another large international athletic event have been watching enviously, wishing that they could have such problems.


NBC Keeps Formula, Warts and All
The high ratings for NBC's Olympics broadcasts -- up 15 percent through Wednesday over the corresponding ratings in 1988 at the Seoul Games -- send out one message.
The network is doing a job viewers like enough that they are sticking around nightly for four and one-half hours.
Despite the commercials.
Despite a load of features.
Despite segmenting events throughout the evening to maintain drama.


Duracell International I


Court Misreads Treaty
To the Editor:
Daniel G. Partan, in his July 10 letter on your editorial "Kidnap? Sure Says the Court," describes at some length the limits of the Supreme Court's holding in the Mexican extradition-by-kidnapping case.
While providing much ancillary legal information, Professor Partan ignores the nub of the matter: Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist ruled that the extradition treaty did not explicitly prohibit kidnapping.
From the standpoint of common sense -- not to mention natural law -- this is absurd.
The prohibition of kidnapping is embedded in the logical structure of the treaty.


Restaurants
When the genteel town-house restaurant called March opened in 1990, it defied the conventional wisdom about what recession-pinched diners wanted.
Just when chefs at most establishments were discarding rack of veal for roast chicken, stripping tablecloths in favor of butcher paper and touting Beaujolais, March was laying on the truffles and offering every creature comfort.
March's success can be attributed largely to its partners, Wayne Nish, the executive chef, and Joseph Scalice, who oversees an ace dining-room team.
Mr.
Nish made his mark at La Colombe d'Or, and until last month he was a consulting chef at the Supper Club on West 47th Street in midtown Manhattan.


Gooden to Test Shoulder
Dwight Gooden is scheduled to take the mound today in a critical measure of the condition of his troubled right shoulder.
He will ask everything of his pitches and see what the shoulder answers.
"It's a major day," said Gooden.
Gooden has been on the disabled list since July 16 with rotator cuff complications.
He has spoken enthusiastically about his belief that the setback has not been serious.
But he has also regularly underscored his refusal to rush any return.
"I am going to be 100 percent absolutely or I am not going to pitch," Gooden said recently.


TIME WARNER IS SAID TO TALK WITH 2 POSSIBLE INVESTORS
Time Warner Inc., which has long said it is seeking a major investor in Europe, has talked with a Canadian and a European company about a possible investment in Time Warner Entertainment, an executive close to the company said.
The companies are the Power Corporation of Canada and Groupe Bruxelles Lambert, a Brussels-based holding company.
Time Warner declined to comment on the talks, which were first reported in The Wall Street Journal yesterday.
But the executive said Time Warner had indicated that it was involved in such discussions.


Sioux to Meet With Hornell
The Hornell Brewing Company in Brooklyn and the leadership of the Oglala Sioux Indian tribe in Pine Ridge, S.D., announced yesterday they would meet to resolve a dispute over a new Hornell malt liquor named after the Sioux leader Crazy Horse.


TV Networks Did a Poor Job at the Convention
To the Editor:
The television networks at large did a disservice to the electorate by not carrying much more of the Democratic National Convention.
I am afraid they will point to dismal ratings as evidence of little interest in the conventions and as a rationale for even less coverage in the future.
But there is small wonder interest is dim when viewers mostly get to watch reporters interviewing one another on expensive, soon-to-be-demolished sets, which use history only as a convenient backdrop.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.18
3.15
5.86
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.17
5.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.24
5.64
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.19
6.10
8.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.42
7.43
8.35
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.45
8.44
9.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.08
6.00
7.09
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Ukrainian Gymnast Wins Women's All-Around Competition


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; WOMEN LEAD IN CALIFORNIA SENATE RACES
Two Democratic women enjoy sizable leads over their Republican opponents in campaigns for California's two open Senate seats, according to a Field Poll released today.
Both former Mayor Dianne Feinstein of San Francisco and Representative Barbara Boxer had 18-point leads.


Connecticut Natural Gas reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Swift Escape Proves Value Of Long-Practiced Procedures
The evacuation of 292 people from a flaming jumbo jet at Kennedy International Airport last night was a textbook example of airline safety procedures, aviation experts said, at an airport with extensive safety equipment and procedures.
"The proof," said Duncan Pardue, a spokesman for the Federal Aviation Administration, "is that they got them all off the airplane.


House Panel to Seek Subpoenas Over Settlement of H-Bomb Case
Two months after the Rockwell International Corporation pleaded guilty to five felony counts for environmental mismanagement at a nuclear bomb plant near Denver, a House committee approved two subpoenas yesterday in an effort to determine why more charges were not brought against the company as well as the Department of Energy, which owns the plant.
The House Committee on Science, Space and Technology voted unanimously to subpoena documents from Rockwell immediately.
It voted 6-to-2 with one abstention to authorize a subpoena of Federal Bureau of Investigation agents who examined the plant unless the bureau makes them available for questioning in the next two weeks.


Review/Film; Squeezing the Humor Out of Death
Nowhere do movie characters defy the laws of the physical universe as gleefully as they do in Robert Zemeckis's films.
From Marty McFly's time travel in the "Back to the Future" trilogy to Jessica Rabbit's close encounters with real flesh and blood in "Who Framed Roger Rabbit," Mr.
Zemeckis's creations escape the ordinary every chance they get.
Even so, this director's latest film manages to find a new frontier as it takes two glamour girls one step beyond the world of collagen shots and chemical peels.
With inexorable logic, "Death Becomes Her" pushes Beverly Hills's beautiful people over the edge, and into the land of the living dead.
Well, why not?
The premise for "Death Becomes Her" is at least as funny as a corpse, and often a lot more so.
It suggests that Madeline Ashton (Meryl Streep), an over-the-hill star first seen in a ghastly Broadway production number ("Can you believe that, a musical version of 'Sweet Bird of Youth'?"), could be no worse off than she already is.
Not even without a pulse.


Rural Bosnian Muslims Tell of Expulsion
The men of Hozici, a Muslim village in Bosnia and Herzegovina, were forced into freight-train cars at gunpoint.
For three days they stood, shoulder to shoulder, with as many as 180 people crammed into a space 39 feet by 6 feet.
Strapping men, tattoos on their arms, repeatedly passed out and then regained consciousness as they fell against each other's feet.
"We had to stand all the time, we had no air, no water," Edhim Mahinovic said.
"We asked to unlock the doors. They wouldn't."


Clifford Denies Fraud and Conspiracy Charges


From Civil Rights to School
Julius L. Chambers, director of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund since 1984, will leave the post in December to become chancellor of North Carolina Central University in Durham.
During his tenure Mr.
Chambers worked to solidify the financial base and reshape the agenda of the Fund, historically one of the most important civil rights legal organizations in the country.


Review/Film; In Memories and Music, Searching for the Blues
In the conventional view of American pop history, genres have succeeded one another in a relentless parade of stylistic and technological innovations, each rendering the sounds of the preceding era obsolete.
But as Robert Mugge's documentary film "Deep Blues" shows, things are seldom that orderly.
An expert, guided tour of those areas of the Deep South where old-time blues music flourishes, the film visits backwoods juke joints and urban honky-tonks where the music, often performed with antiquated technology, lives on as an everyday expression of people's lives.
"Deep Blues," which opens today at the Walter Reade Theater, credits David A. Stewart of Eurythmics, the English rock duo, as executive producer.
Early in the film, Mr.
Stewart, looking saturnine and slightly foppish, presents himself as an admiring blues student eager to go on a field trip.
His mild-mannered, shaggy-haired guide is Robert Palmer, a former chief pop-music critic for The New York Times and the author of "Deep Blues" (Viking Penguin, 1981), a musical and cultural history of the Mississippi Delta.


O'Sullivan Earns Contract With Nets
DAN O'SULLIVAN, a free-agent center who played for Fordham, was signed yesterday to a one-year contract by the Nets after leading the team's summer league squad in rebounding and field-goal percentage.
O'Sullivan, a 6-foot-11-inch, 248-pounder, averaged 7.6 rebounds and 10.4 points with a 63.5 field-goal percentage in eight summer league games.


Sebokeng Journal; Bullied by Its Own Young, the Township Festers
Dr.
Josiah Musundwa practices family medicine in a sector of this black township popularly known as Beirut.
These days he finds the name alarmingly apt.
It is not just the teen-age revolutionary poseurs who rule the neighborhoods, hijacking and burning cars, digging anti-tank trenches, turning away ambulances and terrorizing local residents.


Parents of Bus Crash Victim Bury Their Daughter


KLA Instruments reports earnings for Year to June 30


Reviews/Film; An Indiscretion Among the French Bourgeoisie
In its first half-hour, "En Toute Innocence" ("In All Innocence") promises to be one of those delicious bittersweet comedies about extramarital hanky-panky among the bourgeoisie for which the French have long been celebrated.
But halfway along, the film, which was directed by Alain Jessua and stars Michel Serrault and Nathalie Baye, begins to toy uncomfortably with the idea of becoming a thriller.
In the last half-hour, it finally makes the leap from sophisticated comedy into Alfred Hitchcock-style suspense, and then fizzles out in a flurry of plot developments that are as preposterous as they are hastily introduced.


Executive Changes
COMMONWEALTH ASSOCIATES, New York, a private investment banking and securities brokerage firm, appointed Stephen J. Warner managing director of corporate finance.
EXXON CORP., Irving, Tex., appointed C. M. Harrison, executive vice president at Exxon Co.
U.S., to the additional position of senior vice president of the corporation.


Disclosure of Juvenile Arrests Has a High Price
To the Editor:
Re "U.S. Relaxes Secrecy Rules on Juvenile Arrests" (news article, July 13): The social costs from erroneous information transmitted to police agencies and prospective employers will outweigh any gains to public safety from broader access to juvenile arrest records.
The inaccuracy of arrest records is widely documented.
Omissions of dismissed charges have increased in the last decade as budget crises hit hardest at such police functions as record keeping.
Charges are often inflated at arrest only to be corrected in court, but disclosure of uncorrected arrest records will not reflect the revised version.
Once employers deny jobs to young people based on false arrest information, their exclusion from the labor market becomes a lifetime sentence to criminality and an unnecessary burden on society.


Art in Review
Carl Andre  Julian Pretto Gallery 103 Sullivan Street SoHo Through next Friday
One doesn't normally associate good-humored intimacy with Carl Andre's sculpture, but there is something very like it to be found in this show of nine pieces made in the last five years.
With one major exception, everything here is small in scale and improvised from disparate scraps of found material.
Dada is the clear inspiration, and it is good to be reminded that punning titles, sexual innuendo and intellectual cleverness characteristic of that esthetic have been features of Mr.
Andre's art all along.


TV Networks Did a Poor Job at the Convention; Not Show Up at All?
To the Editor:
Reuven Frank, former president of NBC News, has turned his hand to comic essays in "Opium for the (Dwindling) Masses" (Op-Ed, July 11).
I enjoy a joke as much as the next guy, but the logical consequences of Mr.
Frank's suggestions -- and the possibility that he means to be taken seriously -- move me to respond.
Mr.
Frank suggests that broadcasting the national political conventions is bad television -- uneventful, unhelpful and unwatched.
Maybe so.
But it is good citizenship, good public service (a phrase that has grown rare in broadcasting).


U.S. Lightweight Comes Out Swinging
Oscar De La Hoya made a dramatic break tonight from his recently adopted style, abandoning finesse for raw power.
The highly touted 19-year-old lightweight from East Los Angeles established himself as a favorite by opening his Olympic competition with a convincing knockout of Adilson Silva of Brazil.
Known as a bruising puncher with power in both hands, De La Hoya jabbed his way to victories in the 132-pound class at the Olympic trials and box-offs last month.


The Young and Frisky Amid All That History
The Saratoga Race Course, for 125 years the launching pad for young horses' careers, launched a pair of careers today when two stellar juvenile colts raced like old pros down the home stretch in the 90th running of the Saratoga Special.
Neither flinched, neither surrendered.
But as they flashed across the finish line, Scotty Schulhofer's Tactical Advantage prevailed by a nose over Shug McGaughey's Strolling Along, and both colts took long strides toward the championship of the juvenile class and the distant spires of next year's Kentucky Derby.


The Boys of Summer Play on a Magic Carpet
For most, it will be their first trip to Yankee Stadium, and they will be going as players, not spectators.
Twenty-one members of Harlem's Reviving Baseball in the Inner Cities (RBI), a youth program designed for teen-agers in deprived neighborhoods, will participate in an all-star game against an RBI team from Los Angeles at 10 o'clock today.
It may take them a few minutes growing accustomed to a field without rocks or weeds or the sound of continuous traffic passing, as happens on the RBI field at 100th Street and First Avenue in East Harlem.
They may feel strange wearing spiffy white uniforms and not worrying about breaking a car windshield with a home run to right field.


Cunningham Just One Of Eagles' Questions
Randall Cunningham, a six-inch surgical scar meandering down the inside of his left knee as a reminder that some things are out of an individual's control, is entering this National Football League season with a motto that starts at his sole.
"That's my new thing," said Cunningham, the Philadelphia Eagles' quarterback.
"I wrote F.I.G. on my both shoes, which means Faith in God. I've got my faith and when I go out, I'm just going to go out there and try to have fun."


Fatal New Jersey Crash: Growth and Old Roads
The three-mile roller-coaster stretch of Route 515 that cascades into this green hamlet in eastern Sussex County has become notorious in recent weeks as the site of two spectacular accidents.
But its mean history stretches back well over a decade, and the road is symptomatic of a broader and more pervasive problem in this high corner of New Jersey.
A runaway tanker truck careered out of control on Route 515 near aptly named Breakneck Road on July 16, killing its driver, spilling 9,000 gallons of gasoline into a creek and forcing the evacuation of nearby families.
Ten days later, last Sunday, a tour bus from Brooklyn hurtled down the same treacherous slope and crashed and burned, killing six more people and injuring more than 50 others.


Duracell International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


8 Big Insurers Sue National Medical Enterprises
Eight leading insurance companies filed suit yesterday in Federal court charging National Medical Enterprises, one of the nation's largest operators of psychiatric hospitals, with a "massive" scheme to commit insurance fraud by admitting thousands of patients who did not need hospitalization and treating them at inflated prices.
The insurers, including Prudential and Travelers, contend that National Medical Enterprises systematically manipulated the diagnoses of patients to keep them in hospitals until their health insurance coverage was exhausted.
The insurers, lawyers say, will seek hundreds of millions of dollars in damages.


Art in Review
Gertrude Barrer Berman Nancy/Daferner Gallery 568 Broadway, at Prince Street SoHo Through today


Ruling on Haitians Is Suspended
The Bush Administration won a 48-hour reprieve today from a court order barring the automatic return of all Haitians picked up at sea to their homeland.
The same Federal appeals court in New York that on Wednesday effectively nullified Administration policy suspended its order today "to permit the orderly consideration" of an Administration plea to the United States Supreme Court.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  U.S.
HUNTS FOR DRUG BARON  U.S. military planes joined Colombia in the manhunt for the cocaine trafficker Pablo Escobar, who escaped from prison last week.
The planes flew repeated surveillance runs over Medellin and other suspected refuges in the Andean mountains.
A1  ANGUISH IN PARIS COURTROOM  In a packed courtroom in Paris, legal arguments have been pushed aside as bereaved parents, spouses and hemophiliac patients recounted how blood transfusions tainted with the AIDS virus had ended many lives and still threaten others.
A1  REPRIEVE FOR HAITI POLICY  The Bush Administration won a 48-hour reprieve from a court order barring the automatic return of all Haitians picked up at sea to their homeland.
The U.S. is now free to send back all Haitians.
A2  NO RESPITE FOR BOSNIA MUSLIMS  As world attention is focused on the plight of Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, Serbs are continuing their "ethnic cleansing" campaign in the hinterlands against the remaining Muslim population.
A3  Ukrainian peacekeepers take up positions in Bosnia.
A3  IRAQI LEADER, STILL THERE  Two years after he invaded Kuwait, President Saddam Hussein remains a formidable figure in the Persian Gulf, defying the U.N. and stirring up Arab feeling against the conservative gulf monarchies that joined the U.S. in trying to overthrow him.
A6  Teheran is keeping the planes Iraq sent to Iran for safety.
A6  UNCERTAINTY OF SOMALI AID  After visiting Somalia, U.S. disaster experts said emergency airlifts proposed by the U.N. would not solve the problem of how to get food to tens of thousands of starving people.
A9  JAPAN'S ENVIRONMENTAL RECORD  Japan is trying to become a champion of planetary protection and a leader in setting world environmental policy.
But environmentalists say Japan must improve its own record before it can lead others.
A8  Israel expects quick action on diplomatic ties with the Vatican.
A6  National A10-15  ECONOMY GREW, BUT NOT MUCH  The economy grew by a weak 1.4 percent from April through June, less than half the rate of the first quarter, and the 1990-1991 recession was considerably longer and deeper than at first believed, the Government said.
A1  CALIFORNIA COPES WITH CRISIS  "It's pretty disappointing," said a lifelong Californian as he displayed his layoff notice.
A reporter's journey through California revealed widespread despondency as the state reels from an extraordinary series of blows, natural and man-made.
But also evident was bold optimism.
A1  BUSH WOOS CALIFORNIA ANEW  The President loosed sharper arrows at his opponent on a trip to a California county that was once solid Bush country and is now uncertain territory.
A12  QUAYLE'S SUBTLE ATTACK  Vice President Quayle has steadily outlined the Bush-Quayle campaign's general election strategy, particularly its plans for attacking Governor Clinton.
The formula includes a subtle reinforcement of doubts about Mr.
Clinton's character.
A12  CLINTON AND THE GULF WAR  Governor Clinton was again put on the defensive over his stance on foreign affairs.
This time, he answered Republican charges that he had misrepresented himself as an early supporter of the use of force against Iraq.
A13  MILITARY CHIEFS APOLOGIZE  Four military chiefs told a Congressional panel they realized they needed to do more to stop sexual harassment.
But none of the chiefs said he was willing to let women assume combat roles, generally the ticket for military advancement.
A10  HOLDING BACK ON ABORTION RIGHTS  Lawmakers who oppose most state restrictions on abortion are growing uncertain about whether to push for Congressional action.
A11  BLACK APPOINTEE IN BOSTON  The Governor of Massachusetts appointed a black lawyer to be District Attorney of the county that includes Boston.
The move, intended to improve race relations in the city, also gives the district its first Republican in the job in memory.
A10  A PROMISING CANCER THERAPY  A new type of cancer therapy seems to greatly extend the lives of patients suffering from a lethal skin cancer, a researcher said.
But the findings are extremely preliminary.
A10  MANDATORY AIDS TEST OPPOSED  The National Commission on AIDS recommended against ordering mandatory AIDS testing for health workers, saying that those infected with the virus that causes the disease should not be required to inform their patients.
A11  Cross-examination of a star witness in the Iran-contra trial began.
A10  Law Page A15  In Los Angeles, the man behind the videocamera becomes the star.
A look at the Rocky Flats nuclear bomb plant mismanagement case.
At the Bar  Metro Digest B1  PLANE IN FLAMES  A Trans World Airlines jumbo jet taking off for San Francisco veered from a runway and burst into flames at Kennedy International Airport late yesterday afternoon, but the 291 passengers and crew members were swiftly evacuated and only 18 people were reported to have sustained minor injuries.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-27  Stratagems for dining well.
C1  Film: "Gas Food Lodging." C1  Art: Sculpture everywhere.
C1  Word and Image: Book about Napoleon.
C25  Sports B7-18  LOYALTIES LOSE TO SPORTS REALITY  In crossing the border to play for the Unified Team in the Olympics, two Latvian basketball players, Igor Miglinieks and Goundars Vetra, are regarded as traitors.
A1  Baseball: Expos and Pirates remain in first-place tie.
B16  Yankees hold off Orioles.
B17  Columns: Anderson on women's gymnastics.
B7  Lipsyte on dream teams.
B14  TV Sports B10  Football: Brown's first day at Giants training camp.
B14  Tagliabue takes the stand at N.F.L. trial.
B15  Olympics: An unexpected winner in women's gymnastics.
B7  Popov wins second gold, taking 50-meter freestyle.
B7  Notebook: Swim officials may snub Biondi.
B8  U.S. men need 5 sets to beat Spain in volleyball.
B14  Obituaries D17  Pola Nirenska, a choreographer and teacher.
William Mathias, a composer and teacher.
Samuel J. Rozzi, ex-Police Commissioner of Nassau County Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  Face down the other U.N. outlaw.
Older Americans, dangling.
Fair Haven for Haitian refugees.
Justice, at last, for Mr.
Honecker.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Should Bush run?
James D. Davidson: You can call him Al.
James K. Galbraith: Perot's plan -- too much pain, too little gain.
Ellen Chesler: RU-486 -- we need prudence, not politics.


Dinkins Tells Staten Island He Cares
Mayor David N. Dinkins tried yesterday to assure residents of New York City's most alienated borough that City Hall cares about their problems, from transportation costs to fears of dangerous air pollution from the gargantuan Fresh Kills landfill.
The Mayor, who has had a chilly reception from elected officials since he moved the nerve center of the city government to Staten Island on Monday, parceled out two pieces of good news clearly intended to mend relations with the borough.
He also spent two hours fielding hard questions from advocates for everything from the environment to secession.


Leggett &amp; Platt Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Take a Left at the Next Corner, and Mind the Potholes


Griffith Joyner's Acting Career Is on Track
FLORENCE GRIFFITH JOYNER, the retired sprinting star of the 1988 Seoul Olympics, has signed a contract for a continuing role on the NBC daytime drama "Santa Barbara." Joyner, who is portraying a celebrity photographer, is scheduled to make her first appearance on the show on Aug. 13.


The Spoken Word
RUNES LECTURE, New York Open Center, 83 Spring Street, near Broadway, SoHo.
"The Viking Runes: A Compass for Conduct," a discussion of the history, origin and meaning of the runes, an early alphabet, by Ralph Blum, author of "The Book of Runes." Tonight at 7:30.
Admission: $12.
Information: (212) 219-3739.
GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Manhattan.
All free with museum admission: $6; $3 for children.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


COMPANY BRIEFS
PHILIPS N.V. will delay by "a couple of weeks" its digital compact cassette player but will have it in many shops before Christmas.
ASEA BROWN BOVERI INC., Vasteras, Sweden, received a $20 million contract to supply an 85-megawatt gas turbine to Mississippi Power Co., Gulfport.
Commercial operation is scheduled for 1994.


Harper Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Memorex Telex reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Clifford Issues Spirited Defense Against B.C.C.I. Charges
He never raised his voice.
And with the long, lanky fingers of his left hand, he stroked the lapel of his gray double-breasted suit as he spoke, showing no trace of nervousness or impatience or anger.
Clark M. Clifford, longtime senior statesman of Washington, the man who helped write the National Security Act in 1947, who served as Secretary of Defense in the Johnson Administration, was delivering a 44-minute monologue.
Today he was no longer defending his country but was instead trying to defend himself and his own good name, challenging his indictment on Wednesday on charges of conspiracy and fraud.


Hornets' Johnson Undergoes Arthroscopy
Hornets forward LARRY JOHNSON, the National Basketball Association's No. 1 draft pick in 1991 and its rookie of the year last season, underwent arthroscopic surgery on his right knee yesterday in Charlotte, N.C.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"CHINESE COFFEE," Circle in the Square Theater, 235 West 50th Street, Manhattan.
Ira Lewis's story about a struggling New York writer and his friend; starring Al Pacino and Charles Cioffi and directed by Arvin Brown.
Last performance: tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Other performances: tonight at 8.
Tickets: $50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


INSIDE
Manhattan Bridge Questions
Workers patched a beam on the Manhattan Bridge, reopening it to subway service, but safety questions remained.
Page B1.
Military Chiefs Talk of Bias
Four military chiefs admitted they should do more to stop sexual harassment, but ambivalence about women's roles was plain.
Page A10.
Noncitizens' Voting Rights
As legal immigrants but not United States citizens, one million New Yorkers cannot vote in city elections.
But some would change that.
Page B1.


Stock Sale Postponed By Revlon
Revlon Inc., the crown jewel of Ronald O. Perelman's financial empire, postponed its plans yesterday to sell shares of the cosmetics giant to the public, citing a stingy market and pressure from institutional investors to drop the opening price.
"Given the prospects for the company and what we perceive is its strong consumer franchise and future, we were unwilling to proceed with an offering at a price that did not reflect the true value of the company," said Don Drapkin, vice chairman of MacAndrews &amp; Forbes Holdings Inc., the corporate umbrella for Mr.
Perelman's investments.


Review/Art; Sculpture, Sculpture Everywhere
JUST as this summer brings disappointment to Mets and Yankees fans, it brings promise to fans of outdoor sculpture.
The outdoor sculpture season in New York City is all over the place, geographically and figuratively speaking.
Sculptures are to be found as far afield as the Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx and the Snug Harbor Cultural Center on Staten Island.
Not only are they on view at the scrubby patch of riverfront that is the Socrates Sculpture Park in Long Island City, Queens, but they also appear unexpectedly a few blocks away in the parking lot of the P.S. 1 Museum.
There are sculptures in the courtyards of colleges in Brooklyn and Queens, and at squares and street corners all across lower Manhattan.
You can literally trip over them in Tom Otterness's installation at the new Hudson River Park, or mistake one of them for a No Parking sign on Wall Street.
Outdoor sculpture this summer is also across the map in terms of its interests.
In this sense, it is an inevitable extension of the larger art scene.
If a preponderance of sculptures put forward political and social agendas, and if many of them continue to use humble materials that are themselves an expression of a certain political point of view, there are a few works that unapologetically extend the legacy of monumental sculpture.


Pola Nirenska, a Choreographer And Teacher, Is a Suicide at 81
Pola Nirenska, a noted teacher and choreographer who danced with Mary Wigman, died on Saturday after a fall from the balcony of her apartment in Bethesda, Md.
She was 81 years old.
The death was ruled a suicide by the Montgomery County Medical Examiner.


Frederick Kao, 73, Educator Who Led Acupuncture Effort
Dr.
Frederick F. Kao, a retired educator who was a leader in the movement to encourage Western medicine to explore acupuncture, herbs and other traditional Chinese treatments, died last Friday at Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park, L.I.
He was 73 years old and lived in Garden City, L.I.
He died of complications from heart disease, his family said.


On My Mind; Should Bush Run?
Can he win?
Should he run?
Suddenly those questions about George Bush are part of the conversation of American politicians and journalists.
I think the answer to the first question is yes, and to the second, no.
That is a paradox, but based on the political and personal realities that envelop Mr.
Bush and the 1992 campaign.


TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Atlanta Falcons
The Falcons came to terms with their second first-round draft choice, running back Tony Smith of Southern Mississippi, leaving their first choice, offensive lineman Bob Whitfield of Stanford (No. 8 over all) still without a contract.
Smith (No. 19) signed a three-year deal, but the terms weren't disclosed.
Indianapolis Colts
The negotiations were described as close, but backup quarterback Jack Trudeau remained unsigned yesterday, as did second-round draft pick Ashley Ambrose, a defensive back from Mississippi Valley State.
Coach Ted Marchibroda seemed unconcerned about either absence, partly because Ambrose was not expected to make an immediate impact anyway; partly because starting quarterback Jeff George has been coming along nicely under the tutelage of the head coach, a quarterback specialist, and partly because Marchibroda has two other backup quarterbacks in camp, Mark Herrmann, and Tom Tupa, a Plan B acquisition from Phoenix.
Los Angeles Rams
Call him an innovative traditionalist, but it didn't take long for the Rams' new coach, Chuck Knox, to come up with a bright idea for improving the offensive line.
He switched Tom Newberry from center to guard and Bern Brostek from guard to center.
"We just think Brostek is a center and Newberry is a guard," Knox explained.
Neither player has argued with the switch, perhaps because until former Coach John Robinson switched them last year, Brostek had spent five years as a center, including four college years at Washington, and Newberry had been an All-Pro guard in two of his six pro seasons.
Cincinnati Bengals
With the departure of Ickey Woods (released because of knee injuries) and James Brooks (gone to Cleveland on Plan B), the running back position has been up for grabs, and if quarterback Boomer Esiason knows his stuff, Derrick Fenner, a Plan B acquisition from Seattle, has a firm grip on it.
"He looks super out there on the field," Esiason said.
"And the nice thing about him is he pays attention to detail. You have to wonder what he was doing on Plan B."
A mediocre season with the Seahawks (267 yards on 91 carries) may have been a factor, even though Fenner insists 1991 was an aberration after his big, 15-touchdown season in 1990.
"It just seemed like from the first week of camp things didn't click last year," he said.
This year things seem to be clicking for Fenner, but with a total of six running backs to choose from, it is Coach Dave Shula who will make the decision, and Shula seems just a bit more cautious than Esiason.
"So far he's picked things up pretty well," Shula said, "but there's still a lot of water under the bridge."
Shula's major worry yesterday wasn't multiple running backs but a single wide receiver, Eddie Brown, who was lost for the season with a neck injury.
Brown, a seven-year veteran who led the team with 59 catches for 827 yards last year, will undergo surgery next week to repair a ruptured cervical disk.
Houston Oilers
If you make it a point to change channels when they turn to sports on the evening news so you can watch the taped coverage of the Olympics with a measure of suspense, you might want to skip this item.
For it seems that the outcome of Sunday's Oilers-Cowboys game in Japan is a forgone conclusion, at least to Oiler Coach Jack Pardee.
"You can expect a high-scoring game," he said, suggesting that the Oilers would do the bulk of the scoring.
"I suppose the Cowboys will probably score, too," he added, "but we're going to kill them on Sunday." Dallas Cowboys
And what does Cowboys Coach Jimmy Johnson have to say about that?
"I'll let you decide on Sunday whether Jack Pardee is a liar or someone who can make great predictions," he said.
Well hush your puppies, but based on some early indicators, the Oilers may in fact have an edge, at least in a quarterback-to-quarterback matchup in adventurous eating.
Dallas quarterback Troy Aikman, who played (and lost) in Japan in a 1988 College All-Star Game, doesn't have the stomach for raw fish.
"Sorry," he said, "until they fry it, I won't eat sushi."
By contrast, Houston quarterback Warren Moon, who made a promptional visit to Japan last spring, has an international palate and doesn't care who knows it.
"I like sushi," he said. "In fact, I'm having sushi for dinner tonight."


Penn Central Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Richard A. Brown, Sales Executive, 54
Richard A. Brown, a sales executive at The New York Times, died on Wednesday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 54 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Justice, at Last, for Mr. Honecker
Erich Honecker, now returned against his will to a united Germany, surely deserves to be tried for past crimes against his own people.
As East Germany's leader from 1971 to 1989, he gave guards shoot-to-kill orders on the Berlin wall, whose construction he had supervised as a younger man.
The results can still be seen on the death strip that flanked the wall -- sad memorials and simple crosses that mark where unlucky escapees fell.
Mr.
Honecker has hardly acquitted himself with valor since his ouster.
He scurried to Moscow; when the Soviet Union collapsed, he begged for asylum in every remaining Communist country.
He finally wound up in the Chilean Embassy in Moscow, from which he has now been extracted to face trial for manslaughter and embezzlement.


Peres Predicts Early Vatican Ties
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres predicted today that Israel and the Vatican would move rapidly to establish full diplomatic relations now that they have formed a joint commission to study the matter.
"I think it will happen sooner than people think," Mr.
Peres said in an interview.
"I expect to see the Foreign Minister of the Vatican visiting Israel, and I myself will go to pay a visit to the Vatican."


Credit Markets; Open Treasury Auctions: Years Away
A significant change in the workings of the bond market that is being considered by the Bush Administration in response to the Salomon Brothers scandal that came to light a year ago will not even be tested for years.
The recommended change -- to an open auction for Treasury securities along the lines of an art auction -- would not occur for "a significant period of time," Jerome H. Powell, Under Secretary of the Treasury for Finance and the man who oversees Treasury auctions, said yesterday.
He added, "That is a program people will be working on for several years."


Bush, in California, Seeks to Turn Tide
California was once solid Bush country, but it was clearly shaky ground as President Bush arrived there yesterday in an attempt to revive his re-election bid.


U.S. Permanently Halts Digging at Cemetery Site
Federal officials said yesterday that they had permanently halted excavation where a 34-story office tower is being constructed over a colonial-era cemetery for black New Yorkers.
The future of the site will be decided by a national advisory panel that the officials said they would create with Mayor David N. Dinkins.
After meeting with the Mayor at Gracie Mansion, the head of the Federal General Services Administration, Richard G. Austin, said that the disputed portion of the construction site -- called the pavilion -- might become a museum honoring the black New Yorkers who were buried there.
Some community leaders and local elected officials have proposed such a museum in recent months.


At the Bar; In Connecticut, an empathic advocate for scores of women suing over breast implants.
Over the last year the evidence locker at Koskoff, Koskoff &amp; Bieder has come to resemble a refrigerator.
Its shelves are filled with Ziploc bags, cottage cheese containers, plastic salad-bar boxes and those large white buckets in which restaurants buy potato salad and cole slaw.
But what each of these items contains is a tragedy made of polyurethane, silicone, polymers and glue.
Until very recently, their contents were inside women's breasts.


AIDS Testing Opposed For Health Professionals
The National Commission on AIDS today recommended against mandatory testing of doctors and other health workers for the AIDS virus and said that those infected should not be required to inform their patients.
The commission, which advises Congress and the President on AIDS policy, said the chances of the transmission of H.I.V., the human immunodeficiency virus, from health workers to patients was almost nonexistent if proper sanitary procedures were followed.


Sports of The Times; Just Let Those Kids Be Kids
LIKE a necklace of small but rare diamonds, women's gymnastics has been in the Olympic jewelcase for 20 years.
Olga Korbut put it there.
Nadia Comaneci and Mary Lou Retton kept it there.
But the price on the possibility of a girl developing into another small but rare diamond is too expensive: the absence of a teen-age life.
Instead of thinking about which new sports it should add, the International Olympic Committee would do better to consider one it should drop: women's gymnastics.


Early Data Find Promise in New Cancer Therapy
A new type of cancer therapy seems to sharply extend the lives of patients suffering from advanced melanoma, a lethal skin cancer, a scientist reported yesterday.
But the findings are extremely preliminary, have yet to be published in a scientific journal and must be confirmed through additional clinical trials, the researcher and other cancer experts said.
The scientist, Dr.
Donald L. Morton of the John Wayne Cancer Institute at St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif., announced an early analysis of results from an extensive and ongoing clinical trial of the new therapy, which combines a vaccine traditionally used against tuberculosis with injections of melanoma cells that have been irradiated into harmlessness.


Noncitizens and Right to Vote; Advocates for Immigrants Explore Opening Up Balloting
They are, by most measures, typical New Yorkers who pay taxes, endure the subways, send their children to city schools and complain about rents, crime and alternate-side-of-the-street parking.
But one thing sets them apart.
As legal immigrants who are not United States citizens, one million New Yorkers cannot vote in city elections.
One-eighth of the population, they are, in the traditional political sense, powerless.
But that could change.


A Waltz For U.S. Women
The only differences between the United States Olympic men's and women's basketball teams may be the amount of money they make and the level of air space they occupy.
The men are somewhere above the rim, and the women try to be somewhere between the men and their grounded competition.
One game does not make a gold medal, but the United States women sure looked like a female version of the men today in their 111-55 pasting of Czechoslovakia in their preliminary-round debut at the Palau D'Esports.


McElligott Wright Partner Is Leaving
A partner at McElligott Wright Morrison White, the Minneapolis agency divided by bitter public feuding among its top executives, will, as expected, leave to join another shop there.
Rob White, who has been a partner and planning director at McElligott Wright, said yesterday that he would move to Fallon McElligott as account planning director, as soon as his obligations to clients at McElligott Wright were met.


A Good Day for the U.S., but It's Popov at Head of the Fleet
If swimmers sweat in the water, then Aleksandr Popov of the Unified Team stays dry.
He takes one stroke for every one and a half by his competition, propelling himself with an effortless follow-through that barely raises a splash.
Popov swam his elegant strokes tonight in the 50-meter freestyle against the most intimidating, water-churning sprinters in Olympic history: Matt Biondi and Tom Jager.
When the pool calmed, Popov was the one smiling, his arms raised in triumph with his second individual gold medal of the Olympics, and an Olympic record of 21.91 seconds.


Court Says Sexual Assault Can Occur Without Force
In a ruling that reaffirmed one of the toughest rape laws in the nation, the State Supreme Court today said that physical force need not be involved in order to convict a person of sexual assault.
"We conclude that any act of sexual penetration engaged in by the defendant without the affirmative and freely given permission of the victim to the specific act of penetration constitutes the offense of sexual assault," Justice Alan B. Handler said in writing the opinion on behalf of a unanimous Court.


Review/Fashion; Calm and Classy Vs. Bluntly Sexual
Hubert de Givenchy and Thierry Mugler ended the fall and winter couture shows here on wildly different notes.
Mr.
Givenchy's clothes were calm, serene, tasteful and classy.
Strong colors suffused his presentation at the Grand Hotel, as if he wanted to offer some cheer to the world.
Fashion, he demonstrated, could be both soothing and upbeat.
By contrast, Mr.
Mugler's clothes were raucous and frenetic.
When Mr.
Givenchy opened his business 40 years ago he was a provocative upstart, but he painstakingly studied the couture under Cristobal Balenciaga, his master.
Today he celebrates the power of clothes to please the eye and comfort the spirit, in the classic couture manner.


After Repairs, Bridge Safety Is Questioned
The Manhattan Bridge has been deteriorating for so long that when another safety hazard causes officials to shut down subway service, serious questions arise about whether the 83-year-old structure is being watched as closely as it should be and whether further inconvenience and even danger are inescapable.
Subway service for about 250,000 passengers was disrupted when the bridge was shut down after rush hour Wednesday night after state inspectors spotted a quarter-size hole in a rusty beam.


Geneva Steel reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lawyer for Ex-C.I.A. Aide Assails Character of Chief Witness
The lawyer for a former Central Intelligence Agency official accused of lying to Congress and investigators about the Iran-contra affair today set about trying to tear apart the character and testimony of the prosecution's chief witness.
The lawyer, Richard A. Hibey, began his cross-examination of the witness, Alan D. Fiers, in Federal District Court here by suggesting that he lied throughout the Iran-contra affair and eagerly "handed up" friends and former colleagues to insure his employment prospects for the future.
Although Mr.
Hibey never used the word "betrayal," it was clear that was the concept he wanted the jury to consider.


Argentine Utility Privatized
Giving a much needed boost to Argentina's privatization program, the Government today announced the sale of 51 percent of the state electrical company to an Argentine-Chilean group and an Argentine-French-Spanish consortium.
The deal will eventually yield more than $2 billion in cash and debt reduction.
Argentina's largest industrial concern, Perez Companc, along with Chile's two largest power companies, Chilectra and Endesa Chile, won the bidding for providing electrical power to the city of Buenos Aires and southern suburbs with an offer of $500 million.


Sanderson: From the Paint to Preserving
WIMP SANDERSON, the former basketball coach at Alabama, has a new job with Great Southern Wood Preserving, a producer of pressure-treated wood products based in Abbeville, Ala.


Further Explanations Added to Film Ratings
In an effort to clarify the meaning of film ratings, the Motion Picture Association of America and the National Association of Theater Owners have introduced new language to explain the PG and PG-13 ratings.
For films coming before the ratings board from now on, PG, which stands for "Parental guidance suggested," will be followed by a phrase like "For sci-fi cartoon violence," and PG-13, which stands for "Parents strongly cautioned," will be followed by such wording as "For some action, violence and for nudity."


BARCELONA
BIG LOSS FOR NBC DESPITE HIGH RATINGS
Executives at NBC acknowledged that the network would lose between $30 million and $40 million on its Olympic coverage, primarily because of flagging sales on its pay-per-view cable programming.
But they were heartened by the huge audiences the network coverage has been drawing.
A NEW SPEED KING
Aleksandr Popov of the Unified Team established himself as swimming's new speedster by winning the 50-meter freestyle.
And for the second time this week an American women's relay team set a world record.
ANOTHER CLOSE ONE
Unlike the United States basketball team, the men's volleyball team has had only close matches, this time beating Spain in another five-set match.
SportsFriday, page B7.


Don't Believe Everything You Read


Cauthen Suspended for Misusing Whip
Jockey STEVE CAUTHEN yesterday was suspended for four days for misuse of the whip, marking only the third time he has been set down since arriving in England in 1978.


For Children
'A Day in the West With People of Color'  New York City Riding Academy of Randalls Island Downing Stadium Randalls Island (212) 941-5800 (212) 675-0085 Recommended for all ages Tomorrow
The New York City Riding Academy of Randalls Island was started in 1982 by George E. Blair.
His rodeo tomorrow will not just entertain visitors but it will feed them as well.
The rodeo is a tribute to black cowboys and cowgirls who migrated to the West after Reconstruction, and to American Indians and Mexicans who also contributed to the development of the West.
There will be rodeo stunts on horses performed by students from the academy; supervised horseback riding in a ring; American Indian and black drummers; an American Indian spiritualist who will perform ceremonies, and a Western barbecue.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; CLINTON'S SECRET SUPPORTER
Who said the tabloids were out to get Gov.
Bill Clinton?
The latest Weekly World News features a "world exclusive photo" of Mr.
Clinton shaking hands with an ET-like creature that the publication purports to be an alien.


A Debut for the Ukrainian Peacekeepers in Bosnia
From his position atop Hill 689, Capt.
Sergei M. Vshivtsev of the Ukrainian Army has a picture-postcard view of Sarajevo, a terra-cotta city gleaming in the summer sun, surrounded on all sides by moss-green mountains.
Like the hikers who used to come here in better times, Captain Vshivtsev, part of the first military unit from the newly independent Ukraine to take part in the United Nations peacekeeping force, chose the hilltop for its command of the surrounding terrain.
The hill is named 689 because it is that number of meters, or about 2,250 feet, above sea level.


CMS Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; LAWYERS PREFER CLINTON TO BUSH
By a ratio of nearly two to one, the nation's lawyers support Gov.
Bill Clinton over President Bush, according to a poll taken jointly by The National Law Journal and the West Publishing Company.
The survey, to appear in the Aug. 10 issue of the Law Journal, shows Mr.
Clinton with a lead of 58 to 30 percentage points among 405 lawyers selected at random.


Domtar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
The economy grew by a weak 1.4 percent in the second quarter and the 1990-1991 recession was longer and deeper than at first believed, the Government said.
Democrats used the numbers to castigate President Bush, who countered, "This kind of uneven growth is not unusual." In other economic news, first-time claims for unemployment insurance fell to a 21-month low of 400,000 in the week ended July 18, and new home sales jumped by 7.9 percent in June, after four straight monthly declines.  [ Page A1. ]
"I have just begun to fight," Clark M. Clifford vowed, saying he would spend the rest of his life trying to regain his good name after his indictment in the B.C.C.I. scandal.  [ D2. ]


Art in Review
Gertrude Barrer Berman Nancy/Daferner Gallery 568 Broadway, at Prince Street SoHo Through today


On Spain's Soling, a Crewman Who Will Be King
The lanky young man washes down the boat along with his teammates, and he bends his slender frame to push the boat onto its trailer.
He is listed as a "student" on the official roster of the Summer Games.
He is also listed as 6 feet 5 inches tall and 187 pounds.
And even royalty is included in the official computerized rosters of the 1992 Summer Games.


3 Men's Magazines Seek Higher Profiles
Three magazines aimed at men are introducing campaigns seeking to burnish their images with advertisers.
A campaign for Field &amp; Stream and Outdoor Life, two Times Mirror magazines that compete in the men's outdoor market, acknowledges that agency media buyers might disdain their readers.
Print advertisements, created by Earle Palmer Brown/Bergelt Litchfield in New York, carry the headlines "Men you love to hate and why you should support them" and "When they make you mad as hell how can they be so attractive?" The answers?
In both cases, "They're just the men you're looking for."


Pop/Jazz; With Thelonious Monk As Its Muse, a Series Offers a New Generation
The Classical Jazz series at Lincoln Center, which opens tonight with the music of Thelonious Monk, has a point to make.
Its claim is simple: the younger generation of musicians has arrived.
They are no longer the promise of the future; they are the present.
Both tonight's show and tomorrow's tribute featuring the collaborations of Miles Davis, John Coltrane and Cannonball Adderley are showcases for a host of young and special talent that is rarely heard in the role of headliner.
The series is both an affirmation of the explosion of activity that jazz has witnessed in the last decade, and the fruit of that renaissance.
It is also a gift to the audience, a way to be introduced to a whole flock of brilliant new voices.
Which isn't to say that elder statesmen have been left out, because they're represented as well; for once, though, a jazz program takes into account the new makeup of the jazz world.


The Boys of Summer Play on a Magic Carpet
For most, it will be their first trip to Yankee Stadium, and they will be going as players, not spectators.
Twenty-one members of Harlem's Reviving Baseball in the Inner Cities (RBI), a youth program designed for teen-agers in deprived neighborhoods, will participate in an all-star game against an RBI team from Los Angeles at 10 o'clock today.
It may take them a few minutes growing accustomed to a field without rocks or weeds or the sound of continuous traffic passing, as happens on the RBI field at 100th Street and First Avenue in East Harlem.
They may feel strange wearing spiffy white uniforms and not worrying about breaking a car windshield with a home run to right field.


TV Networks Did a Poor Job at the Convention; Eisenhower's Spots
To the Editor:
Your July 17 article about the selling of polital candidates on television, as commemorated in an exhibition at the Museum of the Moving Image in Astoria, Queens, states, "Adlai E. Stevenson never much liked television," and "Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower suffered from no such qualms." As I recall, the shoe was on the other foot.
Stevenson liked television when he made speeches on it, because he was a great orator and knew it.
Eisenhower hated television, because he knew that his speeches suffered by comparison with Stevenson's.
In September 1952, Eisenhower refused to speak on television, relying on whistle-stop appearances instead.


Yankees End Skid But Watch The Clock
While the Yankees continued their desperate march toward a .500 record on the field yesterday, General Manager Gene Michael was in his office desperately trying to acquire pitcher Jim Abbott from the California Angels.
Mel Hall and Pat Kelly drove in two runs apiece as the Yankees snapped a four-game losing streak with a 6-3 victory over the Baltimore Orioles at Yankee Stadium.
And though Curt Young, John Habyan and Steve Farr combined for the victory, it is still obvious that pitching remains a problem for the Yankees.
It is also evident that they are infatuated with Abbott.


Only Wealthy Lawyers Can Defend the Poor
To the Editor:
Washington has run out of money to pay lawyers for many indigent defendants in Federal courts in the New York area, you report July 19.
The problem is worse than that.
You suggest that those representing poor defendants are paid each month.
A lawyer who accepts a case under the Criminal Justice Act is normally paid when the case is completed, that is, after the verdict has been rendered.
As a case may take several months -- frequently more than a year -- to reach this point, the lawyer remains unpaid during that time.
In a lengthy case, the district court may authorize interim payments, but one-third of the payment is withheld until the case is completed.


On Stage, and Off
Glenn Close Role May Be in Doubt
Better hurry if you want to see Glenn Close in "Death and the Maiden." The play by Ariel Dorfman about a woman who was tortured as a political prisoner is closing on Sunday, on schedule.
All along the show has been sold with publicity claiming that Ms.
Close would also star in the film of the play, to be directed by Roman Polanski.
Yet one company member says the word at the theater is that Ms.
Close, who won a Tony Award for the role, is not necessarily Mr.
Polanski's choice.
In the script the setting is described as "a country that is probably Chile but could be any country that has given itself a democratic government after a long period of dictatorship." The company member says that Mr.
Polanski likes the idea of Chile enough to disqualify the blond, blue-eyed actress from what could be a more Latin interpretation of the role.


Too Good? Too Fast? Drug Rumors Stalk Chinese
When Lin Li of China hit the contact pad tonight in world-record time of 2 minutes 11.65 seconds in the 200-meter individual medley, the spin doctors went to work again.
United States coaches whispered in the corridors of the Bernat Picornell pool: The Chinese women have become too good, too fast, with three golds and three silvers in the five days of swimming competition.
The rumors were fueled by the frustrated American women's swim team, and the implication, again, was that performance-enhancing drugs were involved.


ECONOMY'S GROWTH IN SECOND QUARTER WAS A SLIGHT 1.4%
The economy's growth was a stunted 1.4 percent from April through June, less than half the growth rate of the first quarter, and the 1990-91 recession was considerably longer and deeper than previously believed, the Government said today.
As Democrats quickly went on the offensive, seizing the figures to castigate President Bush's economic stewardship, the White House rushed to put the best face it could on the double dose of bad news.


Timken Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Faulty Brakes On 2d Bus
New Jersey Department of Transportation investigators said they found a second bus with faulty brakes today belonging to the Brooklyn-based Sensational Golden Sons charter bus service, the company that owned and operated the tour bus that crashed on Sunday, killing six passengers.
Federal safety inspectors who examined the bus that crashed Sunday reported on Wednesday that its brakes were in very poor condition.


UAL Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Officials May Ignore Biondi in Relay Event
Matt Biondi might own handfuls of Olympic medals, but it appears that United States swim team officials are prepared to snub their marquee swimmer in selecting the 400-meter medley relay team that will race on Friday.
According to a team official familiar with the selection process, Jon Olsen will swim the anchor freestyle leg of the relay.
The other 100-meter legs are backstroke, breast-stroke and butterfly.


Another National Team, Another Sort of Dream
The Other Dream Team plays Japan this afternoon.
It will be an embarrassment if it loses, since its nation invented the game.
The Other Dream Team should have more trouble on Sunday, when it plays the United States.
The game is lacrosse, the nation calls itself the Haudenosaunee (French missionaries renamed it the Iroquois) and the Other Dream Team is its entry in the junior world championships, which are being held at Hofstra University on Long Island through Aug. 8, the day on which the official Dream Team will presumably win a gold medal in that televised international sports festival.
Comparisons are, of course, odious and impossible to resist.


Another Upset in Summer Bridge Tourney
A second major upset took place here Wednesday night in the Spingold Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
The Vanderbilt champions had lost Tuesday, and on Wednesday the second-ranked team in the Spingold followed them into the twilight.
Jim Cayne and Alan Sontag, both of Manhattan, Chuck Burger of Southfield, Mich., Eddie Kantar of Los Angeles, Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco, both of Rio de Janeiro, lost by 39 imps to Larry Mori of Ballston Lake, N.Y., Kitty Bethe of Manhattan, Steve and Betty Bloom of Duanesburg, N.Y., Chris Hough of Oakville, Ontario and John Guoba of Toronto.


CHRONICLE
"A year ago, I showed my collection before 100,000 people in Red Square just before the fall of Communism," PIERRE CARDIN said the other day.
"The Russians received me so well, I thought I would return the courtesy." So, after the end of official French couture showings in Paris last evening, he invited VALENTIN YUDASHKIN, who has a fashion house in Moscow, to present his clothes at the Espace Cardin.
Mr.
Yudashkin arrived in Paris on Tuesday with 15 models and 150 dresses, some rather eccentric.
At one point, models appeared with violin cases strapped to their mini-dresses.
They opened the cases, and inside were miniature gold violins.


Bally Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Japan and Ecology: Room to Improve
At the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro last month, Japan pledged more than $7 billion to help other nations fight pollution.
But halfway toward the summit of Mount Fuji, a four-story parking garage is being planned.
The difference between the summits shows how far this industrial powerhouse has come in environmental awareness and, some say, how far it has to go.


Lawmakers Fear Changes in Abortion Rights Bill
Fearing amendments that would weaken abortion rights, lawmakers who oppose most state restrictions on abortion are growing uncertain about whether to push for Congressional action this year.
They are nervously counting votes to see whether they can pass a measure that would send a clear message on abortion rights, even though they do not expect to override a certain veto by President Bush.


Bantam Acts To Combine Book Units
In a significant restructuring, Bantam Books is consolidating its hardcover and paperback divisions as part of the company's previously announced plan to cut back sharply the number of books it publishes.
Irwyn Applebaum, who took over as publisher of Bantam Books two months ago, said the reorganization and the trimming of the book list by about 30 percent would enable Bantam "to maximize our support for each book we publish."


Shuttle Ready for Mission With Tethered Satellite
Preparations moved forward tonight for launching the space shuttle Atlantis on a mission to release one satellite and test another one dangling at the end of a 12-mile, electricity-generating cord.
Liftoff for the planned seven-day flight is scheduled for 9:56 A.M.
Friday.
The countdown has proceeded smoothly, with no serious problems with the shuttle or the satellites in its cargo bay.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST DISASTER AVERTED AT KENNEDY
A Trans World Airlines jumbo jet taking off for San Francisco burst into flames at Kennedy International Airport, but the 292 passengers and crew members were swiftly evacuated and only minor injuries were reported.
The cause of the fire, which erupted in the cargo bay or tail engine, was not immediately determined, but aviation authorities said a tragedy that might have cost hundreds of lives had been averted.
"They did a tremendous job," Capt.
Bob Howell, a special assistant to the Fire Commissioner, said of the T.W.A. crew and other rescue personnel.
A1.
CALM AMID THE CHAOS
Expressing an overwhelming relief at having escaped disaster, the passengers aboard T.W.A.
Flight 843 described a quick, mostly calm evacuation amid the horrific scene of an airplane engulfed in smoke and flames.
B2.
Evacuation was a textbook example of safety procedures.
B2.
NEW YORK CITY THE FUTURE OF A CEMETERY
Federal officials have permanently halted excavation where a 34-story office tower is being built over a colonial-era cemetery for black New Yorkers.
The site's future will be decided by a national advisory panel that the officials plan to create with Mayor Dinkins.
B3.
OFFICERS PROTEST HANDLING OF INQUIRY
About 500 off-duty police officers protested outside a precinct in Brooklyn to vent their anger at what they called unfair treatment of police officers accused of beating a Bedford-Stuyvesant community leader and her grown children.
B3.
JAIL OFFICIAL ACCUSED OF HARASSMENT
The chief of jail security on Rikers Island is under investigation after an officer accused him of sexual harassment, the third such complaint since 1991.
The city's Correction Commissioner, Catherine M. Abate, gave investigators two weeks to complete their report.
B3.
SOOTHING WORDS FOR STATEN ISLAND
Mayor Dinkins is trying to assure the city's most alienated borough that City Hall cares about its problems, from transportation costs to worries about the Fresh Kills Landfill.
B3.
REGION COURT REAFFIRMS TOUGH RAPE LAW
In a ruling that reaffirmed one of the toughest rape laws in the nation, New Jersey's Supreme Court has ruled that physical force need not be involved in order to convict a person of sexual assault.
The justices used the case to expound on the subject of acquaintance rape, giving lower courts and prosecutors more latitude in handling those types of complaints.
B5.
NEW HAVEN HOSPITAL OFFERS HOME LOANS
In a move that reflects the worry many urban hospitals share about their increasingly dangerous neighborhoods, the Yale-New Haven Hospital says it plans to provide loans of up to $5,000 to help people buy homes in its neighborhood, the Hill, one of the city's most roughest sections.
B5.
NOT JUST ONE TROUBLED ROAD
The three-mile roller coaster stretch of Route 515 that cascades through Vernon, N.J., has become notorious in recent weeks as the site of two spectacular accidents.
But its mean history stretches back well over a decade, and the road is symptomatic of a broader and more pervasive problem in northwestern New Jersey.
B5.
Our Towns by Sam Howe Verhovek B6


NBC Says Its Loss Will Be Large But Ratings May Soothe the Sting
Despite higher ratings than projected, NBC acknowledged yesterday that it would lose $30 million to $40 million on its coverage of the 1992 Summer Olympics, largely because of its unsuccessful attempt to sell extensive cable programming on a pay-per-view basis.
NBC executives said they believed the ancillary benefits from the huge audiences watching the broadcast coverage, like improved ratings for NBC news programs, would help make up for what they are now calling a tolerable loss on the Olympics.
NBC paid $401 million for the rights to televise the Games in Barcelona, Spain, topping CBS's bid by $15 million.


On Your Mark, Get Set, Go Home: It's Drugs, Again
Four years after the biggest scandal in Olympic history and the day before the track and field competition of the Barcelona Games begins, yet another leading athlete became proof that drug use remains a prominent part of the sport, even on the sport's premier stage, the Olympics.
In an action that contained more than a touch of irony, a British sprinter known as Baby Ben for his resemblance to and fondness for Ben Johnson was sent home by British Olympic authorities today after a random drug test taken two weeks ago showed he had used an anabolic steroid, methandionone.
The athlete, Jason Livingston, is the current European indoor champion at 60 meters.


Market Place; A Cash Flood For Bond Funds
AMERICAN investors are pouring money into bond mutual funds at what may be the fastest rate ever, fund managers said yesterday.
And they said that stock funds, after dipping in popularity in June, appear to be bringing in more cash again.
"This is a spectacular sales environment," said Michael Hines, a vice president of Fidelity Investments, the nation's largest mutual fund company.
"July will be one of the strongest months we've ever had in the bond area."


Samuel J. Rozzi, 67; Police Commissioner Led Force in Nassau
Samuel J. Rozzi, the recently retired Police Commissioner of Nassau County, died yesterday at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
He was 67 years old and lived in Oyster Bay, L.I.
He died of heart failure, a police spokesman said.


Fair Haven for Haitian Refugees
The Bush Administration's heartless policy of turning back Haitians on the high seas has mercifully been reversed by a Federal appeals court.
The decision ought to persuade the Administration to reconsider the cruelty and unfairness of its actions.
The huge tide of Haitians fleeing the chaos and terror after last September's coup caused the U.S. to abandon normal principles of political asylum.
At first, many Haitians were forcibly returned.
Then the Administration allowed people picked up in leaky boats to be processed at the Guantanamo Bay naval base.


Loyalty to Homeland Loses To the Reality of Basketball
Igor Miglinieks could score 50 points on Friday in the Olympic basketball showdown against Lithuania, and he would still be no hero back home.
Quite the contrary.
In crossing the border to play for the Unified Team, Miglinieks and his fellow Latvian Goundars Vetra are regarded in Riga as traitors.
"My family and friends, they understand, but the Government does not," said Miglinieks from the Barcelona suburb where the Olympic basketball arena is situated.
"They say bad things on the radio and the TV."


Face Down the Other U.N. Outlaw
Having pressed Saddam Hussein to an honorable draw, the U.N.
Security Council now urgently needs to turn its attention to a parallel challenge.
For weeks the Khmer Rouge has been openly defying key provisions of the U.N.-sponsored Cambodia peace agreement, chiefly by refusing to disarm its troops and by preventing U.N. monitors from entering areas it controls.
The Bush Administration, which insisted on treating the Khmer Rouge as a legitimate participant in the peace process, now has a special responsibility to help bring these international outlaws to heel.


TVWeekend; Romance, Power, Greed: In the Heat, Trash Rises
Summer books, summer television: either way, trash tends to have the upper hand.
Touching both bases is "To Be the Best," a two-part, four-hour movie based on a best-selling novel by Barbara Taylor Bradford.
It is being broadcast on CBS this Sunday and Tuesday at 9 P.M.
Mrs.
Bradford's "Woman of Substance" was turned into a mini-series of substance several years ago.
This is the sequel.
Emma Harte, the beautiful and skilled entrepreneur who established Harte's London department store -- think Harrod's -- died a decade earlier.
Now the international Harte empire is being run by Paula O'Neill (Lindsay Wagner), Emma's favorite granddaughter, who saved the company from the greedy clutches of her rotten cousin Jonathan Ainsley (Christopher Cazenove).
Jonathan, of course, never stops scheming to destroy Paula.
Can Paula be as tough and shrewd as her beloved Grandy?
Up organ music, and out.


Gutsu Beats Miller and Stashes Gold in the Vault
Just two days ago, Tatyana Gutsu had no reason to expect that she would do anything more tonight than sit beside the competition floor, watching her three Unified Team mates prance through their routines in the all-around competition of the Barcelona Olympics.
But when their third qualifier, Roza Galyeva, developed a sore knee in practice, team officials decided to replace her with Gutsu, who had finished fourth.
It is a common practice in gymnastics, as the rules allow, even if the injury is not always so severe as officials would have you believe with a wink.


