With More to Recycle, a Village Closes Its Center
Back in 1971 after the first Earth Day, it was a sign of the environmentally conscious times when village fathers here decided to do their part for the planet by opening a recycling center.
Now, behind the village office building where people used to drop cans, bottles and other recyclables into big dumping bins, there is a newer sign of more complicated times.
It reads: "No Dumping."


Homesteaders in the Bronx Buck the Tide of Decay
WHEN you take one tired hulk of a building, rip up the floorboards, knock down the walls and rebuild it from scratch, it's called a gut rehab.
If you're Lucy Padron, it's a gutsy rehab.


Books of The Times; An American Master And New Discoveries
Richard Wright  Early Works: Lawd Today!, Uncle Tom's Children, Native Son  Notes by Arnold Rampersad  936 pages.
The Library of America. $35.
Richard Wright  Later Works: Black Boy (American Hunger), The Outsider  Notes by Arnold Rampersad  887 pages.
The Library of America. $35.


Board Likely to Be Ousted At Maxwell Communication
The fight for control of the Maxwell Communication Corporation neared a resolution today, and it seemed that the company's directors would be the losers.
An examiner appointed by a United States court and administrators appointed by an British court agreed to oversee the company's affairs together.
The implication, which could not be confirmed today, was they had agreed to oust the company's board, including the chairman, Peter Laister, who only took office on Dec. 3.


Avoiding 'Caregiver Burnout' In Alzheimer Family Groups
For the last 13 years, Josephine Mazur and her twin sister, Mary, have alternated on a two-week cycle as primary caregivers of their 94-year-old mother, who has Alzheimer's disease.
They do everything for her, including cleaning, dressing and feeding her, and they sometimes feel their efforts are at the expense of their own lives.
"Nowadays when I talk to her there's no response," said Josephine Mazur.
"She's literally like a six-month-old baby."


Matthew Boyer Weds Ms. Reid
Margaret Wetherill Reid, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward S. Reid of Tokyo, was married yesterday to Matthew Penn Boyer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Boyer of Washington, Conn.
The Rev.
Goldthwaite Sherrill performed the Episcopal ceremony at Grace Church in Brooklyn Heights.
Mrs.
Boyer, 26 years old, graduated from Vassar College and until recently was the studio manager of Lacombe Inc., a New York photographic studio.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell.


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY -- The Global Lab: Communications; A Network of Networks That Keeps Scientists Plugged In
From his laboratory in the hills above Los Angeles, Harvey Newman, a California Institute of Technology physicist, can control and monitor experiments taking place in a giant atom-smashing particle accelerator half a world away in Switzerland.
Dr.
Newman is one of a group of international researchers using the atom smasher in their hunt for the Higgs Boson, an elusive subatomic particle whose existence would help confirm the basic theories of modern particle physics.


Rangers Easily Beat Jets
Mark Messier and Adam Graves scored two goals each as the Rangers won the eighth game in their last 10 by beating the Winnipeg Jets, 5-2, here tonight.
Randy Gilhen also scored for the Rangers, who never trailed in the game before a sellout crowd of 15,486 fans, the largest of the season at the Winnipeg Arena.


Moving to Maryland
MARK DUFFNER, who coached Holy Cross to a perfect 11-0 season in 1991, received a five-year contract yesterday to revive the University of Maryland program.
"Our goal is to bring Maryland football back into a position of prominence," said Duffner, who will receive a $120,000 annual base salary.
"But it won't be a quick fix."


Cheating Scandal Jars a Suburb of High Achievers
In this affluent suburb on Chicago's North Shore, where large houses are set on richly landscaped lots and many residents are well-educated and highly paid professionals, it is not uncommon for parents to expect their children to score well above the national average on standardized tests.
So last year, when students in third grade at the Cherokee School received scores substantially above those of third-graders at the district's three other elementary schools, parents of students at those other schools wanted to know why.


Court Ends Suit Against Judge in 'Bonfires' Case
A Federal appeals court today dismissed Essex County's lawsuit against the Chief Justice of the New Jersey Supreme Court, who had banned the filming of a scene from "The Bonfire of the Vanities" inside a Newark courthouse.
In May 1990 Chief Justice Robert N. Wilentz banned Warner Bros. from shooting in the ornate Essex County Courthouse, saying he objected to a scene where blacks riot and chase a judge down the hallway of a courthouse.


Tolstoy Had a Vision Of Census Taker's Job
To the Editor:
In the honest but disturbing "I Find the Homeless Hateful" (Op-Ed, Dec. 8), Dale Maharidge quotes Tolstoy's wonderful, tearful response when told that the poor are an inevitable condition of civilization: "One cannot live so; one cannot; one cannot!"
Tolstoy, who was then 54, volunteered a month later to serve as a census taker in a Moscow slum.
Before undertaking his official duties, he wrote an article, "On the Moscow Census," setting forth his views on how to conduct a proper census.


METRO DIGEST
THE RISING FARE 10 CENTS MORE A RIDE
After scrambling to put together a makeshift financing plan, transit officials voted to raise New York City's subway and bus fare to $1.25 from $1.15.
Page 1.


Wine Talk
WHAT better day than the first of the new year to talk about vintages, and what better man to consult about them than the Sage of Old Nassau, Orley Ashenfelter?
Professor Ashenfelter, you may recall, is a Princeton University economist who has infuriated much of the wine establishment by insisting that the quality of a vintage and its subsequent market value depend almost entirely on the weather.
There is no need, he asserts, to taste and sniff.


A Rising Argument That Teaching Values Should Rank With Lessons
Kevin Walsh, an education professor at the University of Alabama, says that what is wrong with America's schools is not that Johnny can't do math.
Johnny can do math.
And he can read and write.
The problem, Professor Walsh says, is that Johnny does not write neatly or take time to punctuate properly.
When Johnny works through math problems, he often races to find a solution, seizing shortcuts and bypassing critical steps that prevent errors.


Ross to Leave Ga. Tech And Coach Chargers
In yesterday's episode of the National Football League Coaches Sweeps, Bobby (Ross) said yes to Bobby (Beathard) in San Diego and Buddy (Ryan) wants to be a buddy to Hugh (Culverhouse), who was spurned by Bill (Parcells), in Tampa Bay.
Yes, BOBBY ROSS resigned as Georgia Tech's coach and will sign a contract in San Diego tomorrow with General Manager BOBBY BEATHARD to become the Chargers' head coach.


Rite Aid Raises Offer for Revco
For the second time in a month, the Rite Aid Corporation has sweetened its offer to buy the rival pharmacy chain Revco D.S..
Rite Aid, which is trying to win approval from creditors for its plan to buy Revco, which is operating under bankruptcy protection, said today that it had raised the cash portion of its offer by $18.5 million, to about $538 million.


Best Food for Digs
To The Living Section:
Perhaps France is after all the best place for a dig  [ "For Archeologists, Joy Is Digging Through the Camp's Larder," Oct. 23 ] .
I spent a summer in the Dordogne some years ago, excavating a Mousterian site with Prof.
Francois Bordes of the University of Bordeaux.
We lived in tents in the field behind his stone farmhouse.
I used to prepare breakfast, fresh cafe au lait served in bowls, and fresh bread with sweet butter and jam.


The Pop Life; Top 12's, or So
Given that the average buyer of recordings has access to a wider span of music, both chronologically and geographically, than at any other time in history, compiling Top 10 lists might seem like an exercise in inadequacy.
So they've been expanded slightly, to Top 12 (more or less) lists that include a few anthologies.
The intention is to acknowledge that much of the century's musical splendor is out there, waiting.
Whatever else these lists offer -- a reflection of cultural movement, the importance of the artists, or simply each critic's idea of pleasure -- they are meant to provide a path through the last year in popular music.


Florio's Top Counsel Resigns to Join Firm
Gov.
Jim Florio announced today that his chief counsel, Andrew Weber, is leaving the administration to return to private practice.
Mr.
Weber, 44 years old, of Haddonfield, served as commissioner of the Department of Personnel from January through October 1990, when he was appointed chief counsel.


New Years
57-55-55-56-59.
As the old year clicked down on the world's clocks, he lay watching the bright orange numbers pulse across a computer monitor.
Now and then, when he sat up in the hospital bed, the numbers shot up too, triggering the flashing legend "Artifact," and then dropped back.
The throbbing numbers and the graph line measured out the heart beats of the old year.
Another new year, he thought, but how many more?


Change by Mesa
Mesa L.P. said it had completed its conversion to a corporate form from a partnership, effective today.
The company said the new shares of Mesa Inc. will begin trading on the New York Stock Exchange on Thursday under the symbol MXP.


BRIEFS
*
Armco Inc., Parsippany, N.J., a steel concern, and Cyclops Industries, Pittsburgh, postponed the shareholder votes on their proposed merger. *
Bowater Inc., Darien, Conn., completed its previously announced purchase of an 80 percent interest in Northern Paper Inc. from Georgia-Pacific Corp. for $300 million in cash.


Ease Load on Courts, Rehnquist Urges
Describing the Federal court system as "a resource which is both precious and exhaustible," Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist today called on Congress to shift some categories of cases to the state courts and to refrain from expanding Federal criminal jurisdiction.
"The time has come to re-examine the role of the Federal courts," the Chief Justice declared in his year-end report on the Federal judiciary.
He said the writers of the Constitution intended the Federal judicial system to have only a "limited role reserved for issues where important national interests predominate."


King Fahd Pledges Changes in Saudi Government
King Fahd of Saudi Arabia announced on Monday night that laws permitting the creation of a consultative council and other political reforms would be introduced in February, the Saudi Information Minister, Ali al-Shaer, said in Riyadh.
The King communicated his decision to widen the scope of government in what is viewed as the first substantial reforms in the Saudi Government structure to his Cabinet ministers in a meeting Monday night.


It's Not His Census Anymore
When Robert Mosbacher, the Secretary of Commerce, refused last July to adjust the 1990 Census to correct for the miscount of three to five million Americans, he took a regrettable but defensible position.
But when the same Robert Mosbacher, since designated as chairman of the 1992 Bush re-election campaign, won't give Congress the correction data, that's raw politics.
Rejecting the adjustment was unfortunate because most professionals agreed that present statistical methods could make the population count more accurate and fair.
Barbara Everitt Bryant, the Census Director, told the Secretary that not adjusting amounted to "denying that these five million persons exist."


Rebels Ready to Storm Parliament in Georgia
Georgian rebels bolstered their strongholds with heavy artillery today and appeared determined to storm the Parliament building to oust President Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia, who has taken refuge inside with several hundred troops.
Mr.
Gamsakhurdia, accused of being a dictator by the opposition, says the rebels are criminals trying to seize power.
His most prominent political opponent, Georgi Chanturia, said that while he was confident of victory, neither side had the force to achieve quick military success.


Neither War Nor Economic Slump Could Stem the '91 Market Surge
A year ago, few on Wall Street predicted the yearlong bull market to come.
Stock prices had slumped amid the apprehension of a nation poised for war, and the economy was in recession's clutches.
But when war came in the Persian Gulf in mid-January, it gave stocks their first lift, with prices rising sharply in the six weeks of fighting.
And even though economic recovery remained as elusive as a desert mirage for the rest of the year, ever-lower interest rates gave stocks a magnetic ability to attract cash and hold on to it.  20% Gain for the Dow


Clocks Are Fugitive: Will Father Time Now Carry a Watch?
LAST night, anyone with a television set and the stamina to fight off sleep could watch 1991 count itself out of existence.
But other than those expiring nanoseconds, the passing of the year was hard to track, because clocks are fading from neighborhood walls, and time's component minutes and hours plop into oblivion unheralded.
Not to say there aren't fancy new clocks: for one, those micronumbers on the VCR, although the time is often wrong because of lapses in resetting the displays.
But those numbers with a blinking hiatal colon serve only the insomniac, giving unwanted news, namely that anxiety has consumed one-quarter of a night's sleep, and still counting.


Who's No. 1? Keep a Close Waych on Both Coasts Babn on a Husker Is a Distraction At Orange Bowl
Nebraska's Cornhuskers, who came here to play in the 58th Orange Bowl as overlooked guests because of anticipation of a Miami national-championship party, were suddenly thrust into the spotlight today when they determined that questions about a player's eligibility could cost them their conference title.
Late this afternoon, one day before the bowl game, Nebraska officials determined that the use of Omar Soto, a senior fullback, could eventually lead the Cornhuskers to forfeit as many as four of their nine victories this season and to give up the Big Eight Conference championship that placed them here.


Market Outlook
Rarely has a year ended with such different messages coming from the stock market and the economy.
Tomorrow in Business Day: Year-end stock prices plus the outlook for domestic and foreign stocks, the credit markets and foreign exchange.


After Protest by Disabled, Clinton Restores Funds
After a group of protesters in wheelchairs shackled themselves in his office for 15 hours, Gov.
Bill Clinton agreed late Monday to restore financing that helps disabled people live at home.
The stalemate ended shortly before midnight Monday after Mr.
Clinton promised to restore Medicaid coverage of personal care to disabled people who would be forced to live in institutions like nursing homes without the aid, Lieut.
Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker said today.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-7  ACCORD ENDS El SALVADOR STRIFE
The Government of El Salvador and the leftist guerrillas who have fought to overthrow it for more than a decade announced in the first minutes of the new year a comprehensive plan to end their civil war.  1  PROLIFERATION OF SCIENTISTS?
Bush Administration officials expressed fear that the economic deterioration of the former Soviet Union, the demoralization of its military establishment and expected high unemployment may prompt some nuclear-weapons experts to sell their services abroad.  1  LOOKING AHEAD TO TOUGH TIMES
Russians like Mariya Vrublevskaya and her family have little idea how they will survive the economic storm that is about to engulf them when President Yeltsin removes food price subsidies on Thursday.  1  Unity or not, Soviet heirs ponder their fate.  4 THE WORLD'S BUSINESS
American companies are spreading their research and their development of products around the world, helping the creation of technology that transcend national borders.  1  BUSH IN AUSTRALIA
President Bush arrived in Australia, opening a 12-day Asian and Pacific trip intended to increase American exports.
The Australians, too, are in a deep recession. and they are running a big deficit with a major trading partner -- the United States.  6  Japan, another Bush stop, is trying to build its own spy apparatus.  6  GLIMMER OF HOPE IN YUGOSLAVIA
The United Nations special envoy, Cyrus Vance, won agreement from Yugoslav and Serbian officials on a plan for sending peacekeeping forces and for the withdrawal of Yugoslav troops and Serbian irregulars from Croatia.3  SAUDI KING PROMISES CHANGES
Fahd of Saudi Arabia announced that laws permitting the creation of a consultative council and other political reforms would be introduced in February.  3  A U.S. aide says Muslim militancy is becoming a greater concern.  3  North and South Korea initialed a nuclear ban accord.  2  A plan advanced to end the war in the Western Sahara.  2  Berlin Journal: Anti-profiteering at Checkpoint Charlie.  4  National 8-10  THE 1991 BULL MARKET
A year ago few on Wall Street predicted a yearlong bull market.
But the victory of the Persian Gulf war and cuts in interest rates prompted a rally that gave stocks their best December on record.  1  BUT IS HE PRESIDENTIAL?
Paul Tsongas treads the Presidential campaign trail delivering a hair-shirt message: the American economy is doomed to decline unless it rebuilds its manufacturing base.
While the time may be right for his pitch, Tsongas delivers it with such blandness that few political experts take him seriously.  10  CLINTON CONCEDES TO DISABLED
After protesters in wheelchairs shackled themselves to his office, Gov.
Bill Clinton agreed to restore financing that helps disabled people live at home.  9  EASY RIDER, PROTECTED RIDER
Many motorcyclists in California think of riding without a helmet as a natural right, but a new state law makes such freedom illegal.  8  NO MORE CASES, PLEASE
The Chief Justice asked Congress to lighten the caseload of the Federal courts by shifting some categories of cases to the state courts and refraining from expanding Federal jurisdiction.  8  DAMS AND THE ENVIRONMENT
As the licenses of scores of hydroelectric dams come up for review, a Federal energy agency is promising to make sure the dams will be operated in ways that are less harmful to the environment.  9  PROTECTION, WITH LIMITS, FOR BEAR
The United States Fish and Wildlife Service has listed the Louisiana black bear, the model for the traditional teddy bear, as a threatened species, but will continue to allow logging in the areas where the bear lives.  9  IMPLANT MAKER STOPS TALKING
After Federal officials accused it of misleading consumers, the leading maker of breast implants told its employees to curb what it tells callers to its hot line.  8  A Maine man gets a life sentence for killing his neighbors.9  Education Page 32  Metropolitan Digest, 33  FARE RISE VOTED
Transit officials officially voted to raise the New York City bus and subway fare to $1.25, from $1.15, after scrambling to approve a tentative financing plan that would close a projected $263 million budget deficit for 1992.
Mitchell D. Schweitzer, former New York State Supreme Court Justice  Editorials/Op-Ed 30-31  Editorials 30  New years.
It's not his census anymore.
Doors begin to open in Korea.
David C. Unger: China.
Letters 30  Leslie H. Gelb: Freedom against all odds.  31  Debora Greger: Persephone in the west.  31  Derek Walcott: Homeric chorus.  31  Mark Strand: A poem for the new year.  31  Eamon Grennan: First snow.  31  Louise Gluck: The wild iris.  31


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY -- The Global Lab: Agriculture; U.S. Biotech Seeks Foreign Backers
In agricultural biotechnology, the contrast between the American style of creating new businesses and the approach in Europe and Japan is especially stark.
The difference has direct bearing on the way biotechnology companies tend to form their foreign alliances, with smaller American players teaming up with bigger overseas companies.
Although some big American corporations like Monsanto have invested heavily in biotechnology, many of the most intriguing developments in the United States have been reported by entrepreneurial start-up concerns like Mycogen, Ecogen, Calgene, Crop Genetics, Biotechnica and DNA Plant Technologies.


Who's No. 1? Keep a Close Waych on Both Coasts At Rose, Huskies Try to Insure 12-0
The winner of college football's mythical national championship won't be decided until later, when polls are taken and computers are fed the appropriate post-bowl game information, but the arguing is likely to start in the late hours of New Year's Day.
Back East, in the Orange Bowl against Nebraska, Miami (11-0) will have the most significant voice in determining the unofficial No. 1 team for this season, but out here, where the 78th Rose Bowl will be played Wednesday, it remains a distinct possibility that either Washington (11-0) or Michigan (10-1) could end up as the nation's top-ranked team.


Business Digest
The Global Lab
U.S. companies are spreading their research and product development around the world, helping to turn the creation of technology into an activity that transcends national borders.
The trend raises tough new issues for policy makers intent on preserving jobs for Americans and keeping the nation competitive in high technology.
Business Technology: A special report.  [ Page 1. ]


Dancing Into the New Year at Grand Central


Miss Scott Wed To Eric Stabler
Tracy Anne Scott, the special events coordinator for the Bank of Boston, and Eric Atkinson Stabler, a lawyer in Boston, were married yesterday.
Msgr.
Kenneth Roeltgen officiated at the Shrine of the Most Blessed Sacrament in Washington.
The Rev.
Peter Coffin, an Episcopal priest, gave the blessing
Mrs.
Stabler, 28 years old, graduated from Denison University, as did the bridegroom, and is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Walker Scott of Chevy Chase, Md.
Her father is the managing partner of the Washington law firm of Collier, Shannon &amp; Scott.


Diana Adler, 73, Dies; A Fashion Designer
Diana Adler, a New York fashion designer for almost 40 years, died yesterday morning at her home in Manhattan.
She was 73 years old.
Ms.
Adler died as the result of a heart ailment, said her daughter, Pamela Adler Golden of Goldens Bridge, N.Y.


F. W. Pearce Wed to Alice Babcock
Alice Hall Babcock, a picture editor for Entertainment Weekly magazine, and Frederick William Pearce, the owner of the Ciao Bella Gelato Company, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
David C. Reade officiated at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from Duke University.
She is the daughter of Martha K. Babcock and the late Jay P. Babcock, both of New York.
Her father was a stockbroker at Dean Witter Reynolds in New York.
Her mother is the chief of research at Entertainment Weekly.


Holtz Realizes He Must Face Some Harsh New Realities
Perhaps the most significant news out of Louisiana came late last week when Lou Holtz, the Notre Dame head coach, said that he would serve as the defensive coordinator when the Irish faced Florida on Wednesday night in the Sugar Bowl.
While Notre Dame's defense has often leaked like a sieve during the last two seasons, Holtz's decision to take the reins from Gary Darnell reflects the depth of his disappointment and may be the precursor to a shake-up in his staff.


Dollar Off in Slow Trading And Gold Is Mostly Higher
The dollar settled mostly lower on world currency markets yesterday in extremely light dealings, but it was mixed compared with its levels a year ago.
Gold prices were mostly higher.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $354.10 an ounce, up $1.30 from Monday but $40.10 below its 1990 close of $394.20.
The Republic National Bank quoted a late bid of $354 an ounce, up $1.30 an ounce from Monday.


Many Midwests
To The Living Section:
Having lived in Ohio for 19 years and eaten at the Golden Lamb restaurant in Lebanon on a few occasions, I enjoyed seeing your story  [ "Going Home (to a Hotel) for Holiday Meals," Dec. 18 ] .


New Year's Day
NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES -- Closed.
POST OFFICE -- Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.


Correction
Because of an editing error a letter Monday by Ervin C. Brody about Boris Godunov misstated Czarevich Dmitri's family relationship.
He was Czar Fyodor's brother, not Godunov's.


Bank Fund, C.D. Yields Down Again
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit were down for the week that ended yesterday, as the effects of Federal Reserve's latest discount rate cut, and the prime rate cut by most commercial banks that soon followed, continued to affect savings returns.
The lowering of interest rates this year to help a faltering economy has also played havoc with savings.
According to The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest-rate publication, the highest yield on a money market account at the beginning of the year was 7.57 percent, and that was more than the best yield on a five-year certificate the previous week.


Marcor Resorts Sells Properties
Marcor Resorts Inc. said it had sold its commercial real estate operations and all its real estate holdings except the Rio Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas for $25.8 million.
The company said it had sold the assets to Focus 2000 Inc., a private company controlled by Marcor's chairman, Anthony Marnell 2d.
The transaction increased Marcor's shareholder equity by about $7 million, the company said.
The sale relieved the company of $19.4 million in debt owed to Marnell-controlled affiliates and $6.4 million owed to third parties.
The sale allows the company to focus all its attention on the Rio Hotel.


That 'Me Decade'
To The Living Section:


He Knows How to Protect the Water Supply
To the Editor:
"The Price of a $600 Million Gaffe" (editorial, Dec. 17), calling for the reassignment of Albert Appleton, New York City's Commissioner of Environmental Protection, illustrates myopia about his record and the role of the Department of Environmental Protection.
Yes, the department is primarily a public utility but until Mr.
Appleton took over, it was run as little more than a plumbing outfit on a grand scale.


Ross to Leave Ga. Tech And Coach Chargers
In yesterday's episode of the National Football League Coaches Sweeps, Bobby (Ross) said yes to Bobby (Beathard) in San Diego and Buddy (Ryan) wants to be a buddy to Hugh (Culverhouse), who was spurned by Bill (Parcells), in Tampa Bay.
Yes, BOBBY ROSS resigned as Georgia Tech's coach and will sign a contract in San Diego tomorrow with General Manager BOBBY BEATHARD to become the Chargers' head coach.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Named Daniel McCarthy general partner. National League
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Signed Bob Walk, pitcher, to a two-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
NBA -- Fined Chuck Person, Indiana Pacers forward, $7,500, for elbowing a Chicago Bulls player.
Fined Scott Williams; Stacey King; Cliff Levingston; Will Perdue; Bobby Hansen; B.J.
Armstrong, and Craig Hodges of Chicago and George McCloud; Greg Dreiling; LaSalle Thompson; Dale Davis, and Kenny Williams of Indiana, $500, for leaving their benches.
LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Waived Tony Brown, forward.
MIAMI HEAT -- Activated Sherman Douglas, guard.
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Placed Brian Williams, forward, on the injured list.
Signed Anthony Bowie, guard.
Continental Basketball Association
OMAHA RACERS -- Signed Paul Weakley, forward.
Activated Jim Thomas, guard.
Football  National Football League
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Named Bobby Ross coach. College
GEORGIA TECH -- Announced the resignation of Bobby Ross, football coach.
MARYLAND -- Named Mark Duffner football coach and signed him to a five-year contract.
MINNESOTA -- Named Bob DeBesse offensive coordinator; Marc Dove defensive coordinator; Scott Brown defensive line coach; Chip Garber defensive backs coach; Noel Mazzone quarterbacks coach; Hugh Nall tight ends coach; Joe Pannunzio offensive line coach, and Charlie Williams, wide receivers coach.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Victory for Ivanisevic Top-seeded Goran Ivanisevic of the breakaway Yugoslav rebublic of Croatia defeated Nicklas Kulti of Sweden, 6-3, 6-3, yesterday in the first round of the Australian Hardcourt championship in Adelaide.
In the second round, Ivanisevic will play Stefano Pescosolido of Italy, who beat Jimmy Arias of the United States, 6-2, 7-6 (7-4), in his opening match.
In another first-round match, John Fitzgerald of Australia upset second-seeded Jan Siemerink of the Netherlands, 6-2, 7-6 (7-3).
Fifth-seeded Thomas Muster of Austria and eight-seeded Cristiano Caratti of Italy joined Siemerink on the sideline.
Bryan Shelton of the United States beat Muster, 6-3, 4-6, 7-6 (7-1), and Marc Rosset of Switzerland defeated Caratti, 3-6, 6-3, 6-3. (AP)


Pirates' Pact for Walk
The Pittsburgh Pirates signed the veteran free-agent pitcher BOB WALK to a two-year contract worth about $3 million.
Walk was 9-2 with a 3.60 earned run average last season, but one of the reasons the Pirates' withdrew an initial two-year offer was over concerns about the 35-year-old pitcher's health.
The right-hander missed 66 games with groin and hamstring injuries in 1991 and has been on the disabled list four times in the last two seasons. (AP)


Berlin Journal; Ghost of Checkpoint Charlie Haunts a Big Builder
Rainer Hildebrandt knows the taste of confrontation.
He was at Checkpoint Charlie in August 1961, when American tanks stared down the Soviets as the Berlin wall was being built.
Ask him the names of the tunnels they dug under Bernauer Strasse or over in Heinrich-Heine-Strasse, and he can give you the details of how


Harris Gets $1.7 Billion F.A.A. Job
The Federal Aviation Administration selected the Harris Corporation today to produce a $1.7 billion air traffic control system to be installed nationwide over the next 14 years.
Harris was selected over American Telephone and Telegraph Technologies Inc., a subsidiary of the giant phone company, because its prototype performed better during trials this summer, agency officials said.


Hong Kong Comes to the U.S., Whole Fish, Noodles and All
IT is noon on the Bowery in Chinatown and there is not an empty seat at Noodletown, an unassuming restaurant that specializes in homemade noodles and wontons.
The air is thick with the singsong melody of spoken Cantonese as customers hunch over bowls of steaming noodles and plates of barbecued goose and salt-baked cuttlefish.
The scene could pass for any neighborhood restaurant in Hong Kong.
Not far away, at the more sedate Eastern Villa on Mott Street, a waiter dips a net into a tank of live fish, nabs one and takes it over, still squirming, to some customers for their examination.
He heads for the kitchen and reappears not long after with a platter holding the whole fish steamed with scallions and ginger root.
Other dishes include grilled skewered eel, steamed whole shrimp in the shell, fried young chicken with pickled vegetable, and stir-fried snow pea shoots with crab meat.


Gay Groups Call Police Decoys Ineffective
A new police decoy program, in which officers pose as homosexual men to attract people who attack homosexuals in the West Village, is drawing fire from gay and lesbian groups who say it is not working and is a waste of police resources.
The decoys have not made a single bias-related arrest since the program began almost three months ago, in part, the groups say, because the officers have failed to make themselves obvious targets by holding hands or hanging around gay bars.


State Lets New York Avoid a Filter Plant
New York City does not have to filter drinking water from its Catskill and Delaware watersheds -- at least for now, the state Department of Health announced today.
The department's action brings New York City one step closer to its goal of avoiding building a filtration plant for the two watersheds to comply with new Federal clean water standards.
Such a plant would cost an estimated $4 billion.


Japanese New Year's Eve Ritual: TV Song Contest
Fifteen minutes before midnight, one of the titanic battles of 1991 came to an end on television as the Reds triumphed over the Whites.
Most of Japan was said to be watching.
In a nation of many rituals, the New Year in Japan is in a class by itself.
It is time for praying at shrines, sending out greeting cards, putting up decorations of pine branches, bamboo and straw in front of houses and pounding gobs of rice into a gooey edible paste called mochi.


Benjamin J. Buttenwieser, Investment Banker, 91
Benjamin J. Buttenwieser, a banker, philanthropist and civic leader, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 91 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack after being admitted to the hospital with low blood pressure, his family said.


Review/Theater; Even a 'Foolproof' Role Makes Its Demands
Commenting on "As You Like It," George Bernard Shaw said that "Rosalind is to the actress what Hamlet is to the actor." By that he meant that, given a performer's "reasonable presentability," failure is "hardly possible." In both instances, Shaw was probably being intentionally ingenuous.
Neither character is foolproof and each poses a formidable challenge.
Rosalind demands an actress with charm as well as insouciant humor, which is what the role receives from Joanne Camp in the production at the Pearl Theater Company.


Economic Scene; Zionist Dreams, Capitalist Reality
DO Israel's born-again capitalist policy makers truly, sincerely wish to live by the rules of free markets?
Conservative critics -- notably, Alvin Rabushka, an economist at the Institute for Advanced Strategic and Political Studies in Jerusalem -- contend big government is an addiction that Israel will not kick until it is threatened with the loss of American aid.
But Benjamin Gaon disagrees.
And as the chief executive of Koor Industries, his views cannot be lightly dismissed.
Four years ago Koor was the very symbol of Israeli-style statism, an arteriosclerotic, union-owned behemoth that measured success by the size of the payroll.
Today, thanks in part to a tough stance by the Israeli Government, Koor is a lean-and-mean conglomerate that sheds money-losing businesses faster than you can say "Charles Darwin."


Advertisers Shying From Magic's Touch
It has taken several weeks, but America has begun to emotionally distance itself from Magic Johnson.
In a recent article by The Associated Press, a spokesman for Pepsi-Cola, Andrew Giangola, brazenly admitted that a new promotional campaign featuring Johnson, whose contract with that company expires next summer, "is not on the front burner."
The article also quoted Marty Blackman, of the advertising consulting firm Blackman &amp; Rayber Limited, on the likelihood that "companies will fully support his public commitment and refrain from using him in active advertising."


Wheat and Soybeans Rise; Oil Prices Are Up Sharply
Wheat and soybean futures prices recovered from their recent selloff to close higher today, while crude oil prices jumped on year-end buying.
Wheat fell Monday on the possibility that the splitting of the Soviet Union could diminish food aid from the United States.
Soybean prices fell on expectations of large deliveries for both beans and soybean oil when the current contracts expire.


Sterling Optical In Bankruptcy
The Sterling Optical Corporation said today that it had filed for bankruptcy protection and had agreed to sell its stores.
Sterling, an eyeglass retailer based in Hackensack, filed for protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code in Manhattan, the company said in a statement, which provided no explanation for the filing.


Kristina E. Hill Weds in Greenwich
Kristina Evelyn Hill, the daughter of Barbara A. Hill of Tampa, Fla., and John U. Hill of Fort Myers, Fla., was married yesterday to Philip Bradford McDonough, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. McDonough of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
John W. Bishop officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
McDonough, 28 years old, is to become a vice president this month at Lipper &amp; Company, New York investment bankers.
She graduated from Lake Forest College and has an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.
Her father owns a fishing company in Fort Myers.
Her mother, a sculptor and independent curator, is the Coordinator of Art in Public Places for the City of Tampa.


U.N. Envoy Wins Yugoslav Peace Move
The United Nations special envoy, Cyrus R. Vance, won formal agreement from Serbian and Yugoslav officials today for a plan providing for a cease-fire, the deployment of United Nations peacekeeping forces and the withdrawal of the pro-Serb Yugoslav Army and Serb irregular units from the war-ravaged breakaway republic of Croatia.
The agreement today offers a glimmer of hope that progress has been made toward ending the six-month Serb-Croat war, which has taken thousands of lives and destroyed scores of towns and villages.
But despite the assurances given by the Serbs, serious doubts remain that the United Nations will be able to bring in peacekeeping forces any time soon because the crucial first step, a lasting cease-fire on Croatia's battlefields, has yet to be fulfilled despite 14 previous truce agreements.


Francis Tursi Is Dead; Professor of Viola, 69
Francis Tursi, a chamber musician and professor of viola at the Eastman School of Music for 36 years, died on Sunday at Bryn Mawr Hospital after a heart attack.
He was 69 years old and lived in Bryn Mawr.
Mr.
Tursi, originally from Camden, N.J., studied viola and composition at the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia.
He continued his composition studies with Bernard Rogers and Howard Hanson and received degrees from the Eastman School at the University of Rochester in 1946 and 1947.
He joined the faculty there in 1949.


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY -- The Global Lab: Semiconductors; Costs May Be Too High For All-American Chips
When the Reagan Administration first pressed to open Japan's market to American semiconductors in the mid-1980's, the issue seemed as straightforward as an on-off switch: There were American chips, which the Japanese were not buying, and there were Japanese chips, of which the Japanese could not seem to buy enough.
The result was the United States-Japan semiconductor trade agreement.
But when the pact came up for renewal this past year, American companies were still complaining that their market share still fell far short.
In private conversation, however, many corporate executives acknowledged that the whole idea of an all-American chip was fast becoming a historical artifact.
No industry has seen a bigger blitz of international alliances.


Cowboys Not Lacking Incentive
A team in the second round of the National Football Conference playoffs probably doesn't need any extra motivation.
But for the Dallas Cowboys, some added incentive for their game against the Detroit Lions at the Silverdome in Pontiac, Mich., Sunday can't hurt.
The Cowboys were mowed down near Motown on Oct. 27, 34-10.
In that game, Dallas outgained Detroit in total yards, 415-208, but turned the ball over four times, had a blocked field goal returned for a touchdown and gave up 24 second-half points.


Officer Kills Unarmed Man In Brooklyn
A police officer shot an unarmed man to death in Brooklyn last night, apparently mistaking the bottle he held in a paper bag for a gun, the police said.
Hector Rivera, 47 years old, was arguing with his stepson and his stepson's wife near his home at 12 Fayette Street in Bushwick at about 5:30 P.M., the police and one eyewitness said.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 27
Dec. 20
Dec. 28
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.4
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.1
2.9
Gasoline stocks
216.3
214.8
223.6
Distillate stocks
142.9
140.8
130.1
Crude imports, daily
5.0
5.4
4.4
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.9
2.1
Crude stocks
325.5
335.8
327.9
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
87.0
87.1
84.3
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Newmark &amp; Lewis Closing 12 Stores
Newmark &amp; Lewis Inc., a New York City-area electronics and appliance dealer, said it would close 12 stores in January.
That would leave the retailer, which began 1991 with 67 stores, with just 14 outlets.
Ronald Fleischer, the company's chief executive, said holiday sales were substantially below expectations.
He said the economy had worsened since Newmark &amp; Lewis filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in late August.
About 100 employees are expected to be affected by the closings.
Mr.
Fleischer said the company would try to relocate some workers.


Bush, in Australia, Under Fire on Trade
President Bush opened a 12-day crusade today to increase American exports in the Western Pacific, picking as his first stop a country that, like his own, is mired in recession, running a 2-to-1 deficit with a major trading partner, and angry about the protectionism it says has sustained that sorry ratio.
But the villain here is not Japan, with which Australia actually enjoys a multibillion-dollar trade surplus.
Rather it is the United States that stands accused of holding off Australia's wheat and cattle industries in the name of protectionism, a charge that is getting Mr.
Bush's crusade for free trade in the Pacific off to a bumpy start.


Accord Reached to Halt Civil War in El Salvador
The Government of El Salvador and the leftist guerrillas who have fought to overthrow it for more than a decade announced in the first minutes of the new year a comprehensive plan to end their civil war.
Their accord capped an extraordinary day and night of talks that saw the departing Secretary General of the United Nations, Javier Perez de Cuellar, postpone his retirement hour after hour to continue prodding the negotiators to settle their differences before the year ended.


Fare Wars in Albany: City-Suburban Clash
Behind the mixed signals today over just what the State Senate will do to hold the New York City bus and subway fare to $1.25 is a long-simmering clash between the six Republican Senators from New York City and many of their suburban counterparts in the Republican-led chamber.
The dynamics of power in the Legislature here are often cast along geographical fault lines, with the Democratic-led Assembly catering to New York City interests and the Senate representing its suburban and upstate constituents.


Quotation of the Day
"We are slowly dying, just as the Bible said we would. The only expectation is for things to get worse. Either there will be a civil war or we will all burn together, as it is written in the Apocalypse." -- MARIYA Y. VRUBLEVSKAYA, a retired factory worker in Moscow.  [ 4:2. ]


Sports of The Times; Never Back Hurricanes Into a Corner
THE assorted wizards, soothsayers and microchips have made a grievous mistake in recent polls.
They have given the Miami Hurricanes a cause, a mission, a common enemy.
This is never a good idea.
The Hurricanes are currently under the impression that some voters do not want them to win the unofficial national college football championship for the fourth time in a decade.
They are, if not mad, then bitter.
It works out the same.


Detectives Search for Clues in Fire That Ravaged New Rochelle


Windstorm Kills 100 People In Three Provinces in Vietnam
High winds devastated parts of two Vietnamese coastal provinces over the weekend, killing at least 100 people and leaving nearly 500 missing, the official Vietnam News Agency reports.
The agency, in a dispatch seen here in Bangkok today, said 22 people died Saturday morning when a windstorm struck Quang Nam and Da Nang Provinces, destroying or sweeping away many boats in its path.
It said 193 people were missing, with a greater number possible.


No Headline
Because of holiday production requirements, The Times is printed today in two sections.
The Living Section begins on page 25, Business Day on page 45; Health is on page 64.


Editorial Notebook; The World Through Beijing's Eyes
From America, China's leaders look tough, dangerous and maddeningly contemptuous of international opinion.
From close up, they look worried about adverse international trends, frightened by their post-Tiananmen isolation and willing to make pragmatic concessions.
There's no getting around many pernicious Chinese policies.
But by understanding Beijing's state of mind, Washington can respond in ways that increase American leverage.
Beijing offends international decency in a variety of ways.
It profits from prison labor and tolerates copyright piracy.
It relentlessly persecutes people who campaign for democracy and for self-rule in Tibet.
It supplies arms to Myanmar's murderous State Law and Order Restoration Council and, until recently, to Cambodia's genocidal Khmer Rouge.
It exports missiles to Syria and shares nuclear technology with Iran, Algeria and Pakistan.
When other countries protest, Beijing accuses them of impermissible interference in Chinese domestic affairs or colonialist trampling on China's culture and sovereignty.
No context can justify China's misdeeds or negate the need for a vigorous American response.
The challenge for Washington is to find responses likely to yield constructive results.
Deng Xiaoping and his hard-line allies crushed the 1989 democracy protests because they believed their survival was at stake.
Now, Beijing believes it has restored political stability.
China's rulers are unlikely to agree to release all political prisoners immediately for fear of resurrecting a powerful movement.
But they can and should be pressed toward leniency, case by case.
Prison exports and copyright violations grow out of the lawless atmosphere created by decades of revolutionary convulsions.
China's leaders are, on their own, taking steps toward rebuilding the rule of law.
These trade abuses also reflect Beijing's desperate drive to accumulate hard currency for development.
For Washington to threaten stiff trade sanctions if these practices persist is both appropriate and effective.
China's arms sales to tyrants and belligerents is deplorable.
But until the U.S. renounces such sales for itself, it cannot credibly demand purity from China.
U.S. diplomats have consistently raised arms sales and proliferation issues with Beijing, sometimes to good effect.
These efforts are worth continuing, and toughening.
Last month China assured Secretary of State Baker that it would soon ratify the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
Even now, Beijing is said to be applying treaty rules to its civilian nuclear cooperation with Iran.
China has also been prepared, for its own reasons, to discourage North Korea from developing nuclear weapons.
When viewed from Beijing, the Bush Administration's China policies seem tougher than many American critics think.
U.S. sanctions against China stayed in place far longer than Europe's or Japan's.
And while top leaders of other Western countries are again visiting Beijing, America has limited official travel to a tough-talking working visit by the Secretary of State.
America is now in an excellent position to work for changes in China.
But to do so, the Administration needs to rebuild a consensus on policy toward Beijing.
That consensus collapsed not only because of Beijing's murderous repression, but also President Bush's repeated stumbles in the months following the Tiananmen massacre.
The ideal way to undo the damage would be for the public to hear a clear articulation of U.S. values and purposes, direct from President Bush.


CHRONICLE
The poet ALLEN GINSBERG was discharged from Mary Imogene Bassett Hospital in Cooperstown, N.Y., on Saturday.
He had entered the hospital the week before with a heart ailment.
Marc Olmstead, an associate of Mr.
Ginsberg's in San Francisco, where the poet had been scheduled to read at the convention of the Modern Language Association of America on Sunday, said Mr.
Ginsberg suffered mild congestive heart failure on Dec. 21.


New-Home Sales Flat In November
New-home purchases held steady in November despite the lowest mortgage rates in nearly two decades as strong sales in the South and West offset a huge decline in the Northeast, the Government said today.
The Commerce Department reported that new single-family houseswere sold at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 520,000 units in November, unchanged from October.


Alfred S. Moss, 79, Advertising Executive
Alfred Spellman Moss, a retired advertising and publishing executive, died on Dec. 19 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.
Mr.
Moss, who had an M.B.A. degree from Harvard University, retired three years ago as business manager of the Thomas Publishing Company in Manhattan.
He remained a consultant for the company until last year.


Small Software Maker Names Chief Executive
Notable Technologies Inc., a start-up company specializing in software for pen-based computers, has named Ronald J. Brown its president and chief executive.
Mr.
Brown joins Notable, a private company based in Oakland, Calif., from Computerland, where he was senior vice president in charge of national accounts and vendor sales programs.
Mr.
Brown, 58, succeeds Richard A. Ross, Notable's founder, who was an early software engineer at the Lotus Development Corporation.
Mr.
Ross continues as chairman and chief technologist.


Raymond Guest, 84, Ambassador, Polo Player and Breeder of Horses
Raymond R. Guest, a former Ambassador to Ireland who was a champion polo player and horse breeder, died yesterday in Mary Washington Hospital in Fredericksburg, Va.
He was 84 years old and lived in King George, Va.
He died of pneumonia after a long illness, his family said.


Russ Togs Posts Loss
Russ Togs Inc. posted a third-quarter loss of $4.8 million yesterday, compared with a loss of $2.5 million in the comparable period a year earlier.
The apparel maker, which is operating under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code, said its sales rose 3.6 percent, to $71.3 million from $68.8 million.


INSIDE
Icon and a Church Divided
The Greek Orthodox Archdiocese is casting doubts on the Weeping Icon stolen from a dissident Greek Orthodox church in Queens.
Page 33.
Gays Assail Decoy Unit
A police unit to end "gay bashing" in the West Village has been attacked by homosexual groups.
Page 35.
New Yankees Executive
Daniel R. McCarthy was chosen as the Yankees' managing partner.
The Commissioner is concerned.
Page 41.
Yugoslav Peace Move Gains
Cyrus R. Vance won formal agreement from Serb and Yugoslav officials for a plan providing for United Nations peacekeeping forces.
Page 3.


Bridge
Natural bidding runs into problems when it has to deal with direct raises.
The two-level and three-level are available to deal with three types of hand: weak, invitational and game-forcing.
In classical methods the single raise was always weak, the double raise always forcing, and the responder had to fudge with an intermediate hand of about 11 points.
Nowadays the limit raise is standard, so the 11-point hand can jump, but stronger hands have to use an artificial solution.


U.N. Plan for Saharan Voting Gains Support
A United Nations plan for ending the 16-year civil war in Western Sahara advanced today when the United Nations Security Council gave qualified support to proposals for organizing a referendum to determine the territory's future.
The departing Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, has drawn up guidelines for determining who should vote in this referendum.
The guidelines have been strongly criticized by the Polisario Front, which has been fighting Morocco for control of Western Sahara since Spain gave up the former colony in 1975.


Brett Aronow, Manager, Weds
Jennifer Brett Aronow, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Phillip Z. Aronow of Haddonfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Keith Raywood Stein, a son of Dorothy Price of Ojai, Calif., and Robert Stein of New York.
Judge Louis G. F. Retacco of the Philadelphia Municipal Court officiated at the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia.
Ms.
Aronow, 28 years old, is known as Brett and is keeping her name.
She is the circulation and operations manager of Calyx &amp; Corolla Inc., a San Francisco mail-order flower company.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and has an M.B.A. from Stanford University.
Her father is chief of surgery for the Marlton (N.J.) Division of the West Jersey Health System.
Her mother, Nila Aronow, is the executive producer for arts programming at the New Jersey Network, the state public television system in Trenton.


Unity or Not? Soviet Heirs View 1992
Sixty-nine years ago, Communists from Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and the Caucasus ushered in the New Year by proclaiming a new Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Meeting in Minsk on the anniversary of that fateful event, the 11 successors to that union seemed to recoil from anything that might vaguely resemble the deed of their predecessors.


TOKEN PRICE RISES 10 CENTS, TO $1.25, IN NEW YORK CITY
Transit officials, after scrambling to put together a makeshift, tentative financing plan, officially voted yesterday to raise New York City's subway and bus fare to $1.25, from $1.15.
The new fare took effect at 12:01 A.M. today.
Tokens bought before the new fare went into effect will be accepted for an unspecified time, transit officials said.


Food Notes
Herring for Luck
In the South, black-eyed peas are the food for New Year's Day.
In Tuscany it's lentils.
In Eastern Europe, herring is a traditional symbol of good luck.
These days, the people of that region those need all they can get of both luck and herring.
For New Yorkers who want to try herring for a better 1992, one long-established source for the fish, in a variety of styles, is Russ &amp; Daughters, 179 East Houston Street (near Allen Street).
The store has been in business since 1914.
It is now featuring lightly salted matjes herrings, imported from Holland.
The silken-textured herrings are $2.99 each and will be filleted to order.
The store also sells fat Icelandic schmaltz herrings, cured in salt, for $2.25 each, or $1.25 for a single fillet.
German-style rollmops stuffed with onions are $1.99 each.
Ruddy Swedish matjes herrings with their sweet cure are $1.95 for a fillet; they come in the store's own brown sugar and cranberry sauce.
Pickled herrings -- plain, in cream sauce or mustard sauce -- are $1.75 each and chopped herring is $5.99 a pound.
Russ &amp; Daughters is open today from 9 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Normal hours are 9 A.M. to 6 P.M. seven days a week; (212) 475-4880.
Park Slope Patisserie
Dukens Daniel, a Haitian lawyer, immigrated to Brooklyn 26 years ago and wound up baking instead of practicing law.
He baked first at Ebinger's and then, after that company went out of business in the early 1970's, he baked for 19 years at William Greenberg Jr.
Desserts in Manhattan.
He opened his own bakery, Patisserie Daniel, at 388 Seventh Avenue (11th Street) in Park Slope, Brooklyn, two years ago.
"I waited until I could afford to buy a building because I did not want to have to depend on the whims of a landlord," Mr.
Daniel said.
The years spent at Greenberg's have left an indelible mark on Mr.
Daniel's baking.
Devotees of that bakery will recognize and appreciate Mr.
Daniel's delicious glazed dark chocolate cake, his buttery cookies, his hamantaschen and his schnecken.
He has put his own stamp on other items like breads, muffins, elegant little lemon meringue tarts, cheesecakes, brownies and pies.
Cookies are $15 a pound; chocolate cake is $12.95 for the 6-inch and $21.50 for the 8-inch size; small schnecken are 85 cents; brownies are $2, and a 6-inch cheesecake is $15.95.
The shop is open Monday through Friday, 6 A.M. to 9:30 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, 6 A.M. to 6 P.M.; (718) 832-2323 or 832-2360.
Cooking Charitably
Project Open Hand, founded in San Francisco in 1985, provides meals for people with AIDS.
In 1989, the group published "The Open Hand Cookbook," edited by Robert C. Schneider (Pocket Books, $18.95), with recipes by chefs from the San Francisco Bay area; it was a successful fund-raising effort.
Now it has been followed by "The Open Hand Celebration Cookbook," edited by Stanley Eichelbaum (Pocket Books, $22).
The new book is filled with more than 60 seasonal and special-occasion menus and recipes contributed by chefs and food specialists in the region.
From both a culinary and charitable standpoint, it is lovely and worthwhile.
Chocolates With a Twist
Le Francais in Wheeling, Ill., has often appeared on lists of the best restaurants in the country.
Its new owners, Roland and Beth Liccioni, have put their own stamp on the place, while keeping the restaurant's classic style intact.
An example of the inventive elegance that now infuses Le Francais is Mrs.
Liccioni's range of chocolates.
Her finely wrought hand-dipped bittersweet chocolates come with lush, creamy ganache fillings flavored not only with the typical vanilla, mocha, hazelnuts and raspberries, but also with mint, an infusion of Earl Grey tea and an exotic mixture of fragrant spices.
The chocolates, which are served in the restaurant, can be ordered by mail.
A 10-piece 3.75-ounce sampler of Chocolats le Francais is $9; 21 pieces are $16.75; a 45-piece assortment, about a pound, is $33.
Postage is extra.
Telephone: (708) 541-7470.
Chefs on Skis
There will be nearly 500 skiers in toques schussing the slopes in Windham, N.Y., on Sunday, to start this year's round of five regional competitions for the annual Chefs Ski Race.
What began with two dozen chefs in 1975 has now grown into an international competition that now boasts the sponsorship of Grand Marnier and raises money through entry fees to benefit charities, among them City Harvest, City Meals-on-Wheels and several food banks.
It's a serious amateur ski competition enlivened by the skiers' decorated chefs jackets.
The series of races begins at 9 A.M. and continues until 3:30 P.M. at Ski Windham, off Exit 21 of the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway.
Information: (518) 734-4300.
Fewer New Products
Shoppers may not have noticed, but this past year there were 10.6 percent fewer new food products (including old products in new sizes, styles or flavors) introduced onto the market than in 1990, a year that set a record for new product introductions, according to a study released by Marketing Intelligence Service, a market research firm in Naples, N.Y.
There was an overall decline of 3 percent in the number of new retail packaged products (including nonfood items), according to the study.
Still, some individual categories like beverages and pet products did show increases.
The service also reported that one-third of these new products claimed some kind of nutritional benefit, relating to the quantities of salt, cholesterol, fat, calories, fiber or sugar.
And a record 13 percent of the new products advertised some kind of environmental benefit.
The market research company expects the trend toward fewer new products to continue in 1992.
"More restrictive labeling regulations are likely to dampen, rather than accelerate, new foods and beverages that have thrived in recent years on a freewheeling climate for nutritional claims," said Richard Lawrence, president of Marketing Intelligence Service.
NEW FOODS WITH A TASTE OF PROVENCE
IT'S a first at Pierre Deux.
The chain of French country home-furnishings shops has just introduced a collection of food products.
They bear the label of Baumaniere, the name of the elegant restaurant and inn in Les Baux de Provence.
They were introduced in France last year, and in America are only available at the Pierre Deux retail shops.
They are infused with the herbaceous aromas and flavors of the south of France.
Honeys, mustards, vinegars, spice mixtures and even nougats are given unusual tastes like lavender or thyme.
The products include traditional candies from Aix-en-Provence and some expensive but excellent blended coffees.
Prices range from $5.50 for jars of mustard to $43 for calissons d'Aix, traditional glazed candies layered with glace fruit and almonds.
The products are sold at the Pierre Deux shop at 870 Madison Avenue (70th Street) and 12 others around the country.
They can also be ordered by calling (800) 874-3773.


Where Dickens Couldn't Get a Drink
To the Editor:
"Around the holidays, historic hotels become surrogate hearths and homes for families who return every year," you write in "Going Home (to a Hotel) for Holiday Meals" (Dec. 18).
"At these stately dowagers, the planning and baking, preserving and spicing of food for Christmas dinner begins months before the meal is served." You report that Charles Dickens stayed at the Golden Lamb, an inn in Lebanon, Ohio.
He did not stay the night there, but stopped to dine on Wednesday, April 20, 1842, as part of a marathon 23-hour journey from Cincinnati to Columbus, leaving at 8 A.M. and traveling all night.


Coslet and Steinberg Ready to Go Shopping
When Jets Coach Bruce Coslet and General Manager Dick Steinberg were asked about what the Jets needed to do to improve on this season's 8-8 record and the first trip to the playoffs since 1986, they both talked about defense and about depth.
"I think we need one more impact player on defense; I don't care where he plays," said Coslet.
"I also think we could use some more depth on our offensive line."


U.S. Adds Louisiana Black Bear To Its List of Threatened Species
The United States Fish and Wildlife Service has listed the Louisiana black bear, the model for the traditional teddy bear, as a threatened species, but will continue to allow logging in the areas where the bear lives.
The listing, which grants protection under the Endangered Species Act, is based primarily on losses of the bear's habitat, which logging and development have reduced by more than 80 percent, service officials said Monday.
But the agency said normal logging would not place the bear in imminent danger of extinction.


Guide Through a Maze Of Computer Acronyms
As more school systems invest in computer technology, it is becoming impossible for educators and students to discuss computers without dealing with T.L.A.'s (Three Letter Acronyms) and other forms of compubabble.
While computer jargon seems incomprehensible, there is some logic behind it.
This vocabulary list, though far from comprehensive, will help newcomers to the computer culture compuspeak with the best.


CHRONICLE
TIM PETERS, the ex-husband of SALLIE BINGHAM, the media heiress, has been denied a claim to the Bingham family fortune.
Judge Benjamin Shobe of Circuit Court in Louisville, Ky., upheld a prenuptial agreement between Ms.
Bingham and Mr.
Peters, in which he gave up any claim to alimony.
The couple were divorced in October 1990.
In his 27-page ruling, Judge Shobe said that though Mr.
Peters "may now feel he made a bad bargain," that is not sufficient grounds for setting the agreement aside.
He also questioned Mr.
Peters's insistence that he married Ms.
Bingham for love, finding that "the uncontradicted evidence is that the petitioner married the respondent for her money and stayed married to her because of the material benefits that the relationship conferred." Mr.
Peters was, however, awarded various assets that, when sold, may be worth as much as $500,000.


Prices Paid To Farmers Decline 0.7%
Prices farmers get for raw products declined seven-tenths of 1 percent in December from the previous month and were 3.5 percent less than a year earlier, the Agriculture Department said today.
Lower prices for lettuce, cattle and tomatoes were partly offset by higher prices for eggs, wheat and hogs.


Tucson Electric's Revamping Plan
A Federal bankruptcy court dismissed an involuntary bankruptcy petition filed against the Tucson Electric Power Company, a company spokesman said, enabling the Arizona utility to procede with plans to restructure its debt and supplier contracts.
The court's action was a prerequisite for a 15 percent rate increase promised to Tucson Electric by the Arizona Corporation Commission.


Doors Begin to Open in Korea
The divided people of Korea have good reason to celebrate the old year along with the new.
The withdrawal of all U.S. nuclear arms from South Korea made the peninsula nuclear-free.
Now a potentially far-reaching agreement between the Governments of the South and the North could keep it that way.
Yesterday's accord reaffirms the commitment of the two Governments, undertaken in the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, not to acquire nuclear arms.
And it goes two critical steps further: It commits North Korea not to construct facilities for reprocessing nuclear material, and it opens the way to on-site inspection by the South of a suspect facility in the North.


A Town's Disastrous Investment Fling
Normally, the talk around town in late December is of the Iowa State basketball team.
But this year, conversations have turned to the city's complex and highly speculative investments in options, part of a strategy that could have ended in devastating losses for taxpayers.
Marshalltown was one of dozens of municipalities early in December that found their investment funds frozen when their investment manager, Steven D. Wymer, was accused of fraud in handling their money.
Mr.
Wymer, the owner and president of Institutional Treasury Management Inc., a money-management firm in Irvine, Calif., was taken into custody and has been charged with securities fraud in connection with his management of $1.2 billion in money from state and local governments.


Settlement for Olson?
The New England Patriots could be close to settling a lawsuit with the former sportswriter LISA OLSON, who said she was harassed by the team owner, VICTOR KIAM, and three players during the 1990 season.
Olson filed suit last April against Kiam; the former general manager, PATRICK SULLIVAN, and three players ZEKE MOWATT, MICHAEL TIMPSON and ROBERT PERRYMAN.
Olson, who was working for The Boston Herald, charged that the players sexually harassed her on Sept. 17, 1990, in the team's Foxboro Stadium locker room.
She also charged that her civil rights were violated, and that the incident caused her emotional stress.


The Pop Life; Top 12's, or So
Given that the average buyer of recordings has access to a wider span of music, both chronologically and geographically, than at any other time in history, compiling Top 10 lists might seem like an exercise in inadequacy.
So they've been expanded slightly, to Top 12 (more or less) lists that include a few anthologies.
The intention is to acknowledge that much of the century's musical splendor is out there, waiting.
Whatever else these lists offer -- a reflection of cultural movement, the importance of the artists, or simply each critic's idea of pleasure -- they are meant to provide a path through the last year in popular music.


Yankees Still Muddled Despite Leadership Change
For the better part of a week, some of the New York Yankees' limited partners expressed their desires, publicly and privately, that the swirl of uncertainty surrounding a team be stopped.
That, these partners said, could easily be accomplished if only baseball commissioner Fay Vincent would let George Steinbrenner resume control of the team when the resignation of his successor, Robert Nederlander, became official yesterday.
But that was not about to happen.


That Extra Dime Is a Little to Some, a Lot to Others
As word of the new $1.25 subway and bus fare rumbled through the Brooklyn-bound No. 1 train yesterday afternoon, Tripp Evans struggled for the perfect analogy to describe how powerless he felt when contemplating the 10-cent fare increase.
"Unfortunately, it's like iceberg lettuce," said the 38-year-old humor writer from TriBeCa.
"I have to buy it."


Contract Keeps Jockeys on Job
A nationwide strike by jockeys has been averted after the Jockeys Guild and the Thoroughbred Racing Associations reached a tentative agreement on a contract to replace one that expired last night.
The guild told jockeys to accept mounts today, assuring continued racing action at tracks around the country.


Trade Talks With Japan Call for Toughness
To the Editor:
"Mr. Gephardt's Irresponsible Economics" (editorial, Dec. 22), criticizing my trade bill, embraces free trade theory and ignores the facts of Japan's adversarial capitalism.
Since 1980, the United States has accumulated a merchandise trade deficit of more than $1 trillion, of which Japan accounts for more than $400 billion.
Despite a 50 percent reduction in the value of the dollar since 1985, which has turned a trade deficit with the European Community into a substantial surplus, we have a $42 billion trade deficit with Japan.
Since our products sell in Europe, why does our trade deficit with Japan endure?


Story of the Weeping Icon Divides Greek Orthodoxy
The leadership of the traditional Greek Orthodox Church has cast doubts on the now famous Weeping Icon that was stolen from a small Greek Orthodox cathedral in Astoria, Queens, last week.
The traditional church has long been at canonical odds with the leadership of St.
Irene Chrysovalantou Greek Orthodox Cathedral, which is a member of a dissident sect of the Greek Orthodox church that left the main body in 1924.


Remember the Noriega Trial, Anyone?
To the Editor:
While the television news media inundated the airwaves with their gavel-to-gavel coverage of the William Kennedy Smith trial, did anyone notice the trial of Manuel Antonio Noriega on Federal drug and racketeering charges?
It required a United States military invasion of Panama to arrest General Noriega, and yet our television news media have remained largely silent, focusing instead on a rape trial that promised to break absolutely no new legal ground.
However, we may do well to remember the words of Thomas Jefferson, who warned that "a democracy cannot be both ignorant and free."


The Pop Life; Top 12's, or So
Given that the average buyer of recordings has access to a wider span of music, both chronologically and geographically, than at any other time in history, compiling Top 10 lists might seem like an exercise in inadequacy.
So they've been expanded slightly, to Top 12 (more or less) lists that include a few anthologies.
The intention is to acknowledge that much of the century's musical splendor is out there, waiting.
Whatever else these lists offer -- a reflection of cultural movement, the importance of the artists, or simply each critic's idea of pleasure -- they are meant to provide a path through the last year in popular music.


N.B.A. Fines Person
CHUCK PERSON of the Indiana Pacers was fined $7,500 by the N.B.A. for flagrantly elbowing Chicago's JOHN PAXSON in the fourth quarter of the Bulls' 109-104 victory Monday night.
In addition, 12 players -- 8 Bulls and 4 Pacers -- received automatic $500 fines for leaving the bench during the ensuing melee. (AP)


60-Minute Gourmet
IT seems appropriate after all of the holiday feasting and mirthmaking to offer a recipe that is restorative, wholesome and lean.
In France, we might have a pot-au-feu after the New Year's celebration -- which is essentially boiled lean cuts of meat, carrots, turnips, onions, leeks, celery, potatoes and parsnips.
The broth yielded by this combination of ingredients is sublime.
The American equivalent of pot-au-feu is the traditional New England boiled dinner.
Eighteenth-century American cooks boiled many foods, believing that this was the most salubrious method of cooking.
In the first cookbook written by an American -- "1796 American Cookery," by Amelia Simmons -- boiled meat dishes are common.
Little is known about Amelia Simmons, except that she lived near Hartford, and described herself in the book as "an American orphan."
One of the most popular recipes was for Alamode Beef, in which less tender cuts of beef were larded, seasoned and boiled with lots of herbs.
The New England boiled dinner is a logical evolution of that.
In my recipe, smoked shoulder or butt of pork is combined with winter vegetables and chicken quarters.
The smoked pork is already cooked, which greatly reduces boiling time.
The chicken legs and thighs go in last because they cook quickly.
Serve guests a little of each ingredient along with Dijon-style mustard, grated horseradish and cornichons.
A mixed green salad is all you need on the side. New England Boiled Dinner
1 head cabbage, about 1 pound  1 1/4 pound smoked shoulder or butt of pork  6 medium Washington or Idaho potatoes, about 1 1/4 pounds, peeled  6 carrots, about 1/2 pound, trimmed and scraped  2 leeks, trimmed and well washed  4 ribs celery, trimmed and tied  1 onion peeled and stuck with 2 cloves  2 teaspoons allspice  2 sprigs fresh thyme or 1 teaspoon dried  1 bay leaf  6 peppercorns  Salt to taste  4 chicken legs and thighs.
1.
Remove and discard any tough outer leaves on the cabbage.
Quarter the cabbage and remove the core.
2.
In a large kettle, combine the pork butt, potatoes, cabbage, carrots, leeks, celery, onion, allspice, thyme, bay leaf and peppercorns.
Cover with water, and salt.
3. Cover and bring to a boil; simmer for 20 minutes.
4. Add the chicken legs and simmer for 15 minutes more.
5.
Serve with Dijon-style mustard, cornichons or grated fresh horseradish, or any combination of all of these garnishes.
Yield: 4 to 6 servings Mixed Green Salad
1 head Boston lettuce  1bunch watercress  1 tablespoon Dijon-style mustard  2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar  1 teaspoon finely chopped garlic  4 tablespoons olive or vegetable oil  Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste  2 ripe plum tomatoes, cored and sliced thin  1 medium Vidalia or red onion, peeled and sliced thin  Shaved Gruyere or Parmesan cheese for garnish.
1.
Core the Boston lettuce and separate the leaves.
Trim off the tough stems of the watercress.
Rinse the greens well and shake off the excess moisture.
2.
In a large salad bowl, add the mustard, the vinegar and the garlic.
Blend well with a wire whisk, gradually adding the oil.
Add salt and pepper to taste.
3.
Add the lettuce, watercress, tomatoes and the sliced onion.
Toss well and serve with shaved Gruyere or Parmesan cheese on top, or with a wedge of Brie on the side.
Yield: 4 servings


Defying Fernandez, Panel Names Bronx Principals
Amid charges of anti-Semitism and lying, members of a Bronx school board defied Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez on Monday night and approved the appointments of six principals.
A spokesman for the Chancellor said that if the board refused to rescind the appointments Mr.
Fernandez would supersede the board.


Treasury Bonds Continue to Gain
Treasury bond prices moved higher yesterday and long-term interest rates fell again in light pre-holiday trading, as dealers closed their books on what for most was a highly profitable year.
Retail accounts seeking to lock in higher yields were responsible for most of the day's purchases, traders and analysts said.
But thin trading exaggerated the size of the gains, which amounted to more than half a point on some longer-dated issues.


Back in the Screening Room With Stalin
The most potent symbol in the new film "The Inner Circle" is the one audiences will never see.
It's inside Lenin's head -- literally.
Andrei Konchalovsky, the film's director, gained permission to shoot numerous scenes in the Moscow headquarters of the K.G.B., whose lobby is dominated by a massive bust of Feliks Dzerzhinsky, the first chief of the Soviet secret police.
Mr.
Konchalovsky wanted to move the sculpture and replace it with a bust of Lenin, but on this point he could not prevail.
"So we simply wrapped Lenin around Dzerzhinsky," the director said, laughing.
What appears on screen is a gleaming steel head of Lenin, thinking a private, very frightening thought.
The nightmare that unfolded from that thought is the subject of Mr.
Konchalovsky's first film on Russian themes since the highly acclaimed "Siberiade," made in 1979.
"The Inner Circle" surveys the Stalin years through the eyes of Ivan Sanshin, a young, idealistic Communist who works as the Kremlin's film projectionist.
The character is based on Aleksandr Ganshin, who showed films for Stalin and other top Government figures, including Lavrenti Beria, chief of the secret police.
A Nation Seduced


Yanks Pick Managing Partner Amid Rumblings
The Yankees, whose front-office situation seems to grow more and more troubled, finally selected a managing general partner yesterday to replace Robert Nederlander.
But the choice, Daniel R. McCarthy, immediately put the situation under a new cloud.
The elevation of McCarthy, a minority owner who was instrumental in helping George Steinbrenner purchase the Yankee franchise from CBS in 1973 and who serves as Steinbrenner's tax lawyer, was in doubt because he does not live in New York and because he sued Commissioner Fay Vincent in 1990, shortly after the commissioner had reached a disciplinary agreement with Steinbrenner for the Yankee owner to remove himself from the team's day-to-day operations.


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY -- The Global Lab: Aerospace; International Flights, Indeed
Every new airliner is the product of international cooperation.
In the new Boeing 777 program, for example, the Boeing Company is manufacturing only the wings, nose structure and engine nacelles.
The rest of the wide-body airplane will come from hundreds of subcontractors in North America, Japan and Europe.
The main fuselage sections, for example, will be fabricated in Japan; the wing flaps come from Italy.
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation, Boeing's only domestic rival in the airliner business, wants to go even further.
It is seeking to sell 40 percent of its civil airliner business to the Taiwan Aerospace Corporation, a newly formed entity that has the backing of the Taiwan Government.
Because no military technology is involved, the deal requires no approval from the United States Government.


Inquiries Into Deaths at City College Find Dizzying Confusion
A swirl of confusion continued yesterday around events that led up to the crushing human tide that killed eight young people waiting to get into a basketball game at City College on Saturday night, with college officials, an entertainment promoter and a private security agency explaining their actions.
For the first time, an explanation was offered for the whereabouts of the money raised by the event but even that was cloaked in some uncertainty.


New Rochelle Fire Deals New Blow to Downtown
In the wake of a fire that destroyed a dozen stores and offices in the heart of the downtown business district here, detectives searched the rubble today for clues to how the fire began, and neighboring merchants wondered how many disappointments they could endure.
The recession has not been kind to this once-thriving shopping district.
Empty stores with "For Rent" signs in the windows are ubiquitous.
Shopping malls in neighboring communities have drawn away many customers, and developers' promises to inject new life into downtown New Rochelle have gone unfulfilled.
The Christmas shopping season was, in the words of more than one local merchant, "a disaster."


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.12
7.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.84
3.91
6.47
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.85
3.91
6.42
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.34
6.36
7.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.44
8.13
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.57
8.60
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.65
6.67
7.51
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Mutual Funds End '91 on a High
Stock mutual funds had a banner year in 1991, apparently their best ever, fund managers say, and bond funds, which drew in almost twice as much money as stock funds, seem to have turned in their best sales figures since their peak year of 1986.
"People are beginning to realize that after inflation and taxes, they might be losing money on bank C.D.'s and money market rates," said Gavin Quill, a marketing analyst for the Scudder family of funds in Boston.
"The low cash returns are converting people who used to be savers into investors."


Foreign Affairs; Freedom Against All Odds
Humankind seems poised to survive the 20th century.
It has not been easy.
And it is frighteningly uncertain where leaders and events will take the story next.
But humanity's survival from the beginning of World War I until now, and arriving at this point with glimmers of freedom in places familiar only with tyranny, is a monumental achievement that should give courage almost whatever the unhappy turns of the next few years.


On Paul Tsongas
With a hair-shirt economic message and a Spartan campaign, the former Senator from Massachusetts hopes to persuade voters that he can recapture America's pre-eminence.
Strategies: The Democrats and '92.
Page 10.


Insurance Rate Increase Rejected
The New York State Insurance Department said it had rejected a request by U.S.
Healthcare Inc. for a 10.7 percent average rate increase.
The move pulled the company's stock price down $3.50 today, to $41.50, in over-the-counter trading, with the price falling as much as $5.25 a share.
More than 2.8 million shares were traded.
Officials of U.S.
Healthcare, based in Blue Bell, Pa., were not available to comment.


For a Robust Seafood Gumbo, Mix and Match Ingredients
NOW is just the time for a robust seafood gumbo, a real heartwarmer in this cold season.
I've called for a lot of ingredients in this gumbo, but you can eliminate and make substitutions, based on market availability and price.
For example, I use both fish and shrimp, but one or the other is quite sufficient.
You can also add sausage or ham, both of which are often found in traditional gumbo recipes.
Especially good choices would be the tasso ham of Louisiana and andouille, a spicy American sausage, very popular in New Orleans, that is totally different from its French namesake.
Sausage has the advantage, too, of being relatively inexpensive.


2 Koreas Agree on Nuclear Ban, But Not on Method of Inspections
North and South Korea announced today that they had initialed an agreement banning nuclear weapons from the Korean Peninsula, but the two sides did not settle on measures to insure compliance.
According to a text provided by South Korean officials, the agreement says that each side will be allowed to inspect "objects" on the other's territory "in order to verify the de-nuclear ization of the Korean Peninsula." But the procedures and methods for these inspections have yet to be decided by a joint nuclear control committee.


SOVIET BRAIN DRAIN POSES ATOMIC RISK, U.S. REPORT WARNS
Bush Administration officials are expressing apprehension that the economic deterioration of the former Soviet Union, the demoralization of its military forces and an expected high rate of unemployment may prompt some of its top experts with the know-how for making nuclear weapons to sell their services abroad.
A classified report prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency and other intelligence bureaus and agencies on weapons proliferation in the former Soviet Union warns that the potential for nuclear mercenaries is more worrisome than the danger of nuclear-related materials going astray because they are easier to control, said officials familiar with the report.


Tired of Relying on U.S., Japan Seeks to Expand Its Own Intelligence Efforts
Japan is quietly moving to reshape and expand its intelligence operations in an effort to wean itself from its dependence on American analysis of threats to its economic and military security.
Officials here say they are not hiring spies and would steer clear of creating a single, large intelligence agency.
Their biggest concern, they say, is to avoid rekindling memories of the Japanese secret police of half a century ago.


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY The Global Lab -- A special report inside: Industry by industry, pages 48-49.; Technology Without Borders Raises Big Questions for U.S.
Just as they once moved manufacturing plants overseas, American companies are now spreading their research and product development around the world, helping to turn the creation of technology into an activity that transcends national borders.
The trend raises tough new issues for policy makers intent on preserving jobs for Americans and keeping the nation competitive in high-technology industries like aerospace, pharmaceuticals and information processing.
But many business leaders say the march toward technology with no national allegiances -- the march toward the borderless lab -- is as inevitable as it is irrevocable.
Government policies that do not adapt to this fundamental industrial shift, many executives contend, are bound to fail.


U.C.L.A. Stonewalls Illinois by 6-3
U.C.L.A. turned two Illinois turnovers into two field goals by Louis Perez as the Bruins outmuscled the Illini, 6-3, in the John Hancock Bowl today.
The victory gave Bruins Coach Terry Donahue eight consecutive victories in bowl games, starting with a 24-14 victory over Michigan in the 1983 Rose Bowl.


The Pop Life; The Garden Says It Can Handle Big Rap Show Friday
Saturday's catastrophe at City College, where eight people died in the crush as a throng tried to force its way into an overcrowded celebrity basketball game featuring rappers and singers, has once again brought attention to the relationship between violence and musical events.
On Friday, the rappers Public Enemy, Queen Latifah, Kid 'n' Play, the Geto Boys, D.J.
Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh Prince and Naughty by Nature will be performing at Madison Square Garden, the first local arena-sized rap show in recent memory.
"We're getting inundated with calls," said Monie Feurey, the vice president for communications at Madison Square Garden.
"But frankly, I don't understand it. The situations are so different. We have professional crowd control; we're in a business, so we have to know what we're doing. And what we're doing for this show is no different than what we do for say, Guns 'n' Roses or other heavy-metal acts."


EXECUTIVES
*
Frederick Atkins Inc., New York, a retail buying service for regional department stores, named Victoria Amado director of home-store trend merchandising and product development.
Robert Horton was named product manager for decorative accessories and Lisa Bernardi was named market specialist for seasonal novelty gifts and stationery. *
Family Dollar Stores Inc., Matthews, N.C., a discount retailer, named C. Martin Sowers senior vice president for finance.


U.S. Official Calls Muslim Militants a Threat to Africa
A few weeks before the Islamic Salvation Front swept to victory in the first round of national legislative elections in Algeria, a senior Bush Administration official was analyzing the many faces of political ferment in Africa in the 1990's: the drift to anarchy in Somalia, the move to democracy in Zambia, unrest in Zaire and the promise of peaceful change in South Africa.
At the end, he paused to reflect on the single most worrisome trend for policy makers.
"The march of Islamic fundamentalism," he said.


Shifts at Top Of an Insurer
The Niagara Exchange Corporation said today that Edward G. Wright had been named president and chief executive of the Exchange Insurance Company, its primary operating subsidiary.
Mr.
Wright, 43 years old, succeeds Charles J. Clauss, who steps down from the positions on Friday.
Mr.
Clauss will continue as chairman and chief executive of Niagara Exchange, the company said.


Currency Set In Argentina
The peso, Argentina's fifth currency in 22 years, will be introduced on Wednesday to replace the austral, which was devalued by inflation to near worthlessness.
New peso bills were distributed by the central bank this week, but most Argentines will not see them until banks reopen on Thursday after a bank holiday today and New Year's Day.


Indicators Dropped 0.3% In November
The Government index meant to predict the economy fell three-tenths of 1 percent in November, the fourth straight month without a significant advance.
At the same time, a companion gauge of current economic conditions issued by the Commerce Department dropped eight-tenths of 1 percent, suggesting that the economy may have contracted slightly in the final quarter of the year after modest gains in the spring and summer.


Earl Kintner, 79, a Former Chief Of F.T.C. and Law Firm Partner
Earl W. Kintner, a chairman of the Federal Trade Commission in the Eisenhower Administration and a longtime senior partner in the Washington law firm of Arent, Fox, Kintner, Plotkin &amp; Kahn, died on Saturday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 79 years old and lived in Washington.
He died after a long illness, said a spokesman for his firm.


Tsongas Pitches Economic Austerity, Mixed With Patriotism
Anyone looking for a slick political campaign won't find it on the hustings with Paul E. Tsongas.
Mr.
Tsongas, a former Senator and Representative from Massachusetts, runs a dogged, bottom-up campaign that works voter to voter, town to town, and captures space in the news seemingly newspaper by newspaper and sound bite by sound bite.


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY -- The Global Lab: Pharmaceuticals; Though Markets Vary, Drugs Work Anywhere
Drug research has become as international as medicine itself, and pharmaceuticals are among the few products in which the United States can boast a net surplus of exports over imports.
The final tally for 1991 is expected to show an American surplus of $1.4 billion, up from $1.2 billion a year earlier, with some $900 million of the surplus coming from sales to Japan, the world's second-largest drug market after the United States.


Manville Sells 50 Acres
The Manville Corporation said today that it had sold a 50-acre site here that had been cleared of hazardous wastes to ARCO.
Terms were not disclosed.
The sale includes the transfer of all water rights at the site.Manville operated a pipe plant and insulation manufacturing plant at the site from the 1930's through 1982.
Two years later, the empty site was placed on the California Environmental Protection Agency's Superfund list of hazardous waste sites to be cleaned up.
Manville completed the cleanup in June 1990.


Hunger Is Stalking the New Year in Moscow
As 1991 was drawing to a close, Mariya Y. Vrublevskaya went out shopping in a faint snow for a pine tree so she and her two young granddaughters could decorate a traditional yolka to cheer up their spare New Year's celebrations.
What the 62-year-old retired factory worker discovered was that the trees, like everything else connected with this eerie holiday, had soared in price, costing 10 times more than last year and way beyond the means of grandmothers trying to bring up two girls on a combined pension and part-time pay of 250 rubles a month.


No More Free Brunch
In the darkest days of the Great Depression, when banks failed, businesses went bankrupt and old family fortunes crumbled, membership in even the nicest men's clubs declined.
Things got so bad at the Harvard Club, which was losing more than five hundred members a year, that its board imposed severe cost-cutting measures.
In 1931, the club abruptly stopped ordering matchbooks embossed with the club insignia.
While nothing so drastic has yet occurred at most of New York City's dozens of social clubs, even some of the most prestigious preserves of the city's well-to-do are hearing the sharp, cold knock of the recession at their doors.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
At 7 A.M., on my way to work the other morning, it seemed like a good idea to grab a bran muffin as fortification against the long day ahead.
Little did I know.
The glass door at the local Food Emporium was a bit recalcitrant, so I applied that extra shove New Yorkers know is often needed.
On this occasion the door slipped its track, tipping rapidly in my direction.
Acting more on instinct than good judgment, I caught the door in midtilt and found myself holding an enormous piece of glass and steel that was no longer attached to the ground by any other fastening save my own tenuous grip.
By some adrenaline-induced miracle, however, I managed to totter under this incredibly heavy object all the way across the entrance hall of the Food Emporium, bringing it to an incredibly soft landing against the far wall.
Still shaking from my narrow escape, I motioned to the woman standing behind the register who had apparently witnessed the episode with something less than the astonishment one might expect.
"I'm sorry," she said. "We're closed." -- ERIC W. ANNER
. . .
Muriel Taub Glantzman (grandmother), Sara Stites (her daughter) and Chloe Stites (her granddaughter, age 4) are driving into Manhattan.
Chloe is having a fine time during an imaginary conversation on her toy car phone.
Suddenly she says: "Just a moment. . . . Hello."
Grandmother, looking up, bewildered: "What's that all about?"
Mother, in a matter-of-fact manner: "She has call waiting."
. . .
Dear Diary:
The scene, the second floor of Kiddie City in Manhattan.
The time, the height of the recent Christmas bustle.
A woman, holding a book she has chosen for her grandson, collars a Kiddie City employee.
"Excuse me," the customer says.
"Where is checkout?"
The employee looks quite puzzled. A long silence. Then he asks, "Is that a game?"
Customer: "No, I just want to pay for this book."
The employee directs her to the cashier.
The woman pays for the book and chuckles all the way home.
"Christmas shopping can really be fun," she says to no one in particular. -- EDITH MARTIN
. . .
THE SIGHS OF THE MATTER
I ask you, my loves, What's become of the gloves Sent by Rod with the card that read "Wish you the best Christmas cheer." I've a terrible fear They went out with the trash and the tissue! -- MAUREEN CANNON
. . .
Dear Diary:
A funny thing happened on the way to Grand Central this time of the year a decade or so ago.
It was a chilly Wednesday and I -- a suburban lady of a certain age who comes to town occasionally on business -- decided to forgo the rush-hour pleasures of the commuter trains and leave the city early.
I hailed a cab on the corner of Eighth Avenue and 59th Street.
It was 1:20 P.M.
Plenty of time to catch the 2:05 to Westport.
Two blocks later, the cab came to a complete halt.
I had not included the holiday traffic in my plans.
There we sat, my philosophical, middle-aged driver and I, exchanging complaints about the double-parking, the economy, the weather, the Mayor.
I closed my eyes.
When I opened them, we were turning into Vanderbilt Avenue.
It was 20 minutes past 2.
My train was long gone, the next one not until 3:05.
"What do I owe you?" I asked.
"I hate to tell you, lady," the driver replied. "It looks like the national debt."
I pulled a bill from my wallet.
Waiting for change, I wondered: Should I check my packages and take a walk?
Too cold.
Read in the station?
Ugh!
Get on the train?
It wouldn't even be in yet.
"Lady," said the driver, "it's been a lousy day. Can I buy you a drink?" I hesitated perhaps a second and a half.
"You sure can," I heard myself say with enthusiasm.
We left the cab in front of the Biltmore, he locked his cash box and my packages in the trunk (could one have dared do that 10 years ago?) and, the quintessential odd couple, marched arm in arm into McCann's across the street.
Forty minutes later, we said goodbye.
We had shared first names, the stories of our respective long-term marriages and a bowl of french fries.
As we parted, he grinned.
"Doris, you made my day."
"Thank you, Ralph." -- DORIS F. JACOBY


U.S. Orders Assessment of Harm Caused by Dams
A Federal energy agency is undertaking a long review of scores of hydroelectric dams, and promises a new era in which such dams will be operated in ways aimed at reducing or eliminating damage to the environment.
Over the next two years, the agency, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, will review applications from utilities, paper mills that run dams for their own power and other industries to relicense 237 of the country's oldest hydroelectric dams and generating stations.
That is the most hydroelectric projects to come up for relicensing at any one time in the agency's 71-year history.


Corrections
A capsule news report about the stock market yesterday in the "Inside" summary on page A1 misstated the rise in the Dow Jones industrial average for December, through Monday.
It was 269.23 points.
For the year, through Monday, the Dow had risen 530.25 points.


Mitchell D. Schweitzer, 86, Dies; Served as a Judge in Manhattan
Mitchell D. Schweitzer, who retired in 1972 as a New York State Supreme Court Justice after more than 26 years on various benches in New York City courts, died on Monday at the Jersey Shore Medical Center in Neptune, N.J.
A former resident of Manhattan, Judge Schweitzer was 86 years old and lived in Wayside, N.J.
His death was caused by congestive heart failure, his family said.


Chefs' Hopes For '92 Include Lasting Till '93
CHEFS usually hesitate to think beyond their plats du jour.
But at certain times, they are willing to raise their line of vision above the morning's market basket and peer into the future.
Times like now, with a new year dawning, the economic climate uncertain and popular tastes in flux.
They say that business will improve, or that it will not.
They say that customers want their plates loaded with hefty portions, or that they want tasting menus with food that is lighter than ever.
So much for consensus.


Candidates Must Flee NBC-Style 'Debates'
To the Editor:
The sorry spectacle of NBC's televised Democratic "debate" (front page, Dec. 16) restates the sorry states of both network television and the Democratic Party.
How could Ron Brown, Democratic national chairman, and the candidates allow this sequel to 1988's "seven dwarfs" to happen?
The sequel is worse than the original.
An imperious Tom Brokaw stands before these seated inferiors (they're only candidates for the Presidency) and sternly tasks them to answer briefly questions that should be important enough to require exposition.


Chemical Bank Merger Is Official
In formally announcing their merger yesterday, Chemical and Manufacturers Hanover said the savings from their combination would be greater than previously estimated.
Although the companies are now legally combined, the merger of their subsidiary banks will not be completed until the middle of the year, and customers must still pay different prices and use different branches.


Heat Activates Douglas
The newly signed Miami point guard, SHERMAN DOUGLAS, was activated by the Heat yesterday and may start taking off pounds in Seattle tomorrow.
The third-year pro passed a physical after two days of tests, but he was 12 pounds over his Heat-mandated playing weight of 183, and his body fat was about 15 percent higher than last season.
The Heat decided Saturday to match a seven-year, $17 million offer sheet he signed Dec. 13 with the Los Angeles Lakers. (AP)


Estrogen Is Found to Improve Mood, Not Just Menopause Symptoms
A Los Angeles research team has shown that in addition to the established benefits of estrogen replacement after menopause, it also improves the mood and psychological functioning of well-adjusted, healthy women without any distressing menopausal symptoms.
Estrogen hormones given to women to replace those the body stops making at menopause were already known to relieve menopausal symptoms like hot flushes, vaginal dryness and urinary tract irritability, and it was also known that replacement hormones slow the loss of bone with age and help lower cholesterol levels.


Personal Health
Winter has more than its share of petty annoyances that people can do little or nothing about.
But many of the distressing aspects of the dark cold months ahead can be mitigated by knowledge, forethought and simple preventive measures.
While you may be at the mercy of transportation systems that bog down in ice and snow, you need not be plagued, for example, by brittle skin or respiratory infections that just won't quit.
Nor should myths and old wives' tales govern your life.


Trade Talks With Japan Call for Toughness; Where Theory Fails
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 22 editorial attack on Representative Richard Gephardt reminds me of a cancer patient in the denial phase.
Reality is too difficult, so the doctor must be wrong.
Your economic analysis is simply silly.
You argue that we should not try to end the trade deficit because that would strengthen the dollar and affect the trade balance.
But achieving some sort of equilibrium is just what we want; there is no inherent virtue in a weak currency.
Nonetheless, your arguments do bring out a couple of salient facts, even if in a somewhat backward manner.


A Flurry of Drug Approvals by the F.D.A.
Tying its record for new drug approvals in a single year, the Food and Drug Administration said late yesterday that it had approved four new drugs this week, bringing the 1991 total to 30.
The list included Zoloft, a Pfizer treatment for depression that analysts predicted would have $1 billion in worldwide sales by 1995.
Working late on New Year's Eve, F.D.A. officials also approved two antibiotics, Eli Lilly's Lorabid, and Warner-Lambert's Penetrex, as well as Ismo, a chest-pain treatment made by American Home Products.
Analysts predicted that even bigger sales would come from Zocor, a Merck &amp; Company treatment to reduce cholesterol levels, which was approved last week; they foresaw global sales of $1.5 billion.


The Pop Life; Top 12's, or So
Given that the average buyer of recordings has access to a wider span of music, both chronologically and geographically, than at any other time in history, compiling Top 10 lists might seem like an exercise in inadequacy.
So they've been expanded slightly, to Top 12 (more or less) lists that include a few anthologies.
The intention is to acknowledge that much of the century's musical splendor is out there, waiting.
Whatever else these lists offer -- a reflection of cultural movement, the importance of the artists, or simply each critic's idea of pleasure -- they are meant to provide a path through the last year in popular music.


Devils Show a Flair In Topping Penguins
It was the turn of the inconsistent Devils to play well, and tonight they did so in smashing fashion, knocking off the defending Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins, 7-4, at the Civic Arena.
Scott Stevens and Valery Zelepukin led the Devils with two goals apiece.
Aleksei Kasatonov, Laurie Boschman and Dave Barr (empty net) also had goals for New Jersey, which posted its first victory in its last nine games against Patrick Division opponents.


Many Children Learn Early the Importance of Giving to the Neediest Cases
"What do you need to live?" asked a note attached to a $25 contribution to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"You need water and shelter and the basic thing you need is money. If you are rich you should give people who are poor some of your money. If you don't give people some of your money people will die of starvation. Would you like it if you died of starvation?"
The letter, written by 6-year-old Mark Weinberger of Newton, Mass., reflects the forthrightness of many of the youngest contributors to the Neediest Cases.
In dozens of notes the children have managed to overcome all the social policy questions that divide the left from the right, Democrat from Republican, and they have boiled the issue of poverty down to a simple thought: Those with more should help those with less.


150 Nonunion County Workers in Nassau to Start Receiving Layoff Notices
With 3,000 unionized Nassau County workers facing layoffs, county officials said today that they would begin notifying 150 nonunion employees by Friday that their jobs, too, are being eliminated.
David Veiser, a spokesman for Thomas S. Gulotta, the Nassau County Executive, declined to specify which jobs would be eliminated.
The cutbacks were announced on Monday by Mr.
Gulotta, who also said he would impose a 5 percent pay cut for nonunion employees making over $65,000 a year.


Ross to Leave Ga. TechAnd Coach Chargers
In yesterday's episode of the National Football League Coaches Sweeps, Bobby (Ross) said yes to Bobby (Beathard) in San Diego and Buddy (Ryan) wants to be a buddy to Hugh (Culverhouse), who was spurned by Bill (Parcells), in Tampa Bay.
Yes, BOBBY ROSS resigned as Georgia Tech's coach and will sign a contract in San Diego tomorrow with General Manager BOBBY BEATHARD to become the Chargers' head coach.


CHRONICLE
MOTHER TERESA remained in serious condition yesterday, recovering from pneumonia and congestive heart failure.
But her spirits were lifted on New Year's Eve after she received a telephone call from POPE JOHN PAUL II.


Schwartz Brothers reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Computertime Network reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Republic Health reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Spy's Library Holds Many Volumes but No Secrets
"WHAT secrets have you learned?" is usually the first question Henry L. Grant is asked when he is introduced as curator of the personal library of William J. Casey, the former Director of Central Intelligence.
"But I have to tell them there aren't any juicy documents lying around," Mr.
Grant said.
"The C.I.A. made sure of that long ago."


Scimed Life Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sports of The Times; Baseball's Sinus Pain Recurs
ON July 31, 1990, on the morning after George Steinbrenner was exiled from baseball, Commissioner Fay Vincent had a phone call from an old friend.
Bob Strauss, known formally as Robert S. Strauss, once the national chairman of the Democratic Party and now the United States Ambassador to Russia, was on the horn.
"Just remember," Strauss told the commissioner, "that George Steinbrenner is like sinus. He may not be bothering you today, but he'll always be there."


Polyphase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Though the Body's Still Warm, The Cold War Is Collectible
1991: The Cold War ends.
A new collecting opportunity begins.
History take note: Norman Brosterman, lone devotee of the Techno-Future, was there.
At the "Modernism" antiques show in Manhattan last fall, Mr.
Brosterman showed the world the meaning of modernism, as defined by Norman Brosterman.
While other dealers gloated over their Stickley and Art Nouveau, Mr.
Brosterman showed up with paintings of enemy missiles zooming over Washington and mannequins in NASA helmets and spacesuits decked out for the space race.


5-Touchdown Flurry Sinks Vols
In one of the most improbable comebacks in recent memory, a Penn State football team that trailed by 10 points late in the third quarter scored five touchdowns in a span of less than 8 minutes today and rallied for a 42-17 victory over Tennessee in the 21st Fiesta Bowl.
"We were in absolute disbelief on the sidelines and I'm sure they were too," said the Penn State quarterback, Tony Sacca, who completed only 11 passes, but threw four for touchdowns.


Charities Can't Forgo Corporate Donations
To the Editor:
Re "A Short Cheer for the I.R.S." (editorial, Dec. 16): While the Cotton Bowl should not be the Mobil Cotton Bowl, no matter how many millions Mobil contributes, the Internal Revenue Service should make it clear that such contributions, short of takeover of an organization or event by blatant advertising, are not only acceptable but also desirable.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL
Coach Paul Pasqualoni brought his Syracuse team to the Hall of Fame Bowl here with a simple two-pronged plan: have fun and win.
The Orangemen succeeded on both counts.
Pasqualoni imposed no curfew on his players until the two nights preceding today's game against Ohio State.


Castle Group Selling Russian TV Time
The Castle Group, a New York-based merchant bank, has signed an agreement with the Russian State Television and Radio Broadcasting Company, giving it rights to sell commercial time to Western advertisers during the network's broadcasts of the Winter and Summer Olympics.


Martech USA reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Slain Officer May Have Been Protecting One Thief From Another
The police are investigating whether an off-duty police officer who was killed on Saturday when he broke up a a robbery at a bank cash machine may have been protecting one thief from another.
Detectives think that the robbery victim, who fled while Sgt.
Keith R. Levine was killed, "possibly is a criminal" because records from the bank branch indicate that "a stolen automated-teller-machine card was used before the homicide," said Sgt.
Peter Sweeney, a spokesman for the police.


Twigs That Grew Up As Tables
HIS father was a carpenter, and as a small boy in the Adirondacks, Arne Smith became familiar with the rustic furniture of upstate New York.
Mr.
Smith was particularly fascinated with the mosaic twig-work that developed at the turn of the century around Raquette Lake.
The pieces were made from split twigs of different sizes and colors.
The twigs were assembled into decorative patterns.


Vincent Expects Steinbrenner Will End Suits
Baseball Commissioner Fay Vincent said yesterday that he expected George Steinbrenner to soon clear away two lawsuits related to his banishment from baseball, opening the way for negotiations to begin over Steinbrenner's return as head of the Yankees.
Vincent said yesterday it was his understanding that Steinbrenner was moving toward seeing that the lawsuits were dropped.
While Vincent has said repeatedly that there would be no negotiations until the suits were dropped, his comments yesterday were the first sign that Steinbrenner was moving to do so.


Banking Crisis Still Grips Rhode Island
On New Year's Day 1991, Bruce Sundlun was inaugurated as the new Governor of Rhode Island.
Less than an hour after the ceremony, he announced that 45 banks and credit unions would be closed indefinitely because of the collapse of the Rhode Island Share and Deposit Indemnity Corporation, the private fund that insured them.
More than $1 billion, belonging to more than 150,000 depositors, was frozen.
A year later, many of those people still have not been paid, and state regulators are still ironing out how to do so.


The Children Came First: A Retirement Plan Without a Nest Egg
In 1988, after 32 years as an employee of the New York Telephone Company, Charles Ellis, now 63, took early retirement.
His wife, Rosemarie, 58, plans to retire in 1996 from her job as a senior clerk at an aerospace company.
When their five children were growing up, the Ellises had to spend their income as quickly as they earned it, with little left for luxuries or savings.
Now that their childrean are out of school and on their own, the couple faces retirement without substantial cash savings to fall back on.


Super Food Services reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 23


Staodyn Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


CHRONICLE
The Iceberg Club, a New York winter bathing society, splashed into the Atlantic Ocean off of Coney Island yesterday afternoon for a swim in honor of their leader, VIC BOFF, who is retiring this year to Cape Coral, Fla.
Seven of the club's members swam for 15 minutes, took a break and then jumped in for another dip.


APL Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Philharmonic; What's a New Year's Eve Without Party Animals?
There are two traditions of New Year's Eve orchestral concerts.
The dominant one treats the evening as an opportunity for frivolity and escapism, a chance to set aside everyday burdens and be surrounded by music that is lush, undemanding and entertaining.
The alternative view is that the evening is best used for reflection, either on the year gone by and the one about to begin or on some humanistic ideals that might yet be attained.
The New York Philharmonic generally chooses its New Year's Eve programs from the less strenuous column A, but within that context, this year's program offered a few odd twists.
The concert, a benefit for the orchestra's pension fund, was conducted by Leonard Slatkin and had as its centerpiece a wickedly unconventional rendering of Saint-Saens's popular "Carnival of the Animals."


U.S. Pawn Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


With Islanders, the Defense Rests
Only the San Jose Sharks have given up more goals than the Islanders this season, and they have excuses.
They are an expansion team and they have played two more games.
The Islanders have no such rationalizations, and their 8-5 loss to the Washington Capitals today was a poor excuse for a hockey game.
New York trailed by 2-1 after one period and by 6-2 after two.
Only a letdown by the home team early in the third period gave the Islanders some faint, brief, false hope for an upset.


Editorial Notebook; Faces of Japan
After just a week in Japan, some familiar American stereotypes about this country and its people seem shockingly superficial and dangerously out-of-date.
Japanese society differs from America's in important ways.
But like American society, Japanese society is neither monolithic nor static.
Today's Japan is one of the world's most modern, most affluent societies, plugged into every trend in international pop culture and a powerful creator of new trends for others.
Its young people are highly educated, fashion-conscious and remarkably well traveled.
Its face is far more diverse, and youthful, than would ever be guessed from the cautious politicians and corporate tycoons who dominate the news.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: It's Election Day for Miami and Washington; Cornhuskers Caught in Eye of Hurricanes
The suspense did not develop until late on New Year's night.
There was none all evening, not in the Orange Bowl, where the Miami Hurricanes have been unbeatable for more than six years.
The Hurricanes, a group with no audible shortage of confidence, surprised themselves with a defensive effort that became a memorable exclamation point.
Miami raised its level from unbeatable to suffocating as it overpowered, outran and overwhelmed Nebraska, 22-0, in the 58th Orange Bowl.


Save Somalia From Itself
Since civil war broke out in Somalia on Nov. 17, as many as 20,000 people, mainly civilians, have been killed or wounded.
Many more Somalis are starving to death because the fighting is preventing relief agencies from distributing emergency food supplies in the East African country.
Most of the thousands of injured Somalis cannot make it to the few rudimentary hospitals remaining in Mogadishu, the capital.
The war continues to escalate, yet the world largely ignores it.
The fighting pits two clans of the Hawiye tribe, who are battling for control of Mogadishu.
Other factions, including forces of ousted dictator, Mohammed Siad Barre, control other regions.
One group, the Somali National Movement, has declared an independent state in the north of the country.


Bill of Rights Only Spelled Out Our Freedoms; Why Madison Switched
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis reports in "If Madison Were Here" (column, Dec. 13): "James Madison, who had opposed a bill of rights, was persuaded and drafted the amendments." Madison's changed position was the product of Jefferson's persistent urgings, a political deal with the Virginia Ratifying Convention to offer a bill of rights in exchange for the delegates' favorable vote on the Constitution and a campaign promise during his Congressional race with James Monroe.


Markets Closed For the Holiday
Financial markets around the world were closed yesterday in observance of the New Year's Day holiday.
Banks, government offices and most businesses were also closed.


Let Us Recognize Imprudence's Part in Contracting AIDS; Test Before Surgery
To the Editor:
In "Good AIDS, Bad AIDS" (Op-Ed, Dec. 10), Randy Shilts argues we should not judge AIDS victims by their life style, and especially that anger should not distort objective discussions.
But he does not go far enough in defining facts and evaluating measures to assess the problem.


Standard Logic Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


International Consumer reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Phnom Penh Journal; Lord Buddha Returns, With Artists His Soldiers
Chay Hun brushed clay dust from the face of one of the scores of brightly colored Buddha sculptures on display in front of the factory in which she is trying to restore the shattered artistic heritage of Cambodian Buddhism.
"Once, to make Buddha images would have meant my death," said Mrs.
Chay Hun, who has joined with other impoverished Cambodian artisans in several small factories in trying to replace the millions of Buddhist works of art and ritual objects destroyed in the 1970's by the avowedly godless Khmer Rouge.
"Now, to make Buddha images is my duty."


Sportscene Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 24


In New Hampshire, Needy Schools Test a Tradition: Little State Aid
When a ceiling collapsed in the elementary school here, officials were so strapped for money that they had to take proceeds from a candy sale by parents that had been intended for a new playground.
Similar shortages in poorer towns around New Hampshire have prompted five school districts to sue Gov.
Judd Gregg and other officials, challenging the state's system of paying for public education and, by extension, its most cherished political policy: the refusal to adopt a state income tax or sales tax.


U.S. DISASTER AID WAS COSTLY IN '91
A sharp increase in the number of natural disasters that state and local governments could not handle resulted in nearly a doubling of a normal year's Presidential disaster-aid declarations in 1991, the Federal Emergency Management Agency says.
In a report issued Monday, the agency said that a wide range of natural disasters -- from wildfires in Washington State to floods in Texas and Hurricane Bob along the Atlantic Coast -- caused President Bush to declare 43 major disasters last year.
That was 20 more than are declared in an average year, but only 5 more than were declared in 1990.


The Children Came First: A Retirement Plan Without a Nest Egg
In 1988, after 32 years as an employee of the New York Telephone Company, Charles Ellis, now 63, took early retirement.
His wife, Rosemarie, 58, plans to retire in 1996 from her job as a senior clerk at an aerospace company.
When their five children were growing up, the Ellises had to spend their income as quickly as they earned it, with little left for luxuries or savings.
Now that their childrean are out of school and on their own, the couple faces retirement without substantial cash savings to fall back on.


Hollywood Delighted At Holiday Success. But Relaxed? No.
The movie world opened the new year in a giddy but nervous mood.
After a tepid economic year in Hollywood, such films as "Hook," "Beauty and the Beast" and "Father of the Bride" did strong business over the holidays in a time of recession.
And many movie executives, vacationing in such places as Aspen, Colo.; Sun Valley, Idaho, and Maui, Hawaii, read their daily faxes of box office returns and proclaimed business better than ever.


URS Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Quotation of the Day
"Thanks to God, everything has come out well." -- President ALFREDO CRISTIANI of El Salvador.  [ A1:6 ]


In Vienna, a Secret Word: Biedermeier
FOR 10 years, Susan Yungbluth Pisarkiewicz and Ingrid Zerunian have been many a collector's secret sources in Austria for Biedermeier furnishings.
"But we'll look for anything," said Ms.
Pisarkiewicz (Pis-ZAR-kee-witz), who is currently visiting in New York while her partner minds the store in Vienna.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
IF you need more storage space after the holidays or if you want to break in some new tools, here are two easy shelving projects: one supported by brackets and standards, the other a hanging style.
Shelves attached by brackets to slotted metal standards or strips mounted on a wall are easy even for novices to build.
Hardware stores carry the standards and brackets and sometimes even prefinished shelves.
Or you can make the shelves yourself.
A good choice is nominal 1-by-8 lumber, which actually measures three quarters of an inch thick by seven and a quarter inches wide.
Plywood is suitable, but cutting it and neatly covering its raw edges will complicate the project.


Yeltsin and Russians Prepare For Harshness of Price Plan
Russians will wake up on Thursday with the cost of their no-frills existence suddenly far, far higher.
Their reactions to that fact will determine the success or failure of what amounts to a huge and fateful gamble by President Boris N. Yeltsin.
The long-anticipated "price liberalization" after years of artificially low fixed prices will let manufacturers, regional authorities and retailers set the prices of consumer goods and most food products.
The Government will continue to set ceilings on basic food and fuels, but even those will be three to five times higher.


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about a former deputy Controller of the Currency and retired professor at the University of Georgia misstated his name.
He was Robert C. Dince, not Roy.


The 'Gift Box' Atop a Hill By the Bay
ON the crest of a hill in the Fairmont Park district sits a house that looks like a gift box wrapped in bold stripes of cobalt and red-brown.
This box is decorated not with a bow, but with a trellis of fluorescent orange Plexiglas strips interwoven with night-blooming jasmine.
When the sun burns through the San Francisco fog, light bounces off the trellis, and it looks as if it has caught fire.


Moorco International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Precision Aerotech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Sparkling 'Gift Box' on a Hill Above the Bay


Ringer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Suffolk Swears In Gaffney As New County Executive
Robert J. Gaffney was sworn in as Suffolk County Executive today, promising to protect the environment, stimulate the business community and bring efficiency and common sense to a period "beset by hard times."
"We are not about to preside over the economic and social demise of a place which has been blessed with such bounty," he said in his inaugural address.
Mr.
Gaffney, a Republican, was sworn in by Judge Alan Oshrin of State Supreme Court in a midday ceremony at the Islip Arts Building here on the campus of Suffolk County Community College.


Sheldahl Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Circle Fine Art Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


20 Best Sellers of 1991


Russ Togs reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Key to Outer Warmth: The Under Garments
Skiers want clothing that is light enough to enable them to move freely but warm enough so that they will enjoy a long day on the slopes.
Retailers in ski regions throughout New England and other parts of the country say the answer, more often than not, comes down to underwear.


Long Viewed as Safe From Slumps, Las Vegas Finally Feels the Recession
For some time Las Vegas has purveyed an escapist world of fantasy and gambling and a view of itself as largely resistant to national recessions.
Now, the recession has finally hit the Strip, just as it has Atlantic City in New Jersey.
There are more visitors than ever under the neon glare, but they are gambling less and spending less.
The casinos' take has dropped substantially in recent months, local home sales are down from the torrid 1990 pace, and unemployment is up.
Even the high rollers are lying low; baccarat play is down by a third.


Journey's End Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


U.S.-Moscow Pact on Kabul Clears Way for Transitional Rule
An era ended in Afghanistan today, 12 years after a Soviet intervention that drew Washington into a proxy war with Moscow over a poor crossroads country that for centuries had been the focus of big-power rivalry.
Under an agreement announced on Sept. 13, Kabul's former backers in Moscow and the United States pledged to end all military assistance to their respective allies -- the leftist Government of President Najibullah in Afghanistan and a loose alliance of Islamic rebel groups based in Pakistan -- by the first of this year.


Let Us Recognize Imprudence's Part in Contracting AIDS; Government Research
To the Editor:
I agree with Randy Shilts (Op-Ed, Dec. 10) that the anger of Kimberly Bergalis's family about health care workers infected with the AIDS virus is misinformed.
However, his statement that the reason we don't have better treatment for the disease is that the Government did little in research or prevention is overly simple.


Bank Robber Kills Himself After Creating Standoff in California


Overhauling Services: The Long, Painful Process -- A Special Report; Employment in Service Industry, Impetus to Boom in 80's, Falters
For decades, banks, fast-food restaurants, hospitals, law firms, retail chains and governments -- the so-called service sector -- have been the engine that powered the great American job machine.
In the 1980's, when services added a stunning 21 million jobs and employed almost four out of five workers, Americans debated whether service jobs were good jobs or bad jobs, but basically took the steady growth of services for granted.
No more.
Except for health care, the services are in the throes of a pervasive shake-up very much like the one that racked smokestack manufacturing a decade ago.
The concerted drive to squeeze costs and improve profits has resulted in extensive cost-cutting, job freezes, layoffs, consolidations and takeovers.
The storm threatens to last much longer than the recession -- prolonged, very likely, by the wave of white-collar layoffs and the unusual reluctance among service companies to hire.


Cardinal O'Connor in Lebanon At Start of Middle Eastern Tour
The Archbishop of New York, John Cardinal O'Connor, arrived here from Egypt today as part of a tour of Middle East countries that will also take him to Jordan, Israel and possibly Syria.
The Cardinal flew into Beirut's international airport in the Muslim part of the city and told reporters, "I come full of hope for Lebanon."


Bill of Rights Only Spelled Out Our Freedoms
To the Editor:
As we celebrate the 200th anniversary of the Bill of Rights, it is especially appropriate that we see that amazing document not only for what it is, but also for what it is not.
Most important, we should be aware that the first 10 were not amendments as we usually understand that word.


Investors' Hopes Overseas Shaded by Doubt
The professionals who spend their time pondering foreign stock markets say that on balance they are optimistic about 1992.
But their optimism, bolstered by an end-of-the-year rally, is tempered by the underlying economic outlook, especially uncertainity about a global recovery.
This makes 1992 harder to call than 1991, despite the threat of the war at the beginning of last year.


Notre Dame Ground Game Leaves Gators Gasping
Notre Dame, with no national-championship illusions after embarrassing loses to Tennessee and Penn State, ended Florida's dream season tonight with a crunching running game that the Gators and their fans will not soon forget.
Jerome Bettis scored three touchdowns and rushed for 150 yards as Notre Dame upset Florida, 39-28, in the Sugar Bowl.


Op-Ed Columnists
The days on which Op-Ed columnists appear are customarily rotated every six months.
Here is the schedule through June 30:


Ultimap reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


So Far, So Good, and So Go the Rangers
The new year has arrived, the regular season is exactly half done, and the Rangers have not yet been separated from their Stanley Cup dreams.
If anything, the midway point finds them 11 games over .500 and among the four National Hockey League teams most easily projected as potential champions.


Mediq Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Man Hanged in Jail Is Called a Suicide
The Union County Prosecutor said today that an autopsy performed on Bilal Pretlow, a 21-year-old man identified by Federal officials as the leader of this city's major cocaine-trafficking gang, indicated that he had committed suicide.
Mr.
Pretlow was found hanged in the Union County Jail here on Sunday evening.
Prosecutor Andrew K. Ruotolo said that the results of the autopsy were "consistent with a self-inflicted hanging." He said the cause of death was listed as asphyxiation.


Time to Get Serious About the Cavaliers
By ending the 1991 portion of their season with an 18-8 record, the Knicks exceeded almost everyone's expectations.
Will the new year bring more prosperity?
The first test of 1992 comes tonight, when the Knicks are hosts to the Cleveland Cavaliers, a team that is playing as well as any other in the National Basketball Association.


METRO DIGEST
EXAMINING NEW YORK'S URBAN SPRAWL
Without quite noticing it, the New York area, home of the ultimate American city, has transformed itself into a sprawling, dispersed region that more than ever resembles Los Angeles.
A movie at the multiplex or a trip to Bridgewater Commons has become as much a day out as a journey to Lincoln Center or Herald Square.
A recent New York Times Poll reflects the weakening ties between New York City and the region around it.
A1.


Stewart Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Walls of Shame Keep Homeless From School
It may seem as if the homeless are everywhere in New York City these days, but the one place they often are not is in school.
A decade after large numbers of families began living in shelters and hotels throughout the city, little has been done to make it easy for the homeless to keep their children in school, advocates for schools and the homeless say.


Blizzards Blanket the Eastern Mediterranean Region


Reunion With Romania? Moldova Is Intrigued
The traffic on the road from this northeastern Romanian city to Kishinev, the Moldovan capital across the once-inviolate Soviet border, is heavy these days.
Merchants and ordinary residents of the Romania-Moldova border region with anything from woolen scarves to concrete to sell are taking advantage of increasingly porous frontiers to increase cross-border trade.
And among the pioneers are people like Alexandru Lazescu, a Romanian journalist, who is trying to make borders irrelevant.


KRG Management reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Bush Assures Australians of His Support
President Bush sought today to reassure Australia that he intends to uphold its economic stability and its security, saying that the United States would maintain its military presence in the Pacific despite its own economic troubles and the fading of the Soviet threat.
Mr.
Bush made the remarks at a news conference midway through a three-day visit to Australia, where critics have questioned his commitment to freer trade and the reliability of American military forces in the region.


Low Rates Expected to Continue for Bonds
Credit market analysts and economists say the precipitous decline in short-term interest rates engineered by the Federal Reserve Board over the last 18 months should begin to pay some dividends for the economy in the second half of this year.
Few of them, however, expect much more than a tepid rebound.
If they are right, short-term rates will stay low, and bond yields, which remained stubbornly high through much of 1991, will probably fall.


Bowl (Zap) Day (Zap) Bonanza (Zap)
Ohhhhhhh my, eight bowls in 12 hours.
A mind-numbing, eye-glazing parade of college football.
Half a day with Jackson and Bradshaw and Musburger and Walsh and Michaels.
The best and worst day of collegiate sports.
A half-day to reflect on the imminent need for a new battery to power the remote control.
Yes, it's worktime for Mr.
Couch Potato Head.
Time for the Peach Bowl to beget the Hall of Fame Bowl, the Citrus Bowl, the Cotton Bowl and the Fiesta Bowl.
And now we join the ultimate Big Ugly Day, at:


INSIDE
Croatia Accepts Peace Plan
Croatia joined Serbia and the Yugoslav Army in accepting the United Nations proposal for possible peacekeeping troops.
Page A3.
Era Ends in Afghanistan
Kabul's former backers in Moscow and the United States have ended all military assistance to their respective allies in Afghanistan.
Page A4. 9th Stampede Victim Dies
As a ninth victim died from injuries in the fatal stampede at City College a New York official leading the inves-tigation faults the college.
Page B1.


Picking Up the Pieces
Replacements Ltd.
1089 Knox Road, P.O. Box 26029, Greensboro, N.C. 27420; (919) 697-3000.
Crystal stemware might be the most fragile item you can own.
Some goblets and sorbet dishes break so easily that their owners don't bother to look for replacements, particularly for hard-to-find patterns.


Minerex Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


New York City Children Haven't Lost Any Classroom Time
To the Editor:
You report (news article, Dec. 6, and The Week in Review, Dec. 15) that New York City schoolteachers will have two extra days off in this school year.


Israel Plans New Housing in West Bank
Israel's Government has yielded to the demands of far-right parties and Jewish settler groups by agreeing that two-thirds of the publicly financed houses and apartments anticipated in the 1992 budget will be built in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
In addition, press reports today said that about $26 million has been approved for new roads and job programs in the occupied territories.


From Leg Lifts to 'Later' on First Day of New Year
On New Year's Day, some people make resolutions.
Others act on them.
The latter species could be found in the New York Health and Racquet Club on West 56th Street and one of the few fitness centers open in the New York metropolitan region.
While the weaker-willed made vows to eat right and get fit over one last Bloody Mary or burger, gladiators of the 1990's sweated in the New Year.
"Unfortunately, this place was open," said Lorraine Noel, who, wearing a black leotard, stood outside a packed and vigorous step aerobic class, one of a small crowd of compulsives impatiently waiting for the 1 o'clock session.
"Actually, I was hoping all the clubs would be closed, so I'd have an excuse." Ms.
Noel, a secretary, had made a resolution for 1992 that was shared by virtually everyone in that seven-floor, 45,000-square-foot mirror-and-steel temple of tautness.
"I just want to keep doing what I am doing, exercise every day and stay healthy." The 'Weekend Warriors'
Guilt-ridden gourmands in New Jersey flocked to Bally's Holiday Fitness Center, a health spa at Quaker Bridge Mall in Lawrenceville.
"We're seeing our share of weekend warriors today," said Kevin T. McClain, the assistant manager, who spent the day guiding dozens of potential clients on an open house of his gym.
"With all the holiday food, the cookies and the extra poundage, you've got a lot of people with New Year's resolutions to lose weight."


Bridge
For the first time ever, New York enthusiasts were able to end a year with a tournament.
The Greater New York Bridge Association's Winter Regional Championships concluded New Year's Eve in Manhattan, and four players had more than most to celebrate.
Christal Henner, Roy Welland, both of Manhattan, Steve Nellissen of Mahwah, N.J., and Adam Wildavsky of Jackson Heights, Queens, won the Flight A Swiss Teams with considerable help from the diagramed deal.
Welland, who was en route along with his partner, Henner, to his fifth regional victory in 1991, found himself in four spades as South and regretted his optimism when a heart was led.
He won the first trick with the heart king, and led a trump, which brought the jack, queen and ace.


Magic Johnson Spots To Begin Tonight
The first public service advertising spurred by Magic Johnson's announcement that he had tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS begins running tonight on national network television.
Converse Inc., the athletic-shoe marketer, has purchased $1 million of air time through the next three weeks for a 30-second commercial, which features Kevin Johnson of the Phoenix Suns and Larry Johnson of the Charlotte Hornets, and Rick Pitino, basketball coach at the University of Kentucky.
The spot shows the three, all Converse endorsers, talking about how the virus can infect anyone.


Books of The Times; Americans as America's Own Worst Enemy
Anti-Americanism Critiques at Home and Abroad, 1965-1990 By Paul Hollander 515 pages.
Oxford University Press. $35.
After plowing through the thickets of a dense and depressing sociological tract titled "Anti-Americanism," the only good news is that the new year has nowhere to go but up.
It's an unwittingly anti-American book that is actually intended to be a defense of what the author considers to be the one true patriotic American way: his vision of a squeaky-clean, uncritical acceptance of the government and the country.


Kurt Masur in Leipzig: A Favorite Son at Home
His towering frame draped in baggy brown slacks and a gray shirt opened at the collar and not tucked in, Kurt Masur raised his arms and the Gewandhaus Orchestra stirred to life as though its genial music director had never been away.
It was his third visit to Leipzig, where he remains Kapellmeister, since assuming the directorship of the New York Philharmonic in September.
At the end of his 10 days here, he will have conducted Beethoven's Ninth Symphony three times, including on New Year's Eve, extending a tradition begun in December 1918 by a predecessor here, Arthur Nikisch, in the dark aftermath of World War I.


The Fear in Russian Eyes
Russia makes a perilous leap to markets today when it lifts price controls on nearly all consumer products.
Prices are expected to triple, or more, grinding millions of Russians -- those without a mountain of rubles stuffed under mattresses -- further into poverty.
No matter what preparations were in place, the leap wouldn't be easy or graceful.
But in Russia, virtually nothing is in place to absorb the shock: no sizable Western aid, no banking or taxation systems and no functioning safety net for those who will be crunched.
What makes the situation truly terrifying is that Russia is flying off on its own by launching economic and military reforms that could harm its neighbors.


Sony Official To Aiwa Unit
Akinobu Ishihara, an executive at the Sony Corporation in Japan, is moving from Tokyo to New Jersey to become the president and chief executive of Aiwa America Inc., the United States unit of the Aiwa Company, which is based in Japan.
In making the announcement on Tuesday, Aiwa said Mr.
Ishihara replaced Yukio Utsunomiya, who had joined Sony.
Mr.
Utsunomiya had been the president and chief executive at Aiwa since 1987.


Abroad at Home; He Let In The Light
Mikhail Gorbachev went out like the old year, unmourned.
There was a grudging quality to much of the comment when he resigned.
He was not a true democrat, the critics said.
He fumbled economic change.
He temporized, he wavered, he failed.
The criticism was even harsher at home.
Roy Medvedev, the anti-Stalinist Communist historian, said: "The country that was the Soviet Union in 1985 when Mikhail Gorbachev came to power was incomparably better, given all its deficiencies, than it is today."


Long-Stifled Dresden Debates Highway to Prague
Nearly 60 years after Hitler promised the people of eastern Germany a highway that would connect Dresden to Prague and points south, planning for the road is under way.
Government officials say the highway will boost Dresden's economy and provide a long-needed transit link for motorists and truck drivers.
But some of the city's residents are unconvinced.


Warring Yugoslavs Accept U.N. Plan
Croatia joined Serbia and the pro-Serb Yugoslav Army today in formally accepting a United Nations proposal for the possible deployment of an international peacekeeping force in war-ravaged regions of the breakaway Yugoslav republic.
Croatia's agreement to the peacekeeping plan has raised hopes that an end to full-scale warfare in Yugoslavia might be in sight.


VSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


People
*
Vicky Alex has been named executive vice president at International Medical News Group, New York, a publisher of newspapers for doctors.
She had previously been director of advertising.


A Career, At 85, to Tip Your Hat To
EIGHTY-FIVE years old and retired to Miami Beach, Joseph Abrams, who was a costume jewelry designer, started making hats.
Out of newspaper.
Mr.
Abrams keeps a stack of newspapers by his bed, ready to cut, fold and glue into strange shapes.
He adorns his hats with trees, birds and snakes.
Even cartons of milk.
And he actually wears them.


Medi-Mail Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


For President, Help in Tokyo; Intent of the Japanese Is to Bolster a Friend
President Bush's trip to Japan next week has turned into a messy confrontation over trade and a major test for Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.
But Japanese leaders also hope to make the trip at least look like a success for an American President viewed as a friend.
Aides to Mr.
Miyazawa were dismayed when domestic problems forced Mr.
Bush first to postpone his visit, originally scheduled for November, and then to take along 21 executives of the American automobile and other industries to demand greater access to Japanese markets.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
IT can be almost painful to watch very shy children, overwhelmed and tense, acutely aware of their vulnerabilities.
For many, timidity around new people is a temporary response to stresses at home.
For a few, it is a part of a larger set of anxieties and discomforts that may last a lifetime.
"The average person you meet is either shy, used to be shy, or is easily shy in certain situations," said Dr.
Philip Zimbardo, a professor of psychology at Stanford University and the author of "Shyness: What It Is, What to Do About It" (Addison Wesley, 1990; $6.95).
"Only about 10 percent of Americans say they've never felt shy."


Oxboro Medical International reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Calendar: Winter Classes Begin
Mexican Textiles
Museum of American Folk Art, Feld Gallery at Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 66th Street; (212) 977-7298.


Mary F. Rice, 89, Dies; A Catholic Educator
Mary Frances Rice, known as Sister Berenice of the Order of St.
Ursula, a retired faculty member and trustee of the College of New Rochelle, died on Sunday at the Marian Residence in New Rochelle, N.Y.
She was 89 years old.
Sister Berenice was a member of the Ursuline Convent of St.
Teresa, having entered the Ursuline Order in 1925.
Three years later, she became an English instructor at her alma mater in New Rochelle, an independent women's college founded by the order in 1904.
After earning a Ph.D. in psychology from Catholic University of America in 1938, she started the psychology department at New Rochelle and headed it from 1942 to 1967.


'Time for Her to Be at Rest'
As an agent for the New York City Department of Transportation, 20-year-old Dawn McCaine spent the last year placing tickets on the windshields of illegally parked cars.
But she often did so reluctantly, particularly during the Christmas season.
"She felt guilty," her sister Bernice recalled last evening, after Ms.
McCaine became the ninth victim to die from the stampede at a celebrity basketball event at City College on Saturday.
"Around the holidays she would never ticket cars near the supermarkets or churches or hospitals. She just wrote tickets elsewhere."


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: It's Election Day for Miami and Washington; Huskies Sit Back And Smell Roses With 12-0 Mark
With only the polling and the computing remaining, the University of Washington, No. 1 somewhere between the end of the Rose Bowl and the end of the night, made a convincing case for itself today with a 34-14 victory over Michigan.
"There's no question in my mind that we're No. 1 in the country," defensive tackle Steve Emtman said after the 78th Rose Bowl had ended.
"We proved that we can play with anybody, and we're 12-0."


SALVADOR ACCORD AIMS AT QUICK END TO LONG CIVIL WAR
The peace agreement reached early this morning by the Government of El Salvador and its guerrilla enemies will bring an almost immediate halt to their fighting and a final end to the 12 years of civil war there by autumn, rebel and Government officials said.
Diplomats said that the accord, wrapped up by Javier Perez de Cuellar in the final moments of his term as Secretary General of the United Nations, contains a number of points that have yet to be resolved, including details of the dismantling of the rebels' military structure and a comprehensive schedule for putting its various provisions into effect.
Signing Set for Jan. 16
Although the two sides have negotiated other incomplete agreements in the past, this time they devised a guarantee to back their categorical promise that a formal cease-fire would go into effect on Feb. 1.
The guarantee provides that if they fail to settle their remaining differences by Jan. 10, the United Nations would have the power to decide them.
In either case, they said, "final agreements of peace" will be signed in Mexico City on Jan. 16.


National Data Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Defense For Oilers Is Now in Spotlight
Houston's run-and-shoot offense is always susceptible to the whims of a stiff breeze.
And the Oilers have shown that their rushing attack isn't steady enough to keep the pressure off their passing game.
It's a good thing the Oilers found their defense just in time for Saturday's American Football Conference divisional playoff game against the Broncos at Mile High Stadium in Denver.


Tenants to Buy Building With Help of Neediest
Under Adele Larry's plaster-chunk ceiling, the tenants were trying to decide what was the worst thing about their Bronx apartment building.
Ms.
Larry said it was the faulty heating system that forced her to spend winter nights huddled near her oven and to sleep in her winter coat. 'This Is Our Home'
Regina Anderson said it was the foot-long rats she "used to watch play tag in my kitchen."


De Rose Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A.J. Ross Logistics reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Italians Polish Their Wine Image
SEEKING to increase "share of mouth" among American oenophiles, the Italian Trade Commission is beginning a multimillion-dollar campaign for fine Italian wines, its first in four years.
The advertising links Italy's premium wines with art, fashion, food and opera, under a "quality of life" theme.


Cimflex Teknowledge reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Dissonant Messages of 1991
The stock market story of 1991 was one of prices that soared early in the year and again at the end, producing an excellent year for large stocks, and a phenomenal one for small stocks.
But the economy barely limped along, with the weakness returning in the summer and consumer confidence plunging to its lowest level in a decade.
Such a divergence suggests that something has to give, that either the economy will pick up soon or the stock market will have to surrender.
Some market bears even suggest that both could happen.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ Page D1. ]


Statewest Airlines Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Indian Rebels Said to Be Based in Bangladesh
Pro-independence groups from northeastern India have set up bases and offices in neighboring Bangladesh and placed millions of dollars in banks to finance their insurgencies, especially in the state of Assam, Indian officials say.
The officials, citing intelligence information, said the United Liberation Front of Asom, the main guerrilla group in Assam, had established an office in Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh, a transit camp for rebels and three training and arms collection centers near the Indian border.


Essay; No 'Horror Show'
Put yourself in the shoes of an assignment editor for any of the news media today, as shoppers in Russia return to stores closed for the New Year's holiday.
You dispatch reporters to cover an inflationary horror show.
What Gorbachev had long flinched from doing, Boris Yeltsin has just dared to do: ended the state subsidies for most goods, removed the corrupt bureaucracy from the marketplace and opened the economy to the law of supply and demand.


Review/Film; Harsh Family Business In a Haunting Siberia
"The Second Circle" begins with a haunting, enigmatic image: a man walks along an empty, snowy road, struggling against the wind.
Suddenly he bends, as if kneeling in prayer, and slowly vanishes as snow fills the screen.
There is no sound except the wind, no sign of life except the radio tower that looms in the distance like a halfhearted joke about civilization.
As it turns out, this young man is heading to a Siberian village to bury his father, and the harsh, bone-chilling landscape he trudges across is the perfect introduction to this uncompromising, imagistic, masterly work by the Russian film maker Aleksandr Sokurov.


Higher Hurdles for Young Smokers
All anyone has to do to find out why young people need to be discouraged from smoking is to look at the adjacent chart.
It's about women and lung cancer and death.
Lung cancer usually takes 20 or so years to develop.
In the 1960's, not many women had been smoking that long, which is why their death rate from the disease was 23.9 per 100,000 from 1960 to 1964.
From 1982 to 1986, however, that sinister black bar stretched to 130.4 deaths -- and today more women succumb to cancer of the lung than of the breast.
Baby sure
has
come a long way.


CHRONICLE
GLORIA STEINEM says she is finally making her house a home after living in the same apartment for nearly 25 years.


Home Video
Ask about prospects for movies on videotape this year and most people in the industry talk about the big hits, though not necessarily favorably.
While no one objects to a classic like "Fantasia" luring crowds into video stores, some say they are worried that overemphasis on super titles undermines home video's long-term role as a source of all kinds of movies.


Let Us Recognize Imprudence's Part in Contracting AIDS
To the Editor:
Randy Shilts in "Good AIDS, Bad AIDS" (Op-Ed, Dec. 10) states his concern for all disease victims.
He suggests that the only "wrong" committed by those who have contracted AIDS from dirty needles is that they were born black or Hispanic.
True, using contaminated needles is not "wrong," but it is imprudent.
The virtual banishing of this concept from our language enables Mr.
Shilts to imply that people who ignore medical warnings deserve our sympathy because they are helpless puppets -- for otherwise they would be criminals.


DISSONANT MESSAGES: Market Place; Can the Rally Endure Without a Recovery?
Rarely in the history of Wall Street has a year ended with such opposing messages coming from the stock market and the economy.
The stock market story of 1991 was one of prices that soared early in the year and again at the end, producing an excellent year for large stocks, and a phenomenal one for small stocks.
The Nasdaq composite index had its best year ever, rising 57 percent.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 20 percent.


Mixed Messages of '91


An Uncertain Outlook For Dollar's Rebound
As the new year begins, the dollar is falling, just like last year.
But analysts are not soon expecting a sudden and sharp rebound of the sort that occurred at the beginning of 1991.
In fact, some forecasts show the dollar falling to record lows against the German mark before it makes a modest recovery late in the year.
The latest jolt to the sagging dollar came the week before Christmas, when the Bundesbank raised German interest rates sharply and the Federal Reserve cut American interest rates sharply a day later.
By the end of the year, the dollar had lost almost all the ground it had gained against the mark and other European currencies in 1991 and had fallen against the yen as well.


For Many in the New York Region, The City Is Ignored and Irrelevant
Without quite noticing it, the New York area, home of the ultimate American city, has transformed itself into a sprawling, dispersed region that more than ever resembles Los Angeles, where a movie at the multiplex or a trip to Bridgewater Commons has become as much a day out as a journey to Lincoln Center or Herald Square.
In place of a "the-subway-can-get-me-there" attitude that survived the first moves to the suburbs from places like the Grand Concourse in the Bronx or Flatbush in Brooklyn, a new culture has taken hold.
Many residents in the ring of communities around the city never lived in the five boroughs, hardly ever visit the city and do not care much about what happens there.


Three Summer-Camp Fairs
Your child is hoping for snow.
New sleds and ice skates sit near the door.
And it's time to start thinking about summer camp.
The first of two free camp fairs at the 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, (212) 996-1100, will be held on Jan. 12 from noon to 4 P.M.
Fifty sleep-away and day camps in the Northeast, including camps run by the Y, will be represented.
The second fair, featuring 45 private and agency-run camps in the Northeast, will be held on March 1 from 2 to 6 P.M.


Time for Government to Start Spending Again
To the Editor:
While spending by individuals and businesses is an important component of the United States economy, it is a mistake to underestimate the role that Government spending plays in driving the economic engine.


MMI Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


Dinkins Aide Faults College In Stampede
As a ninth victim died from injuries suffered in the fatal crush at a City College charity basketball game on Saturday, the New York official leading the city's investigation suggested yesterday that the college itself was ultimately responsible for the calamity.
The official, Deputy Mayor Milton Mollen, said he had seen no evidence that the police acted improperly.


Ringside Seat on Corporate Disasters
Harold D. Jones has had a front-row seat on the excesses of an era.
As the United States trustee in charge of administering all bankruptcy cases in New York, Connecticut and Vermont, he has seen hundreds of thousands of parties file for bankruptcies.
And he says he does not expect much letup.
"Come January, we're going to get inundated because Christmas may not be so wonderful, and many retailers may fall in," he predicted in an interview last month.


The 'Gift Box' Atop a Hill By the Bay
ON the crest of a hill in the Fairmont Park district sits a house that looks like a gift box wrapped in bold stripes of cobalt and red-brown.
This box is decorated not with a bow, but with a trellis of fluorescent orange Plexiglas strips interwoven with night-blooming jasmine.
When the sun burns through the San Francisco fog, light bounces off the trellis, and it looks as if it has caught fire.


Healthcare Imaging Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


India Seems Adrift in Changed World
Last August, when most of the world's leaders were rushing to denounce the hard-liners' coup in the Soviet Union, India's Prime Minister, P. V. Narasimha Rao, declared that the coup was an instructive example of what happens to "over-enthusiastic reformers."
Unfortunately for the Prime Minister, and India's foreign policy as a whole, Boris N. Yeltsin crushed the plotters, resurrected Mikhail S. Gorbachev and began the final disassembling of the Soviet Union.
Since then, India has struggled to cope with the new landscape in the old Soviet Union and has begun to search for its own place in a world that is changing rapidly, in ways that have upset India's traditional assumptions.


Fatal Beating Is Changed From Bias-Related Crime
In an incident that the police at first classified as bias-related -- but later downgraded -- a black man died of head injuries Tuesday night, four days after he was beaten with a baseball bat and repeatedly kicked by five white men on a Queens street, the police said.
The sister of the victim said a friend who was with her brother at the time of the attack told her that the epithet "nigger" was shouted by one or more of the assailants before they attacked him and then chased him into the street in South Ozone Park, where they beat him again.


2 Charities for Poor Children Battle Over a Name
Usually occupied with helping the world's poorest children, a Connecticut-based charity has recently become embroiled in a nettlesome legal and public-relations battle over its own name.
Save the Children, a 60-year-old nonprofit organization with headquarters here, has become more than a little upset over a newer, increasingly well-financed group also dedicated to aiding impoverished children.
To defend its trademarked name and stave off what some organization officials say is an intentional effort to create public confusion about the two groups, Save the Children has sued the newer charity, Feed the Children, which is based in Oklahoma City, charging trademark infringement.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Czechs Reach Final  Karel Novacek and Helena Sukova combined for a mixed-doubles victory over Boris Becker and an ailing Steffi Graf last night, lifting Czechoslovakia to a 2-1 victory over Germany in the semifinals of the Hopman Cup at Perth, Australia.
The Czechoslovaks will face either Spain or Switzerland in the final tomorrow night.
Graf had a virus for the first two days of the event and defaulted from her singles match against Sukova with the players tied at one-set all.
Becker defeated Novacek, 6-2, 7-6 (7-1), to even the contest at 1-1 but the Czechoslovak pair won the doubles, 6-4, 6-4.
Graf's serve was broken once in each set of the doubles -- the only service breaks of the match. (AP) Steeb Advances: Sixth-seeded Carl-Uwe Steeb of Germany recovered from a slow start for a 4-6, 6-2, 6-3 victory over Sandon Stolle of Australia yesterday in the second round of the Australian Hardcourt championship at Adelaide.
The powerful left-hander gained the quarterfinals, along with the unseeded Rodolphe Gilbert of France and Bryan Shelton of the United States.
Shelton defeated Karsten Braasch of Germany, 7-6 (7-5), 6-3, while left-hander Gilbert defeated Christo van Rensburg of South Africa, 6-4, 6-3.
Steeb can pass $1 million in career earnings if he wins the tournament. (AP) Ferreira Gains: Third-seeded Wayne Ferreira of South Africa eliminated the defending champion, Richard Fromberg of Australia, 7-6, (7-3), 7-5, yesterday in the first round of the BP Nationals at Wellington, New Zealand.
A field of 4,550, second largest in the history of the 13-year meet, participated in the run.
Judy St.
Hillaire of Fall River, Mass., set a women's meet record of 25:58.
Lynn Jennings set the previous ecord of 26:13 last year. (AP)


Skyline Chili Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27


Miami and UConn In Big East Debut
The Miami Hurricanes are about to make their great leap forward into Big East Conference basketball, and most people expect them to land on their faces.





Continental Pharma Cryosan reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Rocky Mountain Helicopters reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


20 Best Sellers of 1991
UNLIKE the fashion world, the decorating world never quite knows if its hemlines are headed up or down.
Just what are American rooms wearing this year?
The editors of The Home Section decided not to ask the taste makers, as is the custom, but to hold a plebiscite: here and on page C6, 20 home-furnishings stores in and around New York City report their best sellers of 1991.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A2-12 SALVADOR ACCORD: PEACE AT LAST?
The Salvadoran peace agreement reached at the U.N. will bring an almost immediate truce in the 12-year civil war, and by autumn, disbanding of the five rebel armies, Government and rebel officials said.
Some points are unresolved.
A1  The rebel soldiers' joy eclipsed even the Rolling Stones.
A12  UNEASY FRIENDSHIP
News Analysis: Bush's trip to Japan next week has turned into a messy confrontation over trade, and a major political test for Miyazawa.
But the Japanese also hope to make the trip at least look like a success for a President they view as a friend.
A1  Bush reassures Australia on economy and security.
A10  THE PRICE IS WRONG
Russian consumers wake up today with the cost of their no-frills existence far higher.
Their reactions will determine the success or failure of Yeltsin's fateful political and economic gamble.
A1  Georgia's opposition talked of forming an interim government.
A8  Reunion with Romania?
The Moldovans are intrigued.
A9  CROATIA AGREES TO U.N.
FORCE
Croatia joined Serbia and the Yugoslav Army in formally accepting a United Nations proposal for the possile deployment of an international peacekeeping force in embattled regions of its territory.
A3  LOOKING ELSEWHERE FOR ARMS
With the cessation of arms aid from Moscow, an era ended in the Afghan war.
But now, Muslim rebels fear that Najibullah may find new benefactors in bordering former Soviet republics that fear an Islamic government in Kabul.
A4  MORE HOUSING IN THE TERRITORIES
The Israeli Government has yielded to the demands of far-right parties and Jewish settlers, agreeing that two-thirds of the publicly financed houses and apartments in 1992 will be built in the occupied West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
A3  Cardinal O'Connor, on Mideast tour, arrives in Lebanon.
A2 Saddam Hussein's oldest son urges public executions.
A3 Phnom Penh Journal: Once again, Buddhism safe and serene.
A4 Assam rebels were said to operate from Bangladesh A5 India seems adrift in a world without its Soviet mentor.
A6 A planned Dresden-Prague highway upsets environmentalists.
A7  NATIONAL A14-18  NEW HAMPSHIRE TAX DEBATE
For years New Hampshire has prided itself on having neither a state income tax nor a state sales tax, but with the state caught in its worse financial straits since the Great Depression, pressure is on for a new source of revenue.
A1  THE JOB MACHINE FALTERS
For decades, banks, fast-food restaurants, hospitals, law firms, retail chains and governments have been the engine that powered the great American job machine.
No more.
Except for health care, the services are in the throes of a pervasive shake-up.
A1  WHITHER THE STOCK MARKET?
The stock market story of 1991 was one of prices that soared early in the year and again at the end.
But the economy barely limped along, and consumer confidence plunged to its lowest level in a decade.
Such a divergence suggests that something has to give.
D1  RINGSIDE SEAT ON DISASTER
Harold D. Jones has had a front-row seat on the excesses of an era.
As the United States trustee in charge of administering all bankruptcy cases in New York, Connecticut and Vermont, he has seen hundreds of thousands of parties file for bankruptcies.
And he says he does not expect much letup.
D1  TIED UP IN RHODE ISLAND
A year after the newly elected Governor of Rhode Island ordered the closing of 45 banks and credit unions, many of the people whose accounts were frozen have still not been paid, and state regulators are still ironing out how to do so.
A14  A DIMMER LAS VEGAS STRIP
Las Vegas has long sold itself as a fantasy world largely resistant to recessions.
But now hard times have finally hit the Strip.
A14  BALLOON TECHNIQUE FOR ARTERIES
Using a balloon to open clogged arteries works better than medicine alone for relieving chest pain, a new study found.A16  GOOD NEWS FOR NEWBORNS
The use of deep anesthesia to protect newborns from pain during surgery appears to substantially improve their chances of survival.
A16  Flooding worsens in southeast Texas near Houston.
A15  Federal disaster aid declarations rose in 1991.
A15  METROPOLITAN Digest, B1 THE SPRAWLING APPLE?
Without quite noticing it, the New York area has transformed itself into a sprawling region that more than ever resembles Los Angeles, where a movie at the multiplex has become as much a day out as a journey to Lincoln Center or Herald Square.
A1  NO HOME AND NO SCHOOL
It may seem as if the homeless are everywhere in New York City these days, but the one place they often are not is in school.
A decade after large numbers of families began living in shelters and hotels throughout the city, little has been done to make it easy for the homeless to keep their children in school, advocates for schools and the homeless say.
A1  Neediest Cases B3  BUSINESS Digest, D1 The Home Section C1-12  20 best sellers of 1991.
C1  Though the body's still warm, the cold war is collectible.
C1  In a father's house, there are many mansions.
C2  Arts/Entertainment C15-22  Giddy but nervous, the film industry greets 1992.
C15  With Masur in Leipzig.
C15  Film: "The Second Circle." C15  Obituaries A19  Sports B6-13  Baseball: Steinbrenner expected to drop lawsuits.
B7  Column: Anderson on Steinbrenner and Yanks.
B7  Football: Miami shuts out Nebraska in Orange Bowl.
B7  Rose Bowl: Washington 34, Michigan 14.
B7  Sugar Bowl: Notre Dame 39, Florida 28.
B8  Hall of Fame Bowl: Syracuse 24, Ohio State 17.
B9  Fiesta Bowl: Penn State 42, Tennessee 17.
B9  Cotton Bowl: Florida State 10, Texas A&amp;M 2.
B9  Peach Bowl: East Carolina 37, N.C.
State 34.
B10  Citrus Bowl: California 37, Clemson 13.
B10  Hockey: Capitals defeat Islanders, 8-5.
B12  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  EditorialsA20  The fear in Russian eyes.
Hurdles for young smokers.
David C. Unger: Japan.
Letters A20  William Safire: No "horror show." A21  Anthony Lewis: He let in the light.
A21  Tyrus W. Cobb: Neutralize nuclear mercenaries.
A21  Nancy Kassebaum and Paul Simon: Save Somalia from itself.
A21


Morehouse Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Pavichevich Brewing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Washington Routs Michigan to Stake Claim for No. 1


Edward John Willi, Lawyer, 88
Edward John Willi, a New York lawyer, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
Mr.
Willi, a lifelong resident of Manhattan, was 88 years old.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


Offerings and Fees Reach New Highs
American corporations' demand for cash from the public markets grew to record levels last year, despite the country's economic troubles, helping to build renewed strength for Wall Street firms.
Corporations issued a record $579.75 billion in domestic securities, up by 85.8 percent from the previous year's record of $312.11 billion, according to IDD Information Services, a New York-based research firm.


Machine Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


At Florist's, The Pot's The Thing
TOM PRITCHARD, an owner of Pure Madderlake, a high-style florist at 478 Broadway (Broome Street), had this "fun idea" -- a shallow terra-cotta bulb pan (2 1/4 inches high, $10) and a similar pan for azaleas (3 inches high, $12).
"We've always been fascinated with English orchid pots, but they are disappearing," said Mr.
Pritchard, speaking for the shop.
It is trying for "wonderfully misshapen" pots that look "old and loved." And the pots are numbered.
"That was my way of dealing with decoration," he said.


Eat Your Forgotten Slogan Out
THE message becomes clearer as you eat:
"Comrades that work get paid."
"He who does not work does not eat."
"The land is for the workers."


New Campaigns
*
An elaborate advertising and promotional campaign reminiscent of the children's book phenomenon, "Where's Waldo?," is being introduced on behalf of the Quaker Oats Company's Cap'n Crunch cereal.
The campaign asks consumers to determine "Who's the real Cap'n" amid "jillions" of look-alikes.
Television commercials and print advertisements are being created by Bayer Bess Vanderwarker in Chicago; there will also be a sweepstakes and a Cap'n Crunch impersonator contest judged by Ron Smith's Celebrity Look-Alikes.


Friends of Man Slain by Officer Plan a Protest
On the spot in the Brooklyn street where Hector Rivera was killed on New Year's Eve, shot by a police officer when the unarmed man put his hand into an empty paper bag, friends and relatives yesterday placed candles and flowers and messages of peace.
A few feet away, where the night before neighbors had screamed "You killed him!" and officers had formed a protective ring around the 21-year-old who fired the fatal shot, there was both grief and anger yesterday.


News Service Editor
Keith J. Kelly, editorial director of Magazine Week in New York, is leaving that position, effective Jan. 10, to take a post at Cowles Business Media Inc. in New York.
Mr.
Kelly, 37 years old, will become editor of an electronic news service for media executives, now being developed for introduction in 1992 and editor at large for Cowles's Folio and Publishing News magazines.
A successor at Magazine Week has not yet been named.


Valley Forge Scientific reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Croatia's Tudjman Is Really a Moderate
To the Editor:
I appreciate Anthony Lewis's insightful assessment of the war in Croatia in "The Killing Goes On" (column, Dec. 20).
However, he makes certain allegations concerning Croatia's president, Franjo Tudjman, that are unsupported, biased, and simply untrue when he states:


Supreme Court Case May Determine Fate of Thousands Seeking Asylum
Jairo Jonathan Elias Zacarias was 18 years old in January 1987 when two masked guerrillas armed with machine guns went to his parents' home in Guatemala at dusk, asked him to join their army and, when he refused, told him: "Piensalo bien," or, think it over well.
Several weeks later, with the equivalent of only $20 in his pocket, Mr.
Elias fled, making his way to Mexico and then toward the United States, sometimes sleeping outdoors and working for a few weeks to save money for the next bus ride.
He crossed the border near Nogales, Ariz., on July 12, 1987, and was immediately picked up by officers of the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service.


Foreign Affairs; Japan, Jobs and Baloney
President Bush says his trip to Japan next week is about "jobs, jobs, jobs."
But even to a tin ear that sounds like politics, politics, politics.


Review/Photography; The Faces and Lives Of Black Achievers
In 1932, at the age of 52, Carl Van Vechten gave up his career as a critic and novelist to photograph black American poets, writers, painters and performers.
He pursued this ambitious project until shortly before his death in 1964, recording a host of renowned figures, including Marian Anderson, James Baldwin, Romare Bearden, Ella Fitzgerald, Dizzy Gillespie, Zora Neale Hurston and Richard Wright.
The marvelous exhibition "Oh, Write My Name," at the Manhattan East Gallery on the Upper East Side, presents 50 of Van Vechten's portraits in rich photogravure prints by the acclaimed printmaker Richard Benson.
Van Vechten made good use of a few stylistic elements to achieve a surprisingly wide range of expression in his pictures.
The portraits, photographed with a 35-millimeter camera, are all verticals and present the subjects framed from the waist up.
For most of the pictures, Van Vechten adopted the simple device of posing his subjects in front of distinctively patterned fabrics.
In one, a professorial W. C. Handy is shown in front of a star-spangled background, while the painter Jacob Lawrence appears in a picture from 1941 seated in front of a cloth printed in interlocking geometric forms.
No doubt this was practical, allowing him to take pictures in virtually any setting.
But it also gives the photographs both consistency and diversity, while not distracting from the main business of recording the appearance of the sitter.


Sparing a Dime, Whether They Agree or Not
During the morning rush hour yesterday at the Borough Hall subway station in Brooklyn, flames leaped from a trash bin fire that the station manager said probably was set by someone with a ravaged mind.
But to a grumbling commuter, John Beranbaum, a civil rights lawyer, the fire looked like a "subterranean protest" of the new $1.25 fare.
Already pinched for money from the holidays and the recession, New Yorkers returned to the subways and buses yesterday to encounter a fare increase that had them waiting in longer-than-usual lines and digging into pockets for an extra dime.
The fare increase provoked a range of emotions, from indifference to peevish resignation.


Yields of Money Funds Post A Mixed Showing for Week
Yields of money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the week ended Tuesday.
Assets of taxable funds declined sharply in the same period, as investors sought higher interest elsewhere.
Tax-exempt money fund yields moved up smartly in the latest week.
The rise in yields was attributed to a combination of seasonal factors and, to some extent, a dwindling demand for money market funds.


Study Criticizes U.S. Deal On Sale of Bailout Property
A Congressional report released today said that a deal the Bush Administration had called a model for disposing of savings and loan properties in bulk was wasteful, uncompetitive and plagued by financial uncertainties.
The report, by the staff of a House Banking subcommittee, covers the discount sale, announced in August, of hundreds of millions of dollars of office buildings and hotels to Patriot American Investors L.P., a newly formed group of Canadian and American investors.


Man Indicted in Killing Of U.S. Judge in 1989
A state grand jury has indicted Walter Leroy Moody Jr. on capital murder charges in the 1989 mail-bomb slaying of a Federal judge, a prosecutor said today.
Mr.
Moody, a 58-year-old resident of Rex, Ga., could be sentenced to death if convicted.
He is already serving seven life terms plus 400 years for Federal convictions last year in the December 1989 slayings of a United States Circuit Court Judge, Robert Vance, and Robert E. Robinson, a civil rights lawyer in Savannah, Ga.


Long-Term Issues Plunge Sharply
The new year began on a somewhat sour note in the credit markets yesterday, as prices of longer-dated notes and bonds fell fairly sharply, and interest rates rose.
The selloff took place despite the release of more dispiriting news about the economy, the type of information that market participants normally like to see.


Why Did It Have to Take 'J.F.K.' to Wake Us?; Raises Suspicions
To the Editor:
"When Everything Amounts to Nothing," your review of the film "J.F.K.," directed by Oliver Stone (Dec. 20), though severely critical, nonetheless states: "What the film does do effectively is to present the case for the idea that there actually was a conspiracy, rather than the lone gunman, Lee Harvey Oswald, specified by the Warren Commission report." This statement supports one of Mr.
Stone's chief objectives in producing the movie.


Accounts
*
Ground Round Inc., Braintree, Mass., a restaurant chain, to Rossin Greenberg Seronick, Boston.
The account was previously handled by Houston Effler, Boston.
Billings are estimated at $2.5 million.


2 People Killed in an Explosion in Upstate New York


Why Did It Have to Take 'J.F.K.' to Wake Us?; Raises Suspicions
To the Editor:
"When Everything Amounts to Nothing," your review of the film "J.F.K.," directed by Oliver Stone (Dec. 20), though severely critical, nonetheless states: "What the film does do effectively is to present the case for the idea that there actually was a conspiracy, rather than the lone gunman, Lee Harvey Oswald, specified by the Warren Commission report." This statement supports one of Mr.
Stone's chief objectives in producing the movie.


Other States Follow Russia
Worried that suppliers would divert their goods to Russia, the leaders of Ukraine, Belarus and Moldova decided to free up prices too.
Page A8.


Yanks Closing In On Trade of Sax
The Yankees were on the verge last night of making their first significant trade in almost 18 months, a deal that would send Steve Sax, their only .300 hitter last season, to the Chicago White Sox.
In return, a source familiar with the talks between the teams said, the Yankees would acquire pitcher Melido Perez, and free up second base for the younger Pat Kelly, as well as at least $2 million on the payroll.


NBC Handles a Lost-Feed Frenzy
The best that can be said for NBC's 15-minute power outage during the Orange Bowl game Wednesday night is that it's lucky Miami had the game won handily.
It was 22-0 when power lines from the Orange Bowl to the NBC mobile truck burned out and 22-0 when power was restored and the game's video and audio returned intact.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Deere &amp; Co. is offering $200 million in 8 1/2 percent noncallable senior debentures due 2022 at 99.196 to yield 8.575 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The debentures are expected to be rated A-2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P.


Felicja Blumental, 80, Brazilian Pianist, Dies
Felicja Blumental, a Polish-born Brazilian pianist who was known for her performances of 19th-century rarities and music by contemporary composers, died on Tuesday in Tel Aviv, where she was attending a recital by her daughter, Annette Celine Blumental, a soprano.
She was 80 years old and lived in Monte Carlo.
She died of heart failure, said her husband, Markus Mizne.


O'Connor Pledges to Assist Lebanese in the Rebuilding
John Cardinal O'Connor, Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York, met today with top officials of the Lebanese Government and pledged a church charity to rebuilding one room in every house demolished in 16 years of civil war.
Emphasizing that his three-day visit to this country is a humanitarian mission, Cardinal O'Connor told reporters he was particularly concerned over the suffering of hundreds of thousands of Lebanese who had been driven out of their homes during the war.


New Campaigns
*
The latest radio commercials for TDK recording tapes often do not sound much different from the rock songs that precede and follow them.
The 60-second spots feature 50 seconds of uninterrupted music from new bands, like Pale Divine and Five Thirty, before a voice-over announcer begins promoting TDK tapes.
Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners created the spots, which continue to use the tagline "TDK. As Serious As You Can Get."


Wife of California Schools Chief Quits Project Under Investigation
The wife of the California schools chief resigned today as head of an educational consulting program that is under investigation by the state and Federal authorities.
The woman, Nancy Honig, said in a statement that she resigned from the program in the hope that questions over her involvement would not further affect it or her husband, Bill Honig, who is the Superintendent of Public Instruction.


Frogs Get a Leader
Former Heisman Trophy winner PAT SULLIVAN became head coach at Texas Christian yesterday and vowed to guide the Horned Frogs to the Cotton Bowl.


Once Again, Penguins Are Just Sitting Ducks
The first strong indication the Devils were ready for a big game tonight was when they limited the Pittsburgh Penguins, the defending Stanley Cup champion, to one shot in the first period.
When they killed a five-minute major penalty to Slava Fetisov against Mario Lemieux and friends late in the second period, the Devils were clearly on their way.
Their destination turned out to be a 4-0 victory over Pittsburgh at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the second in three nights over the Penguins (25-15-1).


Chadian Insurgents Claim Capture of 2 Towns
Rebels loyal to Chad's deposed former President have captured two towns near the capital of the Central African nation, diplomats said today.
France, the country's former colonial ruler, said it was reinforcing its garrison and putting warplanes on alert.


New Entertainment Weekly Campaign
Entertainment Weekly magazine is beginning the new year with a new trade advertising campaign and new recycled paper stock.
The campaign for the Time Inc.
Magazine Company weekly, by Deutsch Inc. in New York, dubs Entertainment Weekly "the chronicle of popular culture." The ads are meant to emphasize the larger role that pop culture is playing in American society, said Michael J. Klingensmith, publisher.


Restaurants
The Russian Tea Room, like the Soviet Government before it collapsed, has been propped up by legends and energetic public relations, but beneath all the hype there is little substance.
One wants to love the Russian Tea Room.
It is a festive New York City institution that glitters like a Christmas tree and has the aura of important people discussing important issues.
It's a shame that the pallid, overpriced food reduces it to a tourist trap.


Art in Review
Jasper Johns 'The Seasons'  Brooke Alexander Editions 476 Broome Street SoHo Through tomorrow
Jasper Johns's prints hardly suffer from lack of public exposure, but this exhibition adds much to the understanding of his work and to the process of printmaking in general.
The show's subject is the etchings based on the artist's "Seasons" paintings, four works whose unusually personal imagery includes the artist's shadow, various personal belongings and motifs from earlier work, as well as patches of weather that indicate spring, summer, fall and winter.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.25
4.09
7.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.86
3.84
6.44
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.87
3.85
6.40
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.41
6.34
7.82
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.46
7.39
8.10
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.60
8.57
9.44
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.70
6.65
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Art in Review
Lothar Baumgarten 'Carbon'  Marian Goodman Gallery 24 West 57th Street Through Jan. 18
The German artist Lothar Baumgarten here turns his attention from the native peoples he has celebrated in earlier work to industrial America, symbolized by the railroad.
In large black-and-white photographs that recall the work of Robert Adams and Lewis Baltz, Mr.
Baumgarten undertakes a sort of poetic archeology of industrial forms in the American landscape.


Excerpts From Mayor's Speech: A Vision of a City
Following are excerpts from yesterday's State of the City address by Mayor David N. Dinkins.
We have just ended another very difficult year, as life proved to be a little harder, a little harsher than the year before.
It has been a year that began with the threat of war abroad and that concluded with tragedy and injustice here at home, as nine promising young people were taken from us so cruelly in a stairwell at City College. . . .


Sounds Around Town
Rap at the Palladium
P.M.
Dawn, the Palladium, 126 East 14th Street, Manhattan, (212) 473-7171.
Live hip-hop concerts by new groups are always an uncertain proposition, but P.M.
Dawn's second American performance is more promising than most.
The New Jersey duo's first album mixes easygoing raps influenced by De La Soul and full-fledged songs about this life and the next; it's off-the-wall and utterly assured.
Tonight at midnight, with doors opening at 10 P.M. for dancing.
Admission is $15.
Steve Lacy's Sax
Steve Lacy, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, at Mulberry Street, Manhattan, (212) 219-3055.
The soprano saxophonist Steve Lacy is to perform in two settings.
Tonight at 9 and midnight, he offers solos that are likely to be unhurried, meticulous, calmly far-reaching explorations of angular melodies; tickets are $12.
Tomorrow at 9 P.M., he joins Samm Bennett on percussion and Tom Cora on cello as part of Third Person, a continuing series of collaborations.
Tickets are $10.


A Moment of Glory, Then the Power Chipper


Australia's Focus, Like Bush's, Is Tokyo
President Bush wound up a three-day visit to Australia today, having proved his will to keep the United States in a strong position in Asia, but failing to dispel a gnawing fear that he lacks the means to do so.
Just as in Washington, Australian officials said today, the worries here center on Japan, whose growing influence the United States seems hard pressed to balance, much less channel to its own benefit.


CUNY Officials Review City College Leadership
Several officials and trustees of the City University of New York said yesterday that they are reviewing the leadership of City College after an extraordinarily troubled year.
Marred by a three-week student strike and a storm of criticism over racially charged remarks by professors, the year ended with the deaths of nine young people who were crushed outside a campus gymnasium last Saturday.
A major focus of the review is what some officials say has been the lax oversight by college officials of student groups and activities, including the Evening Student Government.
Members of that student organization contracted with professional rap promoters to put on a basketball game that featured a host of rap stars and drew twice as many people as the 2,700-seat gymnasium holds.


Samuelson Shifts Her Sights to 10,000
JOAN BENOIT SAMUELSON has decided not to compete with herself -- that is the runner she was when she won the first women's Olympic marathon in 1984.
Instead of trying for a place on this year's United States marathon team, she will seek a spot with the 10,000-meter contingent.
"On paper, I may look better in the marathon," said Samuelson, who has been bedridden with the flu this week, "but I'm more eager and excited to run the 10,000."


Books of The Times; Life in a Country Where Nothing Works Out
Sleepwalker in a Fog  By Tatyana Tolstaya  192 Pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $19.
For Tatyana Tolstaya's characters, everything about daily life in the former Soviet Union seems "shopworn, squalid, fifth-rate, with cavities and defects, abscesses and flaws." Good apartments, good jobs, good food -- and as far as the women are concerned, even good men -- are hard to find.
Faced with little prospect of bettering their real lives, they indulge in wistful daydreams about the long-lost past and rhapsodic fantasies about an impossible future.


Man Arrested Is Linked to Long List of Robberies
To get into his victims' apartments in a poor Bronx neighborhood, he posed as a building superintendent, and once inside, the police say, he would use a gun and a threat to kill their children to rob his victims.
Yesterday, a man coming out of a building in the Morrisania section of the Bronx, where there had just been such a robbery, was arrested and linked to a long list of crimes.


YUGOSLAV FACTIONS AGREE TO U.N. PLAN TO HALT CIVIL WAR
Leaders of the Serbian-led Yugoslav Army and the Croatian National Guard pledged today to cease hostilities on Friday, raising hopes that United Nations peacekeeping forces could be deployed to separate the warring factions in Yugoslavia.
The accord, reached in Sarajevo during four hours of negotiations led by Cyrus R. Vance, the United Nations Special Envoy, says, "Each party agrees to the complete cessation of all hostile military activity on land, at sea and in the air." The cease-fire is to take effect by 6 P.M. local time (noon, Eastern time).


A Corner of Middle Europe Where Empires Mean Little
Ukraine begins on the other side of a border pole here that thrusts across a road and makes cars pull up short.
Poland is no more than 20 miles to the north.
Hungary is a little nearer southward, Romania only a bit further to the southeast.
The ethnic, linguistic and religious mix of Eastern Europe is nowhere more concentrated than along these slopes of the Carpathian Mountains.


UConn Wallops Miami
If the sport was football, Connecticut would be hard pressed to stay even with Miami for five minutes.
But it was basketball at Gampel Pavilion tonight, and the Hurricanes from Miami were never even with the unbeaten Huskies, who registered their ninth victory of the season, 85-62.
The defeat was the sixth in 11 games for Miami, which made its basketball debut in the Big East Conference.
The Hurricane basketball program was swept into the conference along with some lesser sports last year as an afterthought to the fancy football team, which was seen as the keystone to the Big East's ambitious plans for a football conference.


In Rural New York City, Where Wild Things Are
THERE'S a quiet to a winter woods that can bring subtle surprises to visitors who walk softly.
A light snow had blanketed the forest in Pelham Bay Park in the northeast Bronx recently and there, to the observant eye, were tracks of sparrow, pheasant, squirrel and muskrat.
The muskrat's paws had left four prints in the snow, shaped much like human hands, and its tail had carved a knifelike line right up the middle.


People
*
Marie-Claude Stockl has been named senior vice president and director of the marketing communications group in the New York office of Hill &amp; Knowlton Inc..
She had previously been senior vice president and director of the consumer group at Manning, Selvage &amp; Lee in New York.


Without Werdann, Redmen Pull Together
The starting center was on the bench in street clothes tonight, and he watched his St.
John's teammates beat Villanova and come up with something new this season -- 40 quality minutes from the center position.
With Robert Werdann sidelined because of a pulled muscle in his right calf, St.
John's seemed uncharacteristically aggressive and creative underneath the offensive glass.
The result was a 79-69 road victory for the Redmen at DuPont Pavilion.


A Leisured Stay In the Lap of Luxury
IT was condition orange, shading to red.
The room-service waiter at the Essex House was on his knees trying to free a tricky latch on the rolling breakfast table and remove its portable heating unit.
But the thing wouldn't budge.
He looked up, stricken, and said, "Oh, sir, I know, I am taking too long." The genuine anguish in his voice made it clear that I would be well within my rights to horsewhip him on the spot.
And I wondered: What sadist is in charge of the hotel's training program?
After a 20-month renovation costing more than $75 million, the Essex House on Central Park South has thrown open its doors.
Once familiar to television viewers as the hotel where "Saturday Night Live" parked its guests, it was bought by Nikko Hotels International, a subsidiary of Japan Airlines, in 1985.
In 1989, the company began a total overhaul of the 60-year-old hotel that has left only the Art Deco elevator doors intact.
The reborn Essex House has new plumbing, heating, ventilation and air-conditioning systems, a new look (sumptuous and marbled), fewer and larger rooms and standards of service so high that the lesser staff walks in fear.


Study on Breast Cancer Finds Therapy Is Effective for Years
In findings that have startled even the most optimistic experts, the largest analysis of breast cancer patients ever conducted shows that the life-saving benefits of widely used hormone or drug treatments prevail for at least 10 years, long after therapy has ended.
The difference in breast cancer recurrence and death rates actually continued to increase several years after even relatively brief treatment had ended, the analysis showed.
Benefits of the synthetic hormone, tamoxifen, or a combination of drugs in chemotherapy were even more striking in the second five-year period than in the first.


New Measure Will Punish Fraud in Car Registration
New Yorkers and other out-of-staters who try to beat high automobile-insurance rates by falsely registering their cars in New Jersey will face stiff fines -- up to $15,000 -- under a bill signed into law today by Gov.
Jim Florio.
The new law makes it a violation of the state's Fraud Prevention Act for any out-of-state motorist to misrepresent his legal residence in applying for automobile insurance.
First offenders can be fined $5,000, a second offense is subject to a fine of $10,000, and third and subsequent offenses, $15,000.


United Telecom to Buy GTE's Stake in Sprint
United Telecommunications Inc., which owns 80.1 percent of U S Sprint, said yesterday that it planned to buy the remaining 19.9 percent from the GTE Corporation for $530 million.
The purchase, which had been widely expected, caps United Telecom's takeover of the nation's third-largest long-distance carrier, created through the merger of the two companies' long-distance units in 1986.
United Telecom bought an additional 30.1 percent stake from GTE in 1989.


Windfalls Offer a Chance to Give to the Neediest, and to Reflect
At a time when many New Yorkers are defining luck as a steady paycheck, sudden windfalls can be occasions for sober reflection, say contributors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"Last year my husband found a small white change purse on the floor of his taxi," wrote Susan Hermanson of Manhattan, who gave $100.
"We have tried off and on over the months to get through the bureaucracy of the Taxi and Limousine Commission to see if anything like that had been reported missing. Since I am at last giving up, I thought at least that money could be put to some better use than some of our more trivial household expenses."


Texans Fear New Rains Could Worsen Flooding


Upjohn Turns to Women To Increase Rogaine Sales
HAVING learned in selling Rogaine to men that the prescription hair-loss treatment does not sell itself, the Upjohn Company is planning an aggressive advertising campaign to market the product to women.
Beginning Monday, television commercials and print advertisements by Klemtner Advertising Inc. in New York will address women worried about baldness in the same direct, assertive tones that have infused the agency's ads aimed at men for the last two years.
That contrasts dramatically with the initial, almost passive approach taken in the campaign for Rogaine, Upjohn's brand name for its 2 percent solution of the drug minoxidil.


Frank Carrington, 55, Victims' Rights Lawyer
Frank G. Carrington, a lawyer who served on a Presidential panel that advocated victims' rights, died in a fire yesterday at his home in Virginia Beach, Va.
He was 55.
Mr.
Carrington devoted his legal career to addressing the needs of victims of crime, arguing that they had been overlooked by courts seeking to protect the civil rights of defendants.
In 1981 he was appointed by President Ronald Reagan to the Task Force on Victims of Crime.
In April 1991, he was honored by President Bush for "outstanding service on behalf of crime victims."


Licensed-Product Sales Drop 4.5%
For the first time in 15 years, retail sales of licensed products in the United States and Canada have declined, according to the Licensing Letter, a trade publication from EPM Communciations Inc.


BRIEFS
*
American Home Products Corp., New York, and Oncogene Science Inc., Manhasset, L.I., said they would jointly develop gene transcription-based drugs for treatment of diabetes, asthma and osteoporosis. *
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Co., New York, said it had completed the sale of its Bekaert Textiles subsidiary to Gamma Holding N.V., Helmond, the Netherlands.
The value of the transaction was not disclosed.


Improvising That Evokes New Orleans
New Orleans polyphony -- the shouting, honking and howling sound of a marching band's horns intermeshed with drumming -- is one of America's great contributions to music in the 20th century.
Listening to a full band joyously improvising is an ecstatic -- and increasingly rare -- experience.
Much of the polyphony now being played in New Orleans, mostly for tourists, is but a sad shadow of the original music.
But New Yorkers have a chance to hear true, traditional polyphony in all its raw beauty this weekend at the Village Vanguard.
The New Orleans clarinetist Michael White will be leading his Original Liberty Jazz Band, a septet that, for a few sets at least, may include the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis.


Purchasers Index Drops Sharply
The nation's industrial economy, stalled by declining orders and lower production, contracted in December for the third consecutive month, to its lowest level since May, the nation's purchasing managers said yesterday.
The report was the first significant indication of the state of the economy last month.
The survey by the National Association of Purchasing Management came as the Government reported that construction spending slowed in November and the nation's auto makers said their sales remained weak in mid-December.
The Labor Department said that first-time claims for unemployment insurance fell during the third week in December, but economists noted that they were still at a recessionary level.
Reading Indicates Contraction
The association's monthly survey, conducted with more than 300 purchasing managers from a wide range of industrial companies, put its main index of economic activity at 46.5 percent in December, down from 50.1 percent in November.
The association said the last reading below 50 percent was in May, when it was 45.4.
A reading below 50 percent indicates that the economy is contracting while a reading above 50 percent indicates expansion.


Why Did It Have to Take 'J.F.K.' to Wake Us?
To the Editor:
I have read with great interest your extensive coverage of Oliver Stone's film "J.F.K." However, only Mr.
Stone himself, in "Who Is Rewriting History?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 20), speaks in support of the movie.


Bush Signals He's Prepared For Tough Campaign in '92
Acknowledging that it will be "very difficult" to get re-elected without an economic recovery, President Bush says he is girding for a "dog-eat-dog fight" in the campaign and will do whatever it takes to win.
In an interview with David Frost that is to be broadcast Friday night by the Public Broadcasting Service (9 o'clock Eastern standard time, and on Channels 13 and 49 in the New York area), Mr.
Bush tried to project confidence about the economy, citing predictions that it would recover by July.


Preliminary 1991 Figures Show Drop in Homicides
After seeming most of the year to be headed toward another record number of murders, New York City may have had fewer homicides in 1991 than in 1990, the first decline in the city in six years, according to preliminary figures gathered by the Police Department.
At the same time, The Associated Press reported that three of the nation's 10 largest cities -- San Diego, Dallas and Phoenix -- set homicide records in 1991, and in a fourth city, Los Angeles, it seemed almost certain that a record was broken, although year-end statistics were not available yesterday.
Several smaller cities also set records, according to the A.P. report.


Who Won in Salvador? Everyone
After 11 years, El Salvador's Government and guerrilla armies have at last agreed to end a war neither can win in exchange for a peace from which both can gain.
The Government won a chance to turn its energies from killing to development, along with good prospects for foreign aid in reconstruction.
The guerrillas won an official commitment to economic, social and political reforms, along with an opportunity for their fighters to return, safely, to normal pursuits.


3 BOMBS SET OFF IN SOUTH AFRICA
The bombings of three public buildings in different Transvaal towns in the first days of 1992 have raised concern that white militants are embarking on a violent campaign of resistance to the dismantling of apartheid undertaken by President F. W. de Klerk.
Early today, bombs severely damaged post offices in Verwoerdburg, south of Pretoria, and Krugersdorp, west of Johannesburg.
The powerful blasts, which occurred about 2:10 A.M. in Verwoerdburg and 3:15 P.M. in Krugersdorp, gutted both post offices and shattered nearby windows.


Hertz Imposing Stiff Surcharges On New Yorkers
The Hertz Corporation effectively withdrew from a large part of the New York City car-rental market yesterday, announcing that it would impose surcharges of $15 to $56 a day on residents of Queens, Brooklyn and the Bronx who rent cars anywhere in the metropolitan region.
A surcharge of $3 would be added for Manhattan residents, with no extra charge for Staten Island residents.


Files of East German Secret Police Are Opened but Few Seek Access
The secret police files kept on eastern Germans by their former Communist Government were formally opened for public inspection today, but the storm of interest that many had predicted failed to materialize.
Only a trickle of people, mainly artists, writers and human rights campaigners, showed up at the gray stone building in Berlin that houses the agency responsible for granting access to the files, which were kept by the former East German secret police, known as the Stasi.


Last Chance
Here is a listing of shows, performances, art exhibitions and Christmas tree displays that will be closing soon in the New York metropolitan region and Washington.
Closing This Weekend
"AFRICA EXPLORES: 20TH-CENTURY AFRICAN ART," Center for African Art, 54 East 68th Street, Manhattan.
This examination of the diverse strands of mostly contemporary African art includes the satirical paintings of Cheri Samba and the painted cement figures of Sunday Jack Akpan.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Fridays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2.50 ($1.50 for the elderly and children).
Information: (212) 861-1200.
BIG APPLE CIRCUS, Damrosch Park, Lincoln Center.
Performances, today at 7 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday at 12:30 and 4 P.M.
Through Sunday.
Tickets, $20 to $45.
Information: (212) 307-7171.
"THE CRUCIBLE," by Arthur Miller, starring Martin Sheen, Belasco Theater, 44th Street east of Broadway, Manhattan.
Performances: today and tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
All but the 2 P.M. show today are sold out.
Through Sunday.
Tickets, $10 and $35.
Information: (212) 239-6280.
"MASTERPIECES OF THE MORGAN LIBRARY," Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, Manhattan.
To inaugurate its new wing, the Pierpont offers the largest exhibition it has had of its permanent collection: more than 275 master drawings and prints, illuminated manuscripts, rare books and music manuscripts.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Sunday from 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 685-0008.
"THE NUTCRACKER," choreographed by George Balanchine, presented by the New York City Ballet.
New York State Theater.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 1 and 5 P.M.
Through Sunday.
Only partial-view tickets, from $20 to $50, or standing-room tickets, at $10, are available.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
MOMIX, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Manhattan.
Performances by the dance company: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $28.
Through Sunday.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
"ON BORROWED TIME," Broadway play by Paul Osborne, with George C. Scott.
Circle in the Square, 50th Street, west of Broadway.
Performances: today, 8 P.M.; tomorrow, 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday, 3 P.M.
Through Sunday.
Remaining tickets, $36 to $50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"PETER PAN," Broadway musical with Cathy Rigby, Minskoff Theater, 45th Street west of Broadway, Manhattan.
Performances: today, 8 P.M.; tomorrow, 2 and 7:30 P.M., and Sunday, 3 P.M.
Through Sunday.
Tickets, $35 to $50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"SIGMAR POLKE," Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, Crown Heights.
A survey of 30 years of work by this German postwar painter.
Through Sunday.
Suggested admission: $4 ($2 for students, $1.50 for the elderly).
Hours: today through Sunday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Information: (718) 638-5000.
"RENO ONCE REMOVED," a one-woman show with Reno, Anspacher-Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, Manhattan.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M. and Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets, $25.
Through Sunday.
Information: (212) 598-7150.
ROCKEFELLER CENTER CHRISTMAS TREE. Through Sunday.
"UNDERCURRENTS IN THE FLOATING WORLD: CENSORSHIP AND JAPANESE PRINTS," Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, Manhattan.
A look at Ukiyo-e woodblock prints, known in the West for their influence on Impressionism and their sometimes erotic subject matter.
This exhibition traces 250 years of give and take between the artists and print publishers on the one hand and, on the other, the often rigid governmental controls of the Tokugawa Shogunate (1615-1868).
Through Sunday.
Hours: today, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Sunday from noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2 ($1 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 288-6400.
Closing Next Week
"THE CHRISTMAS SPECTACULAR," Radio City Music Hall, 1260 Avenue of the Americas, at 49th Street, Manhattan.
Daily performances start at 11 A.M.
Through Tuesday.
Tickets: $25 to $37.
Information: (212) 307-1000.
CITY HALL PARK CHRISTMAS TREE, Manhattan. Through Tuesday.
"DISLOCATIONS," Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
History, memory and identity (both national and personal) are a few of the themes that thread their way through this exhibition of seven environmental installation pieces.
The show is the first curatorial outing of Robert Storr and features the efforts of Louise Bourgeois, Chris Burden, Sophie Calle, David Hammons, Ilya Kabakov, Bruce Nauman and Adrian Piper.
Through Tuesday.
Hours: today through Tuesday, 11 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
Admission: $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free for children under 16).
Information: (212) 708-9480.
Closing Next Weekend
"THE GHOSTS OF VERSAILLES," by John Corigliano, Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance next Friday at 8 P.M.
Some standing-room tickets, at $9 and $12, may be available.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
"LA TRAVIATA," by Verdi, Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance Jan. 11 at 8 P.M.
Some partial view and standing-room tickets may be available.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
"AMERICAN LIFE IN AMERICAN ART," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
The 20th-century American experience as seen in paintings and sculptures from the Whitney Museum's permanent collection.
Through Jan. 12.
Hours: Sundays, noon to 6 P.M.; Tuesdays, 1 to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays through Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5 ($3 for students and the elderly; free for children under 12).
Information: (212) 570-3676.
CHRISTMAS TREE AND BAROQUE NEAPOLITAN CRECHE, Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Annual display of the museum's Christmas creche Neapolitan figures.
Through Jan. 12.
Hours: Sundays and Tuesdays through Thursdays, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Suggested admission: $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 879-5500.
"CIRCA 1492: ART IN THE AGE OF EXPLORATION," National Gallery of Art, 600 Constitution Avenue Northwest, Washington.
More than 600 works from Europe, Africa, Asia and the Americas representing the world's art at the time of Columbus.
Through Jan. 12.
Hours: Mondays through Thursdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Last week of exhibition: Sunday 11 A.M. to 8 P.M., Monday to Saturday open until 8 P.M.
Admission: Free.
Information: (202) 737-4215 or (202) 842-6690.
"FORBIDDEN BROADWAY'S FORBIDDEN CHRISTMAS," a satirical musical, written and directed by Gerard Alessandrini.
Theater East, 211 East 60th Street, Manhattan.
Performances, Tuesdays through Fridays, 8:30 P.M.; Saturdays, 7 and 10 P.M.; this Sunday, 3:30 P.M. (next Sunday, 3:30 and 7:30 P.M.) Tickets, $35 (Fridays and Saturdays); $32.50 (other days).
Through Jan. 12.
Information: (212) 838-9090.
"THE MIKADO," Gilbert and Sullivan operetta, Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street, Manhattan.
Presented by the New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players.
Performances: Thursdays and Fridays, 8 P.M.; Saturdays at 3 and 8 P.M. and Sundays at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $35.
Through Jan. 12.
Information: (212) 864-5400.
"NICOLAS LANCRET, 1690-1743," the Frick Collection, 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan.
The first retrospective devoted to this follower of Watteau and master of Rococo anecdote features 29 paintings and 16 drawings, including "Blind Man's Buff." Through Jan. 12.
Hours: Tuesdays to Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sundays from 1 to 6 P.M.
Admission: $3 ($1.50 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 288-0700.
"NO CURE FOR CANCER," one-man sketches by Denis Leary.
Actors' Playhouse, 100 Seventh Avenue South, near Bleecker Street, Manhattan.
Performances, Wednesdays through Saturdays, 8:30 P.M. and Sundays at 7 P.M.
Through Jan. 12.
Tickets, $18 (Fridays and Saturdays); $15 (other days).
Information: (212) 564-8038.
"SEURAT, 1859-1891," Metropolitan Museum of Art.
This show traces the development of Georges Seurat's meticulous Pointillist technique.
Also at the Met: "NEO-IMPRESSIONISM: FRIENDS AND FOLLOWERS OF SEURAT." Ancillary to the Seurat exhibition, this display of 70 works from the museum's collection indicates some of the immediate and the more distant repercussions of Neo-Impressionism's Pointillist technique and saturated color.
Both through Jan. 12.
Hours: Sundays and Tuesdays to Thursdays from 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays from 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Suggested admission: $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 879-5500.


When It Comes to Championships, Miami Has Gotten Very Defensive
They have been called many things in the last nine years.
But as succeeding generations of Miami Hurricanes have constructed one of the most successful stretches in the history of college football, they might now just have to be considered trendsetters.
"The last couple of years, a lot of people have been trying to emulate what we're doing defensively," said Miami Coach Dennis Erickson after the 22-0 Orange Bowl victory over Nebraska that left the Hurricanes with another unofficial national title.
The final No. 1 ranking in The Associated Press poll of writers and broadcasters and The New York Times' computer rankings gives Miami its fourth title in the past nine years.


Vehicle Sales Weak Again In Midmonth
Sales of cars and light trucks built in the United States remained weak in mid-December, a historically slow period in the automobile industry.
Although auto makers said today that they had posted a slight gain of four-tenths of a percent over last year, the seasonally adjusted annual selling rate of 5.2 million cars was the lowest since the comparable period last year.
"With few exceptions, this was a poor showing," said Tom Webb, the chief economist of the National Automobile Dealers Association, a leading industry group.
Underreporting Results
But Ronald A. Glantz, an analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in San Francisco, said the sales figures were artificially low in mid-December because Chevrolet and Ford underreported sales of pickup trucks.
He said they were likely to bunch sales in the final 10 days of December as a competitive move.
Those results are to be announced on Monday.


No Liability Insurance at Game That Led to the Deaths of 9
Blame for the charity basketball game at which nine people were fatally crushed at City College last weekend went around and around again yesterday amid disclosures that the event was produced with an unusual contract, with no liability insurance and with a budget that spent far more on promotion than on security.
Lawyers for the promoters and officials of the City University said that the brief contract to produce the event made a student group responsible for what proved to be inadequate security; made promoters responsible for insurance that was never obtained, and did not include the college -- ordinarily responsible for all events on campus -- even as a party to the agreement.


New York City Wants State To Take Back Two Prisons
Four years after New York City bought two prisons from the state for $113 million to ease crowding in city jails, the city now wants the state to take back the prisons.
City officials say that if the state did so, then both the state and the city could ease crowding in their penal systems by allowing the state to speed up the transfers of 2,500 state inmates from city jails.
At the same time, selling the two prisons -- at Cape Vincent and Ogdensburg near the Canadian border -- to the state would give the city an instant infusion of money and would save the city $2 million a year, the cost of transporting inmates to and from the prisons.


DINKINS PROPOSES EFFORTS TO ROUSE NEW YORK ECONOMY
In a broad, hopeful speech intended to build new confidence in his ability to lead New York City through hard economic times, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced measures yesterday to stimulate the city's sagging economy and to ease the burdens of residents and businesses hit hard by the recession.
Mr.
Dinkins's second State of the City address, at the midpoint of his term, was studded with a mixture of ambitious ideas and simple gestures, some of which have been previously proposed, and he did not say how he would pay for his plans.
The proposals include speeding payments to companies that do business with the city, pushing capital rebuilding projects ahead of schedule, freezing property-tax increases and reducing licensing rules and fees to aid small businesses.


Art in Review
'Casual Ceremony'  White Columns 154 Christopher Street West Village Through Jan. 13
This group exhibition at White Columns, an alternative space dedicated to the work of young and unknown artists, is especially good.
It focuses on that famous gap between art and life, an interval that emerging artists find as fascinating today as their counterparts did in the early 1970's, when Post-Minimalism and Process Art were the rage.


Longtime Executives Are Promoted by G.E.
Glen H. Hiner's recent decision to leave General Electric's plastics business to become chief executive at Owens-Corning Fiberglas has produced quick benefits for two longtime G.E. executives: Yesterday the company named Gary L. Rogers to take over as head of the $5 billion plastics business and J. Richard Stonesifer to take Mr.
Rogers's place as head of the appliance business.
By moving to plastics, the 47-year-old Mr.
Rogers gets a chance to add to his credentials as one of a handful of General Electric Company executives in the running to succeed John F. Welch Jr., 56, as chief executive one day.
Mr.
Welch yesterday called him "one of the great young leaders" at the company.


Penn Picks Bagnoli
AL BAGNOLI became the 21st head coach in Penn's 115-year football history yesterday and promised to return the program to the excellence of the 1980's, when the Quakers won or shared six Ivy League titles.


Art in Review
Evelyn Hofer  Witkin Gallery 415 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Jan. 18
Evelyn Hofer, known for her handsome photographic portrayals of cities ranging from Florence to Dublin, here focuses on the residents of Soglio, a small village in the Ticino region of Switzerland near the town where Ms.
Hofer spends her summers.
A single image sets the scene: a handful of white houses perched on a hillside beneath a row of towering mountains.
The rest of the pictures in the show present the people of Soglio in simply lighted and posed black-and-white portraits.


Market Place; A Very Stingy Year for Dividends
The year just ended was in some ways the worst on record in terms of dividend actions, with fewer companies providing good news for shareholders than at any time since comparable figures began to be compiled in 1955, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation reported yesterday.
Nonetheless, the year ended with some limited signs of revival.
In December, as in two of the previous three months, more companies announced dividend increases than had done so in the comparable month of 1990.
That provided some hope that the decline in corporate profits might be about to end.
Fewest Increases on Record
The poor overall dividend figures reflected the recession and the cash-flow problems that have hit many companies burdened by debts left over from the 1980's and hurt by a slowdown in sales.


ALGIERS MARCHERS OPPOSE MILITANTS
A crowd estimated to number at least 135,000 people demonstrated in Algiers today against the Islamic fundamentalist movement, which won handily in the first round of parliamentary elections last week.
Today's march was the first public reaction by dozens of anti-fundamentalist groups and political parties to the elections, in which the fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front triumphed over 48 other parties.
Results of the country's first free elections gave the Islamic Front 188 seats, just 28 short of a majority in the 430-member Parliament.
The next round of elections, pitting the top two vote-getters in districts where no candidate received a majority in the first round, is scheduled for Jan. 16.
Candidates of the Islamic Front are reported leading in at least 150 of the 199 districts that remain to be decided.
According to final official results of the first round of elections, announced only in the last 24 hours, the Front for Socialist Forces, a secularist party with a strong base in the Berber tribal Kabylia region, was a distant second to the Islamic Front with 25 seats, while the National Liberation Front, which led Algeria to independence from France in 1962 and has governed ever since, won only 15 seats.
Call for Election Halt
Organizers of the march, including the country's largest workers' union and several women's associations and secularist parties, estimated that one million people took part.
Journalists in Algiers, a city of about three million, estimated the crowd size at 200,000, and the police estimate was 135,000.
A growing number of groups, including the sponsors of today's rally, are demanding cancellation of the second round of the elections.
Calls for something to stop the fundamentalist victory have also been heard from the independent press, which has sprouted over the last two years since Algeria introduced multi-party democracy.
The inclusion of representatives of the largest workers' syndicate, the General Union of Algerian Workers, was seen as a significant development since its members work in key industrial and governmental sectors including the oil industry.
The union is widely viewed as hostile to fundamentalists.
In June it resisted a strike call by the Islamic Front.
Some secularist leaders have called for general strikes to paralyze the country.
The leader of the Assembly for Democracy and Culture, a largely Berber and intensely secularist party that was eliminated in the elections, called in a news conference on Wednesday for "a democratic holy war" against the fundamentalists. 'People Want Radical Change'
But Hocine Ait-Ahmed, the leader of the Front for Socialist Forces, and senior National Front officials asserted today that they were opposed to any Government interference in the democratic process.
"Our people want a radical change," Mr.
Ait-Ahmed told the French newspaper Liberation in an interview.
"A democratic crisis can be settled only by more democracy."
Several senior Algerian Government officials said in telephone interviews over the last two days that they doubted that the Government would cancel the elections.
"We can't really do anything of the sort," said a Cabinet minister who asked not to be identified, adding that any such action "would simply push the problems aside for a while and may provoke acts of violence that are more grave than the results we are facing now."
The official said there was "still a ray of hope" that the Islamic Front could be prevented from getting 287 seats, a two-thirds majority that would give the fundamentalists the power to change Algeria's Constitution.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday titled "A Steeper Curve," showing yield curves at the end of 1990 and 1991, carried an incorrect scale across the bottom.
A corrected version appears on page D6.


Art in Review
'Viennese Graphic Design: From Secession to Expressionism'  Galerie St.
Etienne 24 West 57th Street Through Jan. 11
In turn-of-the-century Vienna, as in other cultural capitals of Europe, modern art could mean a return to basics on several, sometimes conflicting, fronts.
It could mean a disdaining of ornament in favor of clean, simplified forms and designs, or a love of deftly stylized patterns derived from nature.
It could mean a revival of handwork techniques or folkloric subjects shunted aside by the Industrial Revolution, as well as an unprecedented sexual frankness and emotional openness.
And in Vienna, as elsewhere, the modern period was also a time when many artists, rather than devoting themselves exclusively to painting and sculpture, were rethinking the outward appearances of nearly everything, whether buildings or playing cards, clothing or typefaces for books and posters.


West Acts to Defer Issue of New U.N. Council Seats
By allowing Russia to take over the Soviet Union's permanent Security Council seat last week, the three Western powers believe that they have postponed action for several years on demands by Germany, Japan and several large third world countries for permanent membership on the Council.
Diplomats now say a consensus is forming that the United Nations should not give serious consideration to reviewing the privileged position of the five World War II victors, who hold permanent Security Council seats and a veto over its decisions, before the middle of this decade.


Need a New Scorecard
The Calgary Flames sent disgruntled center DOUG GILMOUR to the Toronto Maple Leafs as part of a 10-player trade yesterday.


Knicks Shoulda Stayed in Bed
The Knicks, the Charlotte Hornets and the Houston Rockets were fined $10,000 apiece by the National Basketball Association yesterday for practicing on New Year's Day and were prohibited from holding practices or team meetings today.
The New Year's Day practices violated the league's collective bargaining agreement, which prohibits teams at home from practicing on Christmas Day or New Year's Day.
It is not unusual for teams to ignore this rule, but when the league became aware of these most recent violations, it decided to enforce it.


Cut the Football in Half: There Are Two No. 1's
So now that college football's coronation committee will have to spring for two crowns, now that Miami and Washington can stay in not-so-neutral corners of the continental United States with 12-0 records, what points are left to argue?
Miami's Hurricanes and Washington's Huskies, after ending perfect seasons with convincing bowl-game victories, sounded satisfied today to share an unofficial but exhausting championship.
At the point in the season reserved for embraces and index fingers extended in the air, no one seemed to mind settling for a split.


Sports of The Times; Hurricanes Would Win In Public
PAT ENGELBERT, who has a 3.587 grade- point average and something like a size-18 neck, also has a proposal.
He is tired of national champions enhancing their reputations by whupping on his team, and he would like them to settle things on their own.
Engelbert, the nose tackle for Nebraska, wishes Miami and Washington would just go off somewhere and play a football game.


What's the Price? Russians Risk Shock
All through the day, people shuffled into Products Store No. 18, stamped the snow off their boots onto a muddy rag and wandered over to glance at the lone, scrawny chicken lying in a battered enamel tub in the "Meats" case.
A penciled price tag over the chicken read "36," and most people needed no further information.
Among these tenements hard by the decrepit Hammer and Sickle metallurgical works, residents spend a tidy piece of their lives scouring stores and standing in lines for basic sustenance, so their instincts are well developed.


Review/Film; Night of Rain, No Train, Damp Woman Meets Swain
"The Station" ("La Stazione"), the Italian film opening today at the 68th Street Playhouse, is a small, inoffensive comedy about Domenico, a small, inoffensive young man who works as the stationmaster near a village in the south of Italy.
One rainy night Flavia (Margherita Buy), a beautiful young woman in an evening dress, arrives at the station hoping to catch a train for Rome immediately, though there are none until morning.


METRO DIGEST
NEW EFFORTS TO COLLECT CHILD SUPPORT
One of the chief barriers to collecting child support is the unwillingness of many unwed mothers to identify their children's fathers for months or even years.
Increasingly, policymakers in the region and across the nation are trying to get around this problem by establishing paternity early on.
A1.
HERTZ IMPOSES NEW FEES ON NEW YORKERS
The Hertz Corporation effectively withdrew from a large part of the New York City car-rental market, announcing that it would impose surcharges of $15 to $56 a day on residents of Queens, Brooklyn and the Bronx who rent cars anywhere in the metropolitan region.
A1.


Topics of The Times; Times Square, the Morning After
Times Square takes some of its charm from being unkempt.
There's a limit, though, and it's exceeded in the extreme by the litter from New Year's Eve.
But, presto!
When New Yorkers returned to the regular grind yesterday morning, the spot where thousands cheered the New Year was immaculate.
Well, not quite.
But thanks to a double-blitz by clean-up crews, it was noticeably cleaner than it is on Mondays after an ordinary weekend, which New Year's assuredly is not.
The coordinated blitz was the work of the city's Sanitation Department and the new Times Square Business Improvement District.


A Therapist Finds His Own Passion and Therapy
HE looks exactly as a psychia trist should tall, bearded and deep-voiced with the slightest European accent.
He sits attentively, long fingers wrapped around his chin, in a quiet, clockless office steeped in wood grains, books and stale grief.
The room is furnished with the usual couch, the ceiling well-worn from countless stares and, nearby, the requisite box of tissues.
The man's sentences are uh-free and as tidy as his desk.
"Why should it surprise you?" asks Dr.
Theodore Cherbuliez.
And the mind of his current appointment scans recent dreams for a satisfactory answer, in vain.
A shrug of stupidity must suffice.


Seeking Consistency, a Judge Sues Her Colleagues
When Justice Michol O'Connor disagreed with a ruling made by several of her colleagues on the Texas First Court of Appeals, she requested a hearing by the full court, but the other justices refused.
She wanted to file a dissent to their refusal, but they denied it.
So she sued them.


TV Weekend; How Ray Charles Became Ray Charles
The voice is as familiar as Sinatra's or Pavarotti's.
The face, wrapped in dark glasses, has taken on a life of its own, whether in concert performances or advertisements selling soft drinks or credit cards.
According to "Ray Charles: The Genius of Soul," an "American Masters" special on Channels 13 and 49 tonight at 10, the man has become "a national treasure." This time around, that overused label is not an exaggeration.
Written, directed and narrated by Yvonne Smith, the documentary manages to celebrate a legendary performer without ignoring some of the more uncomfortable facts about his life.
Mr.
Charles had severe drug problems in the 1950's and 60's. ("Flying higher in his career required more fuel to keep going," Ms. Smith says.) He managed to kick a heroin habit but, as Ms.
Smith puts it, he continued to pursue women "with equal passion," having nine children with seven women between 1950 and 1976.
The joke among backup singers auditioning for his band was that "in order to be a Raelette, you had to let Ray." His wife of 23 years divorced him in 1977.


Shanghai Opera Troupe
The Chinese-American Arts Council is to present the Kun Opera Troupe of Shanghai tonight at 7:30 at Alice Tully Hall.
The company will perform "The Dream," a traditional Kun opera, one of the oldest forms of Chinese music.
Hua Wenyi is the featured singer.
The free presentation is part of the annual Community Holiday Festival at Lincoln Center.
Information: (212) 431-9740.


C. H. Tunnicliffe Jones, Lawyer, 91
C.
H.
Tunnicliffe Jones, a Long Island lawyer and former village official in Hempstead, died on Sunday at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola.
He was 91 years old and had lived in Hempstead since 1925.
Mr.
Jones died of complications from a broken hip he suffered in a fall Dec. 2 while leaving his Mineola law office of Jones &amp; Jones on Old Country Road, his family said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  YUGOSLAVS PLEDGE TRUCE
Leaders of the Serbian-led Yugoslav Army and the Croatian national guard pledged to cease hostilities on Friday, raising hopes that United Nations peacekeeping forces could be deployed to separate the warring factions in Yugoslavia.
A1  GLOOM IN RUSSIAN SHOPS


Dinkins as a Populist: Hearing 'Our People'
Mayor David N. Dinkins's speech on the state of New York City was not so much a summary of the present as a political summons to the future, aimed at assuring restive supporters that he would not abandon the poor to balance the budget, even as he pledged new efforts to appease the middle class.
The Mayor's speech, delivered at the midpoint of his term with his popularity low and his electoral coalition shaken, was less a public report card than the product of having assessed his prospects in private and found them wanting.
In forceful and unusually blunt tones, he unleashed what many in the invited audience of city officials and supporters said was the opening salvo of his re-election campaign.


INSIDE
No Insurance for Game
There was no liability insurance for the basketball game at City College where nine people were killed, the lawyer for a promoter says.
Page B1.
New Manufacturing Decline
The industrial economy shrank in December to its lowest level since May, purchasing managers said.
Page D1.
Tales of Bondage in Kuwait
Foreign workers in Kuwait, mostly from Asia, complain of beatings, long hours, nonpayment of salaries, isolation and sexual abuse.
Page A4.
We're No. 1; No, WE Are
Miami and Washington each got to claim a No. 1 spot in the final college football rankings.
Page B7.


LaFontaine Is Ready
Speaking from his car phone on the highways of western New York yesterday, PAT LaFONTAINE's voice sounded familiar as he talked about playing against his old team tonight for the first time since the Islanders traded him to Buffalo.


At the Movies
Robocop's 'Naked Lunch'
Picture this: Peter Weller was sitting on the set of "Robocop 2" in his clunky Robocop regalia a couple of years ago when he addressed a question to Mark Irwin, the director of photography:


TRANSACTIONS
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association  NBA -- Fined the Charlotte Hornets, Houston Rockets and New York Knicks $10,000 each for violating a league rule that prohibits home teams from practicing on New Year's Day.
ATLANTA HAWKS -- Signed Morlon Wiley, guard. Waived Gary Leonard, center.
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Claimed Mark Randall, forward, off waivers.
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Placed Scott Skiles, guard, on the injured list.
Signed Stephen Thompson, guard.
HOCKEY National Hockey League  BOSTON BRUINS -- Traded Gary Galley, defenseman, and Wes Walz, center, to the Philadelphia Flyers for Gord Murphy, defenseman, Brian Dobbin, right wing, and a 1992 third-round draft pick.
CALGARY FLAMES -- Traded Doug Gilmour, center, Jamie Macoun and Ric Nattress, defensemen, Rick Wamsley, goaltender, and Kent Manderville, left wing, to the Toronto Maple Leafs for Gary Leeman, right wing, Craig Berube, left wing, Michel Petit and Alexander Godynyuk, defensemen, and Jeff Reese, goaltender.
DEVILS -- Sent Alexander Semak, center, to Utica of the American Hockey League.
FOOTBALL National Football League  HOUSTON OILERS -- Placed Doug Smith, defensive tackle, on the injured reserve.
Activated Rick Graf, linebacker, from the injured reserve.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed John Hagy, safety.
Placed Tracy Rogers, linebacker, on injured reserve.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday about the effect of the decline in interest rates on retired people reversed the identities of the two men shown seated together.
Bill Nerenberg was on the right and Sol Eldman on the left.


Israel Expelling 12 Arabs; P.L.O. Warns About Talks
A day after a Jewish settler was shot to death in the Gaza Strip, Israel said on Thursday night that it would expel from the occupied territories 12 Palestinians whom it accused of terrorist involvement.
The action, taken by Defense Minister Moshe Arens, was apparently aimed at placating angry settlers who had put pressure on the Government to adopt stern anti-Arab measures after fatal ambush attacks on four of their number in the last 10 weeks.


TV Weekend; A Time Capsule's Messages to Posterity
"The Class of the 20th Century," the 12-part series that begins on Sunday at 8 P.M. on the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network, is billed as "a kaleidoscopic view of the 20th century, as seen through the eyes of people who helped shape it." The agglomeration is to be stored in the Museum of Television and Radio in Manhattan for anyone extant in the year 3000 who might like to know what things were like back now.
The series turns out to be an anthology of anecdotes, mainly from American show-business figures and television personalities, along with a smattering of well-known journalists, politicians and random celebrities.
It will be of particular interest to contemporaries who care about the ruminations of Hugh Downs, Howard Cosell and Hildegarde.


Pflugradt Memorial
A memorial service for William C. Pflugradt, conductor, composer and director of the Stonewall Chorale, will be held on Wednesday at the Washington Square United Methodist Church, 135 West Fourth Street.
Mr.
Pflugradt died of AIDS on Dec. 22.
The service will begin at 7:30 P.M. and will include a musical tribute by the Stonewall Chorale.


Irish Unfurl the Green and the Glory
With critics saying that the school had been invited here only because of past achievements, Notre Dame decided to pull out all the tradition and unfurl all the glory in preparation for its Sugar Bowl meeting with the University of Florida.
So while the Florida players went to the movies ("The Last Boy Scout") on Tuesday, Coach Lou Holtz made his Notre Dame team watch "Wake Up The Echoes," an inspirational film about the school's fabled football history.


Detroit Looks in the Mirror and Sees Dallas
The similiarities between Detroit and Dallas are uncanny.
Both teams have outstanding running backs.
Emmitt Smith of the Cowboys finished the season as the National Football League's leading rusher, while the Lions' Barry Sanders finished second.


Peat Partner Is Named S.E.C.'s Top Accountant
Walter P. Schuetze, a partner at KPMG Peat Marwick, was appointed yesterday to be the chief accountant at the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The job, considered among the most prestigious accounting positions in Government, had been vacant for a year after the departure last January of Edmund Coulson, who left after three years in the position to join Ernst &amp; Young.
It had been temporarily filled by George Diacont, an associate chief accountant, who said he would stay on as one of Mr.
Schuetze's top aides.


At Victims' Funerals, Disbelief and Anger
Disbelief, with an undercurrent of anger, hung over a funeral and a wake for two young people who died at City College on Saturday, as friends and family gathered yesterday to mourn deaths they said were as senseless as they were unexpected.
"This is horrible," said Alise J. Hannah, a 76-year-old retired nurse's aide, as she leaned on her cane a few feet away from the open casket of a young man she had known for all 24 years of his life, Yul C. Dargan.
"I feel such pity for him."


Jacques Aubuchon, 67, an Actor In Movies, Plays and TV Dramas
Jacques Aubuchon, an actor who appeared in more than 20 feature films, 300 television dramas and 10 Broadway plays, died on Saturday at his home in Woodland Hills, Calif.
He was 67 years old.
He died of heart failure, said his daughter-in-law, Joanna Lipari Aubuchon.


Parcells Not Done Talking
Bill Parcells has met with his friend, Ron Wolf, the Green Bay Packers' new general manager, to discuss the Packers' coaching vacancy.
They will talk again this weekend, but there is no indication that Parcells will take the job, assuming it is offered.
The meeting took place on Wednesday in New Jersey.
In a statement released by his office yesterday, Wolf said: "We had a preliminary discussion. A contract was not offered."
Parcells said: "I met with him. No job was offered. We discussed the parameters of the job, and I have an understanding of what the job is."


For Children
A walk through lower Manhattan requires little energy or money.
Just start at Broadway and Fulton Street and head straight down to Battery Park City, where the fog rolls in and settles on a normal January day.
At the park is a handsome enclosed playground.
George Washington's Pew St.
Paul's Chapel Broadway at Fulton Street (212) 602-0847
The day George Washington was inaugurated as President, April 30, 1789, he attended a special service at St.
Paul's Chapel and sat in a private pew.
The present one is a modified version of the original, which had high walls, a canopy and foot warmers with coals.
Children can sit in the pew on the 18th-century-style blue damask high-back chair and ruminate on the perils of being America's first President.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 585 money market mutual funds decreased by $21.28 billion, to $457.76 billion, in the week that ended on Tuesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 217 institutional funds decreased by $14.98 billion, to $144.33 billion.
The assets of the 280 general-purpose funds were down by $2.89 billion, to $173.81 billion.
The 88 broker-dealer funds decreased by $3.41 billion, to $139.62 billion, the institute said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
The results of the holiday selling season began trickling out, with most results in line with analysts' expectations.
But Toys "R" Us reported better-than-expected sales gains, causing a stampede among investors to buy its stock, which gained $2.
Venture Stores and Caldor reported sales results that were more in line with expectations.  [ Page D1. ]
United Telecom plans to buy the 19.9 percent of U S Sprint it does not own from GTE for $530 million.  [ D3. ]


Richter Gets Decision In Battle of the Goalies
Here, at Chicago Stadium, was a disparate tale of two goaltenders.
Ed Belfour of the Blackhawks, still struggling to regain his rhythm after a 14-game holdout against intransigent management, faced a modest 25 shots tonight and did not stop enough of them.
Mike Richter of the Rangers, who played through the preseason without a contract and then signed a compromise pact with little fuss, was often brilliant with 44 saves in the Rangers' 4-3 victory over Chicago.


Jerusalem, Dressed in White
Jerusalem, city of miracles to three major faiths, found itself humbled today by one of the few heavenly acts for which the millenniums have provided scant experience: a world-class snowfall.
The city struggled with its worst snowstorm in four decades, muddling through like the eclectic place it is, with a mixture of Mediterranean efficiency and Manhattan carefreeness.


Ron Christopher, AIDS Educator, 53
Ron Christopher, an AIDS educator, died on Sunday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 53 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of lymphoma, said his longtime companion, Philip Williams.


Fire Damages Idaho Capitol


Why Did It Have to Take 'J.F.K.' to Wake Us?; Kennedy Was No Dove
To the Editor:
Oliver Stone's assertion (Op-Ed, Dec. 20) that history "may be too important to leave to newsmen" should be expanded to include reductionist film makers.


New Publisher For Seventeen
Janice Grossman, who became the publisher of New York magazine a year ago, was named publisher of Seventeen yesterday by K-III Magazines, which owns both publications.
She replaces Michelle Berman, who resigned in October.
Seventeen, which is aimed at young women 13 to 24 years old, leads the teen-age market with a circulation of 1.8 million, up almost 7 percent for the first six months of last year over the previous six-month period.


A Specialist in Cutting Costs Is the New President of PNC
The PNC Financial Corporation, the prosperous Pittsburgh banking company, which grew rapidly in the 1980's to become the 16th largest in the country, yesterday named a new president, James E. Rohr.
Mr.
Rohr, 43, started at the Pittsburgh National Bank in 1972 and spent most of his career in corporate banking.
In his new position, he will be the No. 2 PNC executive after Thomas H. O'Brien, who gave up the president's title but remains chairman and chief executive.


A Warning From Margarita
Does it make sense for a child who has lived with foster parents for seven years, almost her entire life, to be returned to her natural mother?
Perhaps not, but that was the painful decision of a New York City Family Court Judge, Jeffry Gallet.
He faced a no-win situation after seven years of mismanagement by a private agency and an alarming failure by the city's Human Resources Administration to monitor it.
The child, identified as "Margarita," was born prematurely to a drug-abusing mother living in a homeless shelter.
After spending her first two months in neonatal intensive care, Margarita was placed with foster parents with the permission of her natural mother.
There she remained, with the exception of one month, for seven years.
The child and the foster parents were supervised by the Puerto Rican Association for Community Affairs (Praca), one of many voluntary agencies used by the city to provide foster care services.


Kansas City Journal; A Shared Dream: Treasures From a Sunken Boat
Few people dream of recovering historical treasure from a sunken ship.
But for five businessmen who did, the dream came true at the bottom of the Missouri River in the form of a 19th-century steamboat, the Arabia.
Now they are sharing their dream with the public after the excavation of that relic of life on the frontier.
In November the businessmen, including a father and two sons, and their families opened a museum, the Treasures of the Steamboat Arabia, to show off the Arabia, which sank in 1856, and thousands of artifacts salvaged from her.


No One Has a Child for Welfare Benefits
To the Editor:
New Jersey's and California's proposals to "reform" welfare by refusing additional benefits to families that have additional children (news articles, Dec. 6 and Dec. 11) constitute another misguided and mean-spirited attack on the poor.


Critic's Choice/Dance; A Collaboration In Individuality
Beverly Blossom and Douglas Nielsen are antic, highly individualistic choreographers and performers whose vividly theatrical dance has grown out of wide worlds of experience in American modern dance.
The two, who are sharing a program this weekend at Dance Theater Workshop, will present three solos each and perform together in a new collaboration called "Four Bits (a k a Two Cents)."
Ms.
Blossom was a principal dancer with Alwin Nikolais from 1953 to 1963, later working with Roberts Blossom's Filmstage Inc. and on her own in New York City.
After a 22-year career as a dance professor at the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana, Ms.
Blossom returned to New York in 1990, and has carved a niche for herself in the city's dance life as a solo performer capable of capturing audiences with a turn of the head or a teasing bit of bump and grind in her comic-tragic pieces.


CHRONICLE
Who is the busiest member of the British royal family?
TIM O'DONOVAN, a London insurance broker who has kept track of the public engagements -- opening ceremonies, receptions, banquets, investitures, luncheons and the like -- for members of the family for 13 years, said that PRINCESS ANNE ranks first in industriousness, outdoing even her mother, QUEEN ELIZABETH II.
Princess Anne had 504 engagements in 1991 in Britain, and 241 abroad; the Queen had 455 in Britain, 126 abroad.
Anne started to catch up with her mother in 1985, Mr.
O'Donovan said, and she has been tireless ever since.


Gloom Prevails at Crucial Time in Quebec Dispute
At a gathering of well-to-do Canadians at a private home here on New Year's Eve, the midnight toasts included one to a happier year for Canada in 1992 than in 1991.
Then, as the conversation turned to Quebec and its French-speaking majority, voices were raised.
"No more concessions!" an English-speaking businessman said, prompting similar remarks from several other guests.


Sounds Around Town
A Quartet's Anniversary
Modern Jazz Quartet, Cafe Carlyle, at the Carlyle Hotel, 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, (212) 744-1600.
Although the Modern Jazz Quartet is celebrating its 40th anniversary as a group this month, the original members were playing together in Dizzy Gillespie's orchestra as early as 1946.
In fact, the initials M.J.Q. were first used to identify the Milt Jackson Quartet in 1951, a year before the Modern Jazz Quartet became an entity.
Since Mr.
Jackson, John Lewis, Percy Heath and Kenny Clarke became the Modern Jazz Quartet in 1952, there has been only one change in its makeup, when Mr.
Clarke, the drummer, went to France in 1955 and was replaced by Connie Kay.
Since then the same four musicians have been creating, polishing and re-creating one of the most rewarding repertories in jazz, based on the compositions of Mr.
Lewis and Mr.
Jackson.
They play in the Cafe Carlyle tonight and tomorrow at 8:45 and 10:45 P.M.
There is a music charge of $35, plus a $10 minimum.
Rare Performances
Chris Anderson Trio, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, Manhattan, (212) 749-2228.
In the 31 years since the pianist Chris Anderson moved to New York City from Chicago, he has received accolades from fellow musicians like the saxophonist Clifford Jordan (who called him "a harmonic master whose playing is very subtle") and the pianist Barry Harris ("When Chris does his thing, it's just beautiful").
Yet in three decades New Yorkers have had relatively few opportunities to hear Mr.
Anderson because his public performing has been limited by two physical disabilities: he is blind, and his bones are so brittle that they break easily and frequently.
But on Sunday he is to appear at Birdland for three sets, at 9 P.M., 10:30 P.M. and midnight, with Lisle Atkinson on bass and Winard Harper of the Harper Brothers on drums.
There will be a $5 music charge and a $5 minimum at tables; at the bar there is a one-drink minimum but no music charge.
Recording at J's
Ken Peplowski Quartet, J's, 2581 Broadway, between 97th and 98th Streets, Manhattan, (212) 666-3600.
Ken Peplowski's jazz career is being built around one-nighters at J's.
Carl Jefferson, who owns the perceptively swinging jazz label Concord Records, heard the clarinetist and saxophonist playing at J's a couple of years ago and signed him to make his first album.
As a result, his debut album was made at J's.
Now he is to make his second album, again for Concord and again to be recorded live at J's.tomorrow night.
The quartet includes Frank Vignola on guitar, Murray Wall on bass and Tom Melito on drums.
The music starts tomorrow at 8:30 P.M. with a $12 minimum at tables and a $7 minimum at the bar.
There is no cover charge.


Quotations of the Day
"If somebody clear-cut won a national championship it would have been unfair." -- DENNIS ERICKSON, the University of Miami football coach.  [ B12:2. ]
"I don't mind sharing it." -- DON JAMES, the University of Washington football coach.  [ B12:1. ]


And He Can't Dunk
Commissioner DAVID STERN, the man who maneuvered the National Basketball Association into big money and international markets, is the most powerful person in sports, according to The Sporting News.
Only three athletes -- two of them basketball players -- made the weekly newspaper's list of the 100 most powerful people in sports, and they finished far down in a ranking dominated by businessmen, television executives and league commissioners.
MAGIC JOHNSON was No. 31, MICHAEL JORDAN, 50th, and JACK NICKLAUS, 81st.


Salvadoran Opponents Clash Hours After a Peace Accord
Salvadoran Army troops and leftist guerrillas clashed only hours after both sides signed a peace plan aimed at ending the civil war, officials said today.
A spokesman for the Salvadoran armed forces said one soldier was killed on Wednesday in fighting in the northern department of Chalatenango.


The Art Market
It's Better to Receive
Museums can't stop talking about what they got for Christmas.
Despite cuts in public and private aid caused by the recession, museums -- both big and small -- are reporting a rush of year-end gifts of top-quality artworks.
The reason: a Federal tax law that permits donors of valuable objects to deduct their full market value, determined by an outside appraiser, on income-tax returns.


Art in Review
Agnes Martin  Pace Gallery 32 East 57th Street Through tomorrow
Agnes Martin, now 80 years old, has been working out basically the same abstract painting for many years.
It is six feet square, and based on a version of the grid form she has favored since the late 1950's.
Although usually associated with Minimalism, in Ms.
Martin's hands the grid had the flavor of a mathematical folk design, like almanac charts and quilt patterns.


Abortion Advocates Denounce Shutdown of Hospital's Clinics
For years, abortion foes, including some of Nassau County's top officials, have tried to stop the county's only public hospital from performing abortions.
Now as Nassau County Medical Center has begun to close its abortion and family-planning clinics in a cost-cutting move -- one that will force hundreds of poor women to seek alternatives -- advocates of abortion rights are accusing the county of carrying out a cynical, ideological vendetta.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY U.S.
Juniors Beaten The United States lost to the Commonwealth of Independent States, the former Soviet Union, 5-0, yesterday, in the world junior championships.
The victory improved the Commonwealth's record to 5-1, first over all, and dropped the U.S. to 4-2.(AP) TENNIS Ivanisevic Wins Twice Top-seeded Goran Ivanisevic of the Yugoslav breakaway republic of Croatia advanced to the singles quarterfinals and the doubles semifinals of the Australian hardcourt championships in Adelaide yesterday.
In singles, Ivanisevic defeated Stefano Pescosolido of Italy, 6-4, 6-3, and in doubles, he combined with Marc Rosset of Switzerland to beat Stefan Edberg of Sweden and John Fitzgerald of Australia, 6-4, 6-2.(AP) Volkov, Haarhuis Advance: Top-seeded Aleksandr Volkov of Russia edged Gilad Bloom of Israel, 7-6 (7-4), 6-4, and No. 2 Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands beat Jonathan Stark of the United States, 7-6 (7-2), 6-1, to advance to the quarterfinals of the BP Nationals in New Zealand.(AP)
Novotna Falls in Quarterfinals: Andrea Temesvari of Hungary upset top-seeded Jana Novotna of Czechoslovakia, 6-3, 6-3, yesterday to advance to the quarterfinals of the Danone Queensland Open in Brisbane, Australia.
Debbie Graham of the United States also advanced.(AP)
Switzerland to Play for Title: It will be fourth-seeded Switzerland against No. 5 Czechoslovakia today for the title in the Hopman Cup team tournament in Perth, Australia.
The Swiss beat Spain yesterday as Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere and Jakob Hlasek scored singles wins over the brother-sister team of Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and Emilio Sanchez.(AP)


Diner's Journal
For Indulging at Lunch
Even though the holiday binges are guilt-laden memories, there is no reason not to indulge in a good lunch now and then.
Here is a suggestion.


Battle Sings Previn
The Orchestra of St.
Luke's is to present a concert on Sunday at 3 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
Andre Previn is to conduct the premiere of his song cycle "Honey and Rue," for soprano and small jazz ensemble, with lyrics by Toni Morrison.
The soloist is Kathleen Battle, who will also perform two arias by Rossini.
Also on the program are Mozart's "Haffner" Symphony and Mendelssohn's "Italian" Symphony, conducted by David Zinman.
Tickets are $13 to $60.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Little Anger Among Those on Bush Trip
For all the Japanese fears that the business executives joining President Bush on his Asian trip are coming to protest their trade policies, many of these leaders will probably bear a friendlier message.
Many have already prospered from contracts with Japanese companies and see the trip as a chance to drum up business.
J.
Bronce Henderson 3d, chief executive of Detroit Center Tool Inc., simply wishes to sell the Japanese his most advanced welding systems.
For him, the President's trip represents an unusual opportunity to get the attention of top Japanese auto executives, said Paul Diettmer, the company's manager of advertising.


Topics of The Times; Tacky, Not Trendy
Perhaps we are oversensitive, but a term newly making the rounds seems particularly offensive.
It is "breeder," meaning one who chooses to have children.
It can be used in question form ("Oh, so you're a breeder?") or in the simple declarative ("I've decided I'm a non-breeder.") In either case, the required mode of delivery is studied nonchalance.
What rankles is not so much the breezy dismissal of parenthood as a stud and kennel service.
It's more the implication that a difficult and emotional decision requires no more thought than choosing a pair of shoes.


Toys 'R' Us Christmas Sales Jump
As the nation's retailers began reporting the results of the holiday selling season yesterday, Toys "R" Us stood out with better-than-expected sales gains that caused a stampede among investors to buy its stock.
Results of two regional discount chains were more in line with analysts' expectations.


Shadow of Prison Wall
One of Connecticut's most notorious murderers and another inmate at the state's maximum-security prison in Somers escaped on New Year's Eve.
They briefly took two hostages here, stole a truck and have not been seen since.
To prison administrators, this was an unfortunate and -- as of now -- an unexplained lapse.


Establishing Paternity Earlier To Gain Child Support Later
The father of Magdalena Marrero's two sons stopped giving her money to support the boys in 1989, she said.
Even so, she only reluctantly named him recently to qualify for welfare.
The man was a heel, Ms.
Marrero said, but she still felt guilty for turning him in to the welfare system, which she said had treated her "like a speck of dirt that doesn't mean anything."


Review/Art; At the Met, a Large Sampling Of Small South Asian Works
For admirers of South and Southeast Asian art, the Samuel Eilenberg Collection has long been one of New York's hidden treasures.
Mr.
Eilenberg, a professor (now emeritus) of mathematics at Columbia, has spent decades building up one of the world's premier collections of small-scale Asian sculptures, chiefly in bronze, but including objects in silver, stone, terra cotta and stucco as well.
The Met purchased several pieces over the years, and in 1987 Mr.
Eilenberg gave the museum more than 400 as a gift.
Almost half of these works, supplemented by a few loans from Mr.
Eilenberg himself, have been brought together in an exhibition titled "The Lotus Transcendent." Much of the material will be included in the Met's new Florence and Herbert Irving Galleries of Indian and Southeast Asian sculpture, to be completed in 1994.
But schedules, economics and politics being what they are -- the Irving galleries' opening has already been put off more than once -- it is best to see this remarkable gathering while you can.


The Spoken Word
LECTURES AND PLAYS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Family Matters: An Immigrant Memoir," a dramatization of the lives of immigrant children, Sunday at noon, followed at 1 P.M. by "House of Heritage," a lecture on the history of the Tenement Museum building and at 2 P.M. by "The Streets Where We Lived," a walking tour of the area.
Tickets for the drama are $10 ($8 for the elderly; $5 for students); lecture tickets are $4 and walking tour tickets are $12 ($10 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, Crown Heights.
"Ancient Splendors," by Marlene Hollan, today at 2 P.M.; "Contemporary Art," by Armando Chisari, tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "Highlights of Islamic Art," by Maribeth Flynn, Sunday at 2 P.M.
All talks free with museum admission of $4 ($2 for students and $1.50 for the elderly).
Information: (718) 638-5000.


Washington Coach Is Happy With Just a Share of the Title
When the phone in his hotel room hadn't rung by 6:30 this morning, Don James turned to his wife, Carol, with a look full of disappointment.
Not even a Rose Bowl victory, it seemed at that moment, was enough to earn the University of Washington a national championship.
But 11 minutes later, James finally smiled.
Even though The Associated Press panel of writers and broadcasters had narrowly voted Miami as its No. 1 team, the coaches in the USA Today/CNN poll had picked Washington, assuring college football of co-national champions for a second straight year.
The New York Times computer picked Miami first, Washington second.
The United Press International poll had Washington No. 1 and Miami No.  2.


Why Did It Have to Take 'J.F.K.' to Wake Us?; Questions Need Asking
To the Editor:
Does it matter that Oliver Stone presents in his movie a view discredited by some?
The point of "J.F.K." lies not in Jim Garrison's (and Mr. Stone's) point of speculation.
Rather the film stirs debate and demands questions be asked about the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
The film is important, whether or not President Lyndon B. Johnson was involved and independent of possible connection with the assassinations of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. and Senator Robert F. Kennedy.
Even if Mr.
Garrison (and Mr. Stone) miss the boat completely, the Warren Commission report may still be subject to inquiry.


Atlanta Man Charged in Killing of 4 in His Family
The police charged a 30-year-old man today with the slaying of his parents, his sister and his 5-year-old niece.
They were stabbed and bludgeoned on New Year's morning as they slept and a 2-year-old boy apparently looked on.
At a preliminary hearing in Municipal Court on the four murder counts today, the suspect, Maxwell Winston Jr., stood mute, nodding only "yes" that he understood the charges and "no" that he did not want the court to appoint a lawyer for him.


Algeria Chooses Islam
Algeria's struggle to rid itself of French colonialism in the 1950's inspired colonized people around the world.
Last week Algeria set a different kind of example, successfully completing the first round of the most democratic elections ever held in North Africa.
The key question, for Algeria's secularist minority and for its neighbors, is whether the victorious Islamic Salvation Front will respect the pluralism that permitted its victory.


Republics, Following Russia, Free Prices
Fearful that suppliers would divert their goods across the border to Russia, the governments of Ukraine, Belarus and Moldova went along with President Boris N. Yeltsin's sweeping liberalization of consumer prices today.
Ukraine, which had reluctantly planned to raise prices one week after Russia, at the last minute decided to free prices today.
Moldova and Belarus followed suit with price increases of their own.


Mary Virginia Gaver Dies at 85; An Advocate for School Libraries
Mary Virginia Gaver, who championed the cause of school libraries in America, died Tuesday at the Roman Eagle Memorial Home in Danville, Va.
She was 85 years old and died of Parkinson's disease, her family said.
Miss Gaver helped develop national school library standards in 1960 and headed a $1.1 million campaign promoting their adoption nationwide and creating eight model libraries.


Croatia's Tudjman Is Really a Moderate; Still Time to Forgive
To the Editor:
Do they have no shame?


Indictment In Fraud Case
A Federal grand jury today returned a 30-count indictment against Steven D. Wymer, an investment manager accused of defrauding local governments in Iowa, California and Colorado.
At least $100 million is estimated to be missing from client accounts.
The indictment, charging Mr.
Wymer with securities fraud, mail fraud, money laundering, obstruction of justice and lying to Federal investigators, broadened the Government's case against the former president and sole owner of Institutional Treasury Management Inc. of Irvine, Calif.
The charges carry maximum penalties of 275 years in prison and fines of more than $14 million.


On Stage, and Off
Broadway and a Cause
The biggest names in theater have all been working over the holidays -- on their contributions to "Broadway: Day and Night," the book being published in the fall by Pocket Books, which says it will give all royalties to Equity Fights AIDS and Broadway Cares.
A first printing of 50,000 copies is planned.


Kuwait City Journal; Foreign Women Lured Into Bondage in Kuwait
Edita Castro left her home in a Manila slum for Kuwait after hearing a radio commercial promising a good job overseas.
Out of work, struggling to feed her three children, the 33-year-old mother packed her bags for what she thought would be a two-year stint as a nanny.
But when she showed up at the airport she was spirited away in a van to a house in Kuwait City.
She would work, she was informed, not as a nanny but a maid.


Publisher to Begin Three Magazines
Viare Publishing Inc. in New York, the publisher of Video Review, plans to begin three more entertainment-related magazines in the next six months.
They are Skypix, a movie magazine that will complement the Skypix satellite pay-per-view system; Event/U.S.A., which will report on special events offered by promoters across the country, and Camcorder Review.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about birth rates in Eastern Europe referred incorrectly in some editions to a new Romanian abortion law.
It allows abortions in the first 14 weeks of pregnancy.


One More Dow Record
Stock prices edged higher again after a last-minute buying surge, with the Dow gaining 3.58, to 3,172.41, its fifth straight record.
Page D6.


Dow Gains 3.58 to Close At 3,172.41
Stocks edged further upward in the year's opening session yesterday, as widespread selling was overwhelmed by a last-minute buying surge that extended the market's rally and carried it to a fifth straight record.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 3.58 points, to 3,172.41, the 10th consecutive rise.


Economic Scene; How Much Aid To Give the East?
AMID great turmoil and doubts, Russia has taken its historic plunge to economic and political freedom.
And the United States, perhaps belatedly, is moving to organize Western aid for Russia and the other republics of the former Soviet Union that must rebuild collapsing economies.
At Princeton University last month Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said the popularly elected leaders of Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan and the other republics are looking to America and the West for "guidance and help in launching genuine, far-reaching political and economic reform." But how much can the United States, running a budget deficit expected to exceed $350 billion this year, do to help the ex-Communist countries?


EXECUTIVES
*
American General Corp., Houston, a financial services company, named James S. D'Agostino Jr. senior vice president for administration. *
Bally Manufacturing Corp., Chicago, named Lee S. Hillman chief financial officer, vice president, treasurer and corporate controller.


CHRONICLE
"This may be exhausting, but I can't think of a better way to start the New Year," JOHN CORIGLIANO said yesterday, noting that performances and rehearsals of his two new works -- "Ghosts of Versailles" and his Symphony No. 1 -- will converge in the coming week.
The opera is to be performed tomorrow, Tuesday and Friday by the Metropolitan Opera, and the symphony is to be performed by the New York Philharmonic on Thursday evening, Friday morning and Saturday evening, and then again the following Tuesday evening.


Miscellany
*
Metro-North Commuter Railroad's ticket-by-mail service plans to begin including advertising inserts in monthly mailings to its 32,000 customers.
Starting in May, as many as seven 3 1/2-by-6 1/2-inch advertisements will accompany the mailing of the monthly commuter passes at a cost of $1,600 to advertisers.
More than 90 percent of Metro-North's customers reside in Westchester County, N.Y., and Fairfield County, Conn.


Rear Adm. Grace M. Hopper Dies; Innovator in Computers Was 85
Rear Adm.
Grace Murray Hopper, retired, a mathematician and pioneer in data processing who was a legendary figure among both computer scientists and industry executives, died New Year's Day at her home in Arlington, Va.
Admiral Hopper, who was 85 years old, had been in ill health recently, family members said, and died in her sleep, apparently of natural causes.


Cavs Quiet Knick Noisemakers
The Knicks played hard last night, but they did not always play well.
They fell behind by 15 points in the third quarter.
They missed a bundle of easy shots.
They received no offense from their starting shooting guard, Gerald Wilkins (no points, 0-for-4 shooting), and when it counted most, the Cleveland Cavaliers played with more poise.


Steinbrenner Hopes for Talks
George Steinbrenner confirmed yesterday that there has been movement to dispose of the two lawsuits brought against baseball by Yankees associates, further indicating that Steinbrenner is hoping to meet with Commissioner Fay Vincent by next week to discuss his possible return.
Though Steinbrenner said the lawsuits "are still out there," he agreed with the comments Vincent made Wednesday when the commissioner said he expected the lawsuits to be rescinded soon.
Vincent has refused to have any substantive discussions with the former managing general partner of the Yankees until the lawsuits are renounced.


Little on Its Agenda, Congress Plays Wait-and-See as New Session Starts
Congress will return to the capital to meet for a few minutes Friday, fulfilling a constitutional command that it begin its session on Jan. 3, but with little on the immediate agenda besides leadership meetings and a few news conferences.
In contrast to the scene a year ago, when most lawmakers were here early expecting to confront the grave issue of war in the Persian Gulf, few are in town now, and the choices they face seem harder to grasp.


Emerson Radio Gets Chairman
Jerry Zarin, the turnaround expert named president and chief executive of the financially troubled Emerson Radio Corporation last August, yesterday assumed the additional title of chairman.
He replaces William L. Lane, 57 years old, whose family continues to be a major shareholder in the company, based in North Bergen, N.J.
Emerson markets a range of consumer electronics products manufactured to its specifications in the Far East.


Moses Files For Arbitration
Edwin Moses, the former Olympic champion 400-meter hurdler, and three other athletes have applied for arbitration through the United States Olympic Committee to gain places on the American bobsled team for the 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville, France.
Moses and the others -- Willie Gault of the Los Angeles Raiders; Greg Harrell, a former football player, and Brian Shimer, already a member of the United States team as driver of a two-man sled -- are seeking to make the team in the four-man event.


Puerto Rico's Vote
To the Editor:
"Puerto Ricans Tilt to Statehood" (editorial Dec. 16) does not fully explain Puerto Rico's vote on Gov.
Rafael Hernandez Colon's ambiguous plebiscite.
The voting constituency of Puerto Rican-Americans has spoken and its clear majority "no" represents a victory for the Republican National Committee of Puerto Rico and our quest for statehood.


Robert Wakefield Armstrong, 69, a Revlon Executive for 3 Decades
Robert Wakefield Armstrong, retired chairman of the Revlon subsidiary that introduced the company's perfumes and other cosmetics to the Soviet Union and markets in Asia, died on Wednesday at the Stamford Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 69 years old and lived in New Canaan.
He died of cardiac arrest, a family member said.


Simon's Tour Backed in South Africa
The largest group of anti-apartheid musicians in South Africa said today that it supported a tour of the country by the American singer Paul Simon despite criticism by radical blacks.
The mainly black group, the South African Musicians' Alliance, said it approved of the tour this month because Mr.
Simon had contributed to a fund to develop black music, and his musicians would hold workshops for young artists during the tour.


U.S. Shipbuiding Can't Look to the Past
To the Editor:
Where have the writers of the Dec. 14 letters headlined "U.S. Shipbuilding Withers as Japan's Thrives" been for the last 35 years?


Bridge
There is no way to determine, objectively, the identity of the world's best junior player, who according to international standards must be under 26 years of age, but one of the strongest candidates is a Canadian.
He is 23-year-old Geoff Hampson of Toronto, who four months ago was a member of the Canadian team that finished second in the World Junior Team Championships in Ann Arbor, Mich.
Since then he has qualified to be a member of Canada's squad in the World Team Olympiad in Salsomaggiore, Italy, next August.
Junior players rarely achieve such heights, and he will be one of the youngest contestants.
A week ago Hampson was at the Greater New York Bridge Association's Winter Regionals, where he won the premier event, a four-session Swiss Teams, along with Michael Polowan, Sue Picus and Richard Schwartz.


BRIEFS
*
Ecogen Inc., Langhorne, Pa., which makes biological pesticides, has acquired control of FRM Agricultural Sciences Partnership, Jerusalem, for approximately $2.1 million. *
Joule Inc., Edison, N.J., a diversified services company, said it had completed the acquisition of Designeers Inc., Totowa, N.J., a specialty engineering concern.
No terms were disclosed.


Despite a Lingering Recession, More People Are Giving to the Neediest Cases
A dramatic surge in the number of donations enabled The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund to top $3.5 million yesterday as it entered the second half of the campaign.
Thirty-four days into the campaign, the Neediest Cases has received 9,789 donations, a 21.5 percent increase from last year when 8,060 contributions were made in the same period.


Treasuries Slip on Budget Concerns
Prices of Treasury securities slipped a bit again yesterday, as worries arose again about what sort of fiscal package Congress and the Bush Administration were likely to concoct over the next few months.
Talk about tax cuts and the like was stimulated by an article yesterday in The Washington Post, which quoted President Bush as saying the 1990 budget accord might be reopened to shift spending planned for the military into domestic areas.


Documenting Your House
The start of a new year is a good time to sort important papers at home.
One of the most important files for any homeowner is the one that records all improvements.
That file can be used to lower the size of the capital gains tax owed after sale of the house because such verified costs will be deemed part of the amount the owner paid for the home.
The file can also be useful when applying for an equity loan because it will verify value added to the original worth of the house.
Documents to Keep
A record of the original purchase price and all incidental expenses connected with that purchase.
Contracts, estimates, bills, receipts and canceled checks covering labor, materials and other costs for renovations.
Any building permit or certificate of occupancy connected with a major alteration like an addition or an outdoor improvement like a swimming pool.
Before and after photographs will separate improvements from routine maintenance.
Home Offices
Anyone working at home should also include records substantiating when the office was opened and its maintenance costs.
These records can make a significant difference in the taxes due after sale of the house or in regular income taxes.
What to Discard
Records of routine maintenance costs like repainting a room, fixing a leaky gutter, replacing a cracked window pane.
Neither lenders nor the Internal Revenue Service consider these as adding value to a property.
Guidebooks
"The Homeowner's Tax Guide" by Julian Block, 1991, Runzheimer International, $14.95; telephone (800) 942-9949.
Internal Revenue Service Publication No. 523; telephone (800) 829-3676.


REBELS IN GEORGIA KILL TWO AT RALLY
Opposition gunmen hurled smoke bombs today and then opened fire on demonstrators chanting the name of President Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia.
At least 2 people were killed and 25 others wounded.
Panic reigned amid the smoke and flying bullets, and many at the rally of about 3,000 people dived for cover behind cars and kiosks.


Foothill Deal for Utility
The Tucson Electric Power Company sold a block of 3.8 million shares of Foothill Group Inc. yesterday to a number of institutional and individual investors for about $19.3 million, Foothill announced.
Foothill, an industrial loan company, did not identify any of the buyers, but said none of them owned more than a 9.9 percent stake.


Review/Cabaret; Billy Stritch In a Solo Act At Rainbow
Billy Stritch has been a familiar face on New York City's cabaret scene from his years as leader of the vocal trio Montgomery, Plant and Stritch, but not until he went solo last year did his career begin to soar.
Last spring, the singer, pianist and protege of Liza Minnelli played a successful engagement at the Greenwich Village club Eighty-Eight's that revealed him as a sort of swinging answer to another Minnelli protege, Michael Feinstein.
And on Thursday evening he moved a significant rung up the ladder by opening a four-week engagement at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th floor).
The date coincides with the release of his first solo album on DRG Records.
Like Mr.
Feinstein and Harry Connick Jr., Mr.
Stritch, who is 29 years old, has built a musical style that is a personal composite of 1940's and 50's influences.
In Mr.
Stritch's case, they include the breathy crooning of Dick Haymes and the scat style of Mel Torme.
If Mr.
Stritch's voice lacks the physical power of his models, his more intimate singing is beguiling in its warmth, delicacy and clarity of diction.
He is also one of a handful of singing pianists whose keyboard proficiency, skills in arranging and charm work together to make one forget that he is tied to a piano, even when executing technically demanding flourishes.
At Rainbow and Stars, he is joined by David Finck on bass and Dave Ratajczak on drums, whose support enhances the rhythmic strength of singing that even in the quietest moments conveys a steady current of swing.


Insurance Mirage; A Growing U.S. Affliction: Worthless Health Policies
About a year ago, Camille Ewing survived a grueling $200,000 operation to replace his diseased heart.
But he suffered one unforeseen complication: His health insurance turned out to be worthless because the plan collapsed, and he was stuck with the bills.
Mr.
Ewing and his family have since been sued by Stanford University Hospital.
They recently lost their home in Santa Barbara, Calif.
Over 10 months, the Ewings' health coverage was shifted to two other plans.
Both of them also collapsed.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Dec. 26 about the landscape architect Arthur Edwin Bye Jr. misidentified the organizer of the exhibition of his work at Wave Hill in the Bronx.
It was the department of landscape architecture at Pennsylvania State University, with the assistance of the Palmer Museum of Art at the university.


Dow Leaps Past 3,200
The stock market's rally continued unabated, pushing the Dow Jones industrial average through the 3,200 level for the first time and giving it its sixth straight record.
Only a week after passing 3,100, the Dow ended at 3,201.48, up 29.07 points.
It was the Dow's 11th consecutive rise.
Business Day, page 33.


Cold War Static On Fiber Optics
In a hangover of the cold war, the Bush Administration is continuing an embargo on the sale of sophisticated telecommunications technology to the former Soviet Union.
This misguided policy prevents American companies from helping the Russians when they really need it and making a buck at the same time.
Washington's error became embarrassingly clear -- and costly -- when a German company, using a loophole in the trade restriction, recently sold high-speed fiber-optic cable to Moscow at the expense of an American manufacturer, U S West.
Unless the Administration rescinds the embargo, it risks putting the U.S. telecommunications industry at a competitive disadvantage in its effort to capture a huge market.


Cuban Pilot Defects With 33 Others in a Daring Helicopter Flight
In a daring escape from one of the world's last remaining Communist nations, a pilot for the Cuban national airline commandeered a helicopter in Havana today and flew 33 relatives and friends to a small suburban airport here.
The group, which included nine children and infants, immediately requested political asylum and was taken to an Immigration and Naturalization Service detention center here to be processed.


CHRONICLE
Add RONALD REAGAN'S name to the list of individuals, universities and corporations who have invited MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV and his wife, RAISA, to the United States since Mr.
Gorbachev relinquished the presidency of the Soviet Union.
The former American President invited the former Soviet President to see the new Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, Calif., after having received a letter from Mr.
Gorbachev, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


Fugitive Slain After Long Chase in California
A driver killed a good Samaritan, then led the police on a 300-mile chase before he ran out of gas and was shot to death, the authorities said today.
Officers pulled up near the fugitive on a freeway exit in this Los Angeles suburb and shot him as he moved a sawed-off shotgun toward them, said Lyle Whitten, a California Highway Patrol officer.


With Local News and Memories, a Paper Ends Its Run
Shailesh Patel, the owner of Brown's Cigar Store, looked up from his calculator at the stacks of daily newspapers arranged on bleacher-style shelving next to the door.
"See that?" he said, pointing to the one empty space that a few hours earlier held more than 200 copies of The Daily Journal.
"All gone."


Deep Recession Takes Aim at New Jersey Papers
The Daily Journal of Elizabeth closed yesterday in the latest manifestation of the very hard times New Jersey newspapers are facing.
Indeed, the state's especially crowded newspaper competition and the deep recession in the state suggest that The Journal could easily be joined by other papers in the months to come.


Israelis Have Every Right Not to Hear Wagner
To the Editor:
In "Wagner, Israel -- and Herzl" (Editorial Notebook, Dec. 19), Karl E. Meyer presents two reasons Richard Wagner's music should be publicly performed in Israel.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
The stock market rally steamed further into uncharted territory, shoving the Dow past 3,200 for the first time.
Just a week after passing 3,100, the Dow closed at 3,201.48, up 29.07.  [ Page 33. ]


Mortgage Rates Fall to 8.24%
Average interest charged on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages has dropped to its lowest level in more than 18 years, according to a national survey released today.
Fixed rates this week averaged 8.24 percent, down from 8.35 percent the previous week, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation said.
It was the lowest since rates averaged 8.18 percent during the week ending July 27, 1973.


RESULTS PLUS N.B.A.  Battle Leads Cavaliers Over Celtics


Algeria Says Election Violations May Erode Militants' Advantage
The Algerian Government asserted today that voting irregularities could deprive the Islamic fundamentalists of as many as 70 of the 188 seats they won in last week's parliamentary elections.
The Government and most other parties opposed to the fundamentalists are now trying to dilute the Islamic triumph in the Dec. 26 elections, in which the Islamic Salvation Front appeared well on its way to securing a majority of the 430-seat multi-party National Assembly.
Depending on how far the Government is willing to go, the result could in fact deny the fundamentalists their almost certain victory.  300 Complaints Reported
Government officials said today that as many as 300 complaints of irregularities could result in the annulment of vote results for seats that the Islamic Salvation Front won in the first round of elections.
The complaints involve such activities as improper campaigning and tampering with ballots.


CEASE-FIRE STILLS GUNFIRE IN CROATIA
After six months of increasing warfare and a night and a day of intense clashes, fighting between Serbs and Croats appeared to wane on Croatia's battlefields tonight as the deadline for ending hostilities arrived.
The United Nations-brokered cease-fire took effect at 6 P.M. local time, and it is too early to call the truce successful.
But reports that silence replaced gunfire in Vinkovci, Sibenik and other front-line areas of Croatia raised hopes that all-out fighting between Serbs and Croats might be near an end, and that United Nations peacekeeping forces may soon arrive to prevent new violence from breaking out.


White Sox Abandon Sax Deal
Just when it appeared that the Yankees had worked a deal to trade veteran second baseman Steve Sax and the bulk of his $12.4 million contract to the Chicago White Sox for pitcher Melido Perez, the trade appears to have fizzled.
Hours after saying that the deal was set and awaiting only the approval of the Yankees' hierarchy, White Sox General Manager Ron Schueler announced a sudden turnaround last night.


Knicks Hurt by Jack-Rabbit Play
Playing well for 48 minutes has suddenly become a problem for the Knicks.
They have lost two of their last three games, largely because they have played in spurts.
Good quarters have been followed by bad quarters.
Their defense has slipped.
Their offense has come and gone without warning.


Another Olympic Ovett
NICK OVETT, brother of STEVE OVETT, the 1980 800-meter track gold medalist, has been chosen to compete for Britain in the luge event in the Winter Olympic Games at Albertville, France, next month. (AP)


U.S. ACCUSES IRAQ OF BLOCKING AID
The State Department accused Iraq today of continuing to impede international aid to its 18 million people and called on President Saddam Hussein's Government to immediately resume sales of crude oil under United Nations supervision to help feed its people.
A department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, catalogued several recent attempts by Iraqi officials to block the distribution of donated food and medicine to tens of thousands of Iraqis.
Many Iraqis are said to be suffering from disease and malnutrition brought on in part by a 17-month-old trade embargo that has further devastated the Iraq's economy and prevented it from recovering from the effects of the Persian Gulf war.


For Olympics, Choices Are Not Clear
Because the sport is tennis, one noted more for self-aggrandizement than selflessness, selecting a team of Olympic volunteers by next week's deadline may be easier said than done for the United States.
For some players accustomed to earning six-figure paychecks in the space of an afternoon, a near-three-week stint in Barcelona, Spain, where they will bed down in a dorm instead of the Ritz, may seem like an underpaid eternity.
While the Olympic medals beckon, the United States is trying to sort its sure things from its long shots: John McEnroe wants in, Andre Agassi wants out, and there's even a hitch with the normally trouble-free women's squad because two teams, the United States and Puerto Rico, are vying for the services of one player, Gigi Fernandez.


Corrections
A list of winning lottery numbers yesterday misstated figures in some editions for the New Jersey Pick-6 Lotto bonus drawing.
Corrected numbers appear today on page 25.


Bush Opens Singapore Trip With Announcements
President Bush said today that the United States and Singapore have tentatively agreed to shift command of the Navy's Seventh Fleet logistics operations to this island nation from the Philippines, where the Government ordered the vast Subic Bay naval base closed down.
The announcement was one of a string of agreements that Mr.
Bush made public during a one-day visit here, the second stop on his four-nation tour of the western Pacific.


Edward M. Love Jr., Broadway Dancer, 43
Edward M. Love Jr., a Broadway dancer, choreographer and former member of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, died on Dec. 27 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 43 years old.
He died of AIDS, said his lawyer, Elliot J. Lefkowitz.


Police Say Church Organist Proved Expert as a Thief, Too
As a former church organist, authorities say, Oather James Blocker knew his way around churches better than most people.
He knew where the chalices, trays and incense holders were kept.
He knew when nobody was likely to be around.
He even knew where the burglar alarms were.


Patents; Extended Rights Sought On Some Delayed Products
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company says it has spent $180 million and more than two decades trying to win regulatory approval for Olestra, its potentially revolutionary fat substitute made from polyester.
Yet as the company carries out still another round of tests for the Food and Drug Administration, it complains that its patents have been rendered all but worthless because they are scheduled to expire by the end of 1994.


Samuel M. Peck, 91, Dermatologist and Professor
Dr.
Samuel Mortimer Peck, a prominent New York dermatologist long associated with Mount Sinai Medical Center, died Monday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 91 years old and also had a residence, as well as his private practice, on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He died after a brief illness, his family reported.


Seaman Furniture Files Chapter 11
The Seaman Furniture Company, a Kohlberg, Kravis &amp; Roberts leveraged buyout and the largest furniture retailer in the Northeast, filed yesterday for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
The company cited a "severe and prolonged recession" in its markets.
The company, based in Uniondale, L.I., said that it would close 15 of its 37 stores and that more than 300 of its 1,300 employees would lose their jobs.


U.S. and Allies to Seek U.N. Support Against Libya
Before seeking international sanctions, the United States, Britain and France plan to ask the United Nations Security Council to support their demand that Libya turn over agents accused in the bombings of two airliners, Western diplomats said today.
The three countries would ask the Council to approve sanctions against Libya only if Tripoli refused to obey the proposed order by the Security Council, which would also demand compensation.


Nassau Board Squabbles Could Lead to Stalemate
Six minutes after the historically staid Nassau County Board of Supervisors convened in its dark-paneled meeting room today, the fireworks began.
Lewis J. Yevoli, the newly sworn-in Democratic supervisor from Oyster Bay, looked around in confusion and asked, "When can I speak?" Then, taking the floor, he lambasted the county for paying $550,000 in what he termed unnecessary legal fees, much of it to well-connected Republican law firms.


Your Money; Help for Workers Posted Overseas
WITH the economic integration of Western Europe this year and the remarkable drive by Eastern Europe toward a market economy, American companies are increasing their presence abroad.
But people who assume that a transfer to Brussels is like a move to, say, Boston, can find that financial disasters arise.
Even in Western Europe, consumer banking practices often do not meet American expectations, and in Eastern Europe and the third world many services may not be available at all.
Also, most people assigned overseas continue to have financial obligations at home -- mortgage and tuition payments, insurance premiums, investment accounts, credit cards, taxes, perhaps alimony or support for elderly parents.
All of this calls for arranging financial affairs in advance.


Big Retailers Report Weak December Sales
The nation's big retail chains reported disappointing December sales yesterday, even falling short of the industry's modest goals, retail executives and industry analysts said.
The reports mark the third straight year of weak sales during the crucial holiday selling season.
Several large merchants, including Sears, Roebuck and J. C. Penney, either failed to match or barely exceeded last year's poor results, while the Gap and Wal-Mart Stores posted solid gains.


Dame Judith Anderson Dies at 93; An Actress of Powerful Portrayals
Dame Judith Anderson, who electrified Broadway audiences in 1947 with her savage performance of the title role in "Medea" and was a memorably sinister housekeeper in the 1940 film "Rebecca," died yesterday at her home in Santa Barbara, Calif.
She was 93 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


Barring of Muslim Group Violates Constitution
To the Editor:
"A black Muslim group," you report (news article, Dec. 16), "was barred from using the Harlem public elementary school it rented for an event after Board of Education officials learned of posters advertising the title of the main speaker's speech: "Are Jews Hiding the Truth?" You quote James S. Vlasto, described as a spokesman for the New York City Board of Education, stating, "We cannot have hate or propaganda of any kind emanating from our schools."


Ron Christopher, AIDS Educator, 53
Ron Christopher, an AIDS educator, died on Sunday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 53 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of lymphoma, said his companion, Philip Williams.


China, Uzbekistan Form Ties
China and the newly independent republic of Uzbekistan have established full diplomatic relations, the official New China News Agency said today.
Uzbekistan is the second member of the new Commonwealth of Independent States to establish full ties with China.
China and Russia set up ties at the ambassadorial level on Dec. 27.
At the same time, China recognized the 10 other republics in the commonwealth and Georgia, which has not joined the group.


Biathletes Brave Balmy Elements
You couldn't quite call it a crowd.
Perhaps a circle of close friends would be more like it.
About 30 people watched today as the United States' top biathletes fought the warm weather and rocky terrain to try to qualify for the Olympic team.


Environmentalists Get Little Corporate Aid
To the Editor:
Contrary to your Dec. 23 report that environmentalists are seeking corporate gifts, the Wilderness Society is not about to lay off any employees.
There were some layoffs in 1991, but in the last month we have added two ecologists and two resource economists.
Our financial picture is improving, not worsening.


News Summary
International 2-5 I.M.F.
IS URGED TO ADMIT RUSSIA  In a shift aimed at aiding the economic transformation of Russia and five other former Soviet republics, Washington urged full membership for them in the International Monetary Fund and World Bank.  1  RUSSIANS SUFFER FROM PRICE RISES


Two Men Are Killed in an Apparent Robbery in Bridgeport


U.S. Shipbuilding Can't Look to the Past
To the Editor:
Where have the writers of the Dec. 14 letters headlined "U.S. Shipbuilding Withers as Japan's Thrives" been for the last 35 years?


Mike Frankovich, Film Producer, 82, And a Civic Leader
Mike Frankovich, the producer of films like "Bob and Carol and Ted and Alice" and "The Shootist," died Wednesday in Los Angeles at the age of 82.
He died of pneumonia and had Alzheimer's disease, family members said.


Loan Pact Keeps Bridgeport U. Open for Spring Semester
The University of Bridgeport reached agreement with a consortium of banks today on a loan that will enable it to open for its spring semester and complete the current academic year.
The loan, for $2.2 million, eases an immediate cash crisis at the private university.
But its administrators have yet to complete an affiliation plan with Sacred Heart University in Fairfield that will result in Bridgeport ceasing to exist as an independent institution at the semester's end.


It's Billington's Turn Now as the Devils Play Favorites
One of the peculiar things about professional hockey is that a team sometimes goes through a stretch in which it performs more effectively in front of one goaltender than it does another.
Craig Billington and Chris Terreri, the two goaltenders for the Devils, attribute this phenomenon to what they call a cycle.


LaFontaine's Revenge: Sabres Thrash Islanders
A visit to Memorial Auditorium tonight left the Islanders with one more defeat and three more injuries.
The Sabres beat them, 5-2, as Aleksandr Mogilny scored three times.
Pat LaFontaine, an old acquaintance not to be forgotten, had three assists for the Sabres.
Tom Kurvers scored twice for the Islanders.
"Some of the Islanders were joking around and saying things about my mask and my jaw and my mouth and I was trying to focus," said LaFontaine, the former Islander star who is wearing elaborate headgear to protect a jawbone healing from a recent break.
"During the first period, I had butterflies, nerves.


L.S.U. Barely Beats Texas


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.61
5.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.85
3.86
6.53
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.88
3.87
6.51
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.48
6.41
7.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.47
7.46
8.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.63
8.60
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.70
6.70
7.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Politicians Assail Hertz For New York Surcharge
Kathleen Restifo and Dr.
David Bernstein rented from Hertz this weekend, but she will be doing all the driving.
She's from Philadelphia; he's from Brooklyn.
Dr.
Bernstein had reserved a car a few days ago for a weekend getaway, but on Thursday, Hertz announced that it would apply a surcharge to rentals by most New York City residents; when he arrived at the rental counter at 222 East 40th Street in Manhattan yesterday after work, he was told that the extra cost for the two-day rental would be $68.


Israelis Have Every Right Not to Hear Wagner; After Herzl's Time
To the Editor:
Karl E. Meyer misses the point (Editorial Notebook, Dec. 19).
Theodor Herzl died in 1904 and so did not survive, witness or even live during, the murder of six million Jews by men and women who were also inspired by Richard Wagner's music.


Election Panel Is Hoping To Replenish Its Funds
The Federal Election Commission, hoping to stave off a $150 million shortage projected by 1996 in the taxpayer-financed campaign fund, announced today that it would begin a public relations effort and an appeal to Congress to replenish its coffers.
Joan Aikens, the chairwoman of the commission, said the Presidential Election Campaign Fund would probably not run out of money in the 1992 campaign season, but only because Presidential candidates had made lower demands on the public financing mechanism this year.


Younger Baby Boomers Are Found Less Well Off
The outsized baby boom generation, whose attitudes and angst have been fodder for demographers, advertisers and scriptwriters since the early 1960's, is really made up of two disparate mini-generations equal in size but not in opportunity, with the younger less well off and more politically alienated than the older group.
This conclusion made in a new report, "The Baby Boom -- Entering Midlife," by two demographic researchers, Leon F. Bouvier and Carol J. DeVita, and is based on data showing that by several economic measures, including home ownership, the "trailing edge" of the baby boom, or those born in the years 1955 through 1964, is not likely to achieve the same standard of living as the "leading-edge" baby boomers born in the years 1946 through 1954.


CHRONICLE
KATHARINE HEPBURN has come to the rescue of the fire department in Old Saybrook, Conn., with a gift of $7,000 to buy a 1959 ladder truck.
The fire department has needed a reserve truck for 10 years, but was unable to afford a new one for $500,000, and until last fall, could not find a used one in good condition.


EX-SOVIETS RECEIVE LIST OF U.S. MISSING
The Bush Administration has given several former Soviet republics the names of more than 50 Americans listed as missing in action from World War II and the Korean and Vietnam Wars who might have been moved to the Soviet Union, officials said today.
The names include those of Americans who fought in Asia in World War II, crew members aboard warplanes that were downed near Soviet territory in the Korean War and prisoners of war taken in Vietnam, the officials said.


Letter: On Research; Utilizing Former Soviet Scientists
To the Editor:
"Forget Dr. No" (editorial, Dec. 22) correctly calls attention to the major problem of the future of the scientists of the former Soviet Union.
But to suggest that Western governments and foundations support scientific work inside the former Soviet Union is dead wrong!


First Meeting For Two Sons Of a Defector
Laden with documents he said he had smuggled out of Russia in his socks and underwear, the son of a wartime Soviet defector arrived here from Moscow today for a tearful reunion with the half-brother he discovered only a year ago.
"If only we could have lived our whole lives together like this," cried Valentin Bodrov as he embraced his brother, Andrew Kravchenko, an Arizona rancher, at the airport.


Skyscrapers' Veil of Clouds Portends a Brewing Storm


U.S. Sharp at Junior Finals
In Germany this week, five first-round National Hockey League draft choices are part of a United States team that might make history with its best finish in the world junior championships.
Despite a 5-0 loss Thursday to the Commonwealth of Independent States, formerly the Soviet Union, the young Americans could finish with a 5-2 record with a victory over Czechoslovakia in the final game today in Fussen.
Until now, the only American medal in tournament history has been a bronze in 1986.
The Yanks still have a chance for a silver, but no guarantee of even third place.
It's that tight.


O'Connor Meets With Muslim and Christian Spiritual Leaders in Lebanon


Robinson Joins Angels
The free-agent pitcher DON ROBINSON agreed to a $900,000, one-year contract with the California Angels.
Only half of Robinson's base salary is guaranteed.
The deal contains performance bonuses that could make it worth as much as $1.8 million.
Robinson, 34, went 5-9 with a 4.38 earned run average and one save for the San Francisco Giants last season.
He appeared in 34 games, starting 16. (AP)


U.S. Shipbuilding Can't Look to the Past
To the Editor:
Where have the writers of the Dec. 14 letters headlined "U.S. Shipbuilding Withers as Japan's Thrives" been for the last 35 years?


Palestinians Delay Trip to Peace Talks
Palestinian delegates to the Middle East peace talks said today that they had suspended plans to go to Washington for a new round of negotiations next week as a protest against Israel's decision to expel 12 Palestinians from the occupied territories.
The negotiators said a final decision on whether the delay would be temporary or turned into a full-blown boycott was to be made by the Palestine Liberation Organization, which they called "the legitimate political leadership of the Palestinian people."


Preserving Skin Without Preservatives
Adverse reactions to skin-care products are relatively rare, but when they do occur, the two most common culprits are the fragrance ingredients and the preservatives.
Although there are a number of different brands of moisturizers made without fragrance, it is difficult to find a mass market product made without preservatives, especially one from a major manufacturer.


6 EX-SOVIET STATES GAIN U.S. SUPPORT FOR TIE TO LENDERS
The Bush Administration, in a policy switch aimed at more quickly assisting the economic transformation of Russia and five other former Soviet republics, urged today that they be admitted to full membership in the International Monetary Fund and World Bank.
Membership in the fund and the World Bank for Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan and Armenia -- the former republics with which the United States is initially establishing diplomatic relations -- could allow them access to billions of dollars in development loans to help make the unsettling transition from a centralized to a free-market economy.


What's Up Inside the Rinks and With Outside Issues
A survey of hockey's wintry landscape shows everything heating up.
It is a busy and interesting time for legal matters, for trades and trade talk and for the intriguing National Hockey League race at the halfway point.
Behind the scenes, the issue is pension money involving the league and its players association.


Taipei Journal; The Voice of Taiwan Speaks English
Tune to 100 on your FM dial some bleary morning in Taiwan, and you might think that unusual atmospheric conditions had somehow brought in a California radio station.
There's an American disk jockey bantering and joking along in English, and Madonna and Michael Jackson compact disks, and telephone requests for more American top 40 songs -- and then along comes the traffic report and gives it away.
It's not Hollywood Boulevard that is backed up, but Chien-kuo north road.


Credit Reports: The Overhaul Rolls On
After years of increasing consumer complaints about errors in credit reports, invasion of privacy and the cost of obtaining the records, the Federal Government and credit bureaus themselves are finally reacting to the pressure.
Here are some recent developments:


Beliefs
There are about 2000 entries in the Oxford Dictionary of New Words, published last month, and probably less than 10 have to do with religion, ethics or systems of belief.
Far more of the decade's new terms, or new meanings for old terms, have sprung from the business world, with its "junk bonds," "greenmail," "poison pills" and "headhunters." Youth culture, the news media and drug use did more than their share with new words like "high-fives" and "sound bite" and new meanings for once-innocent words like "crack" and "ice."


Water? No. 'New Age' Soda? Clearly.
It looks like a mineral water, tastes like a soft drink and sells for $1 a bottle.
It is Clearly Canadian and it is the beverage industry's fastest-rising star.
Some industry analysts say Clearly Canadian is the new leader of what they call the "new age" category of light beverages like flavored seltzers and fruit juice-based soft drinks.
Unsweetened mineral waters, like Perrier, are not included in the category.


4 Are Given Maximum Sentences in Utah Tourist's Subway Murder
Saying that he wanted to send a strong signal to those who carry out "wolfpack" attacks in New York City, a state judge yesterday sentenced each of the four defendants convicted in the murder of Brian Watkins to the maximum of 25 years to life in prison.
"Make no mistake, we must come to grips with these marauding gangs," the judge, Justice Edwin Torres of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, said.


James F. Bere, 69, a Chicago Leader and Corporate Chief
James Frederick Bere, the chairman and chief executive of the billion-dollar Borg-Warner Corporation and a Chicago civic figure, died early yesterday at his home in Hinsdale, Ill., a Chicago suburb.
He was 69 years old.
A statement issued at the Chicago headquarters of Borg-Warner said he had died after a heart attack.


Trouble in SimCity
It had seemed like a chancy Christmas gift: a computer game called SimCity, based on urban management.
But in one New York household, it turned out to be as addictive as any firefight with alien invaders -- and soberingly instructive.
Booted up on the Macintosh computer, the SimCity program presents a piece of barren if promising real estate to a player invested with sweeping powers over a capital fund, zoning rules, tax rates and an operating budget for city services.


In Capital's Power Circle, a Box Helps Keep Score
Forget invitations to White House dinners.
Forget dinner a deux at the British Embassy.
Forget personal tours and tea at the Russian Embassy.
The most clamored-for invitation in the capital is the one from Jack Kent Cooke, septuagenarian owner of the Washington Redskins football team, to watch the National Football League playoffs from his 50-yard-line director's box at Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium.


The High Court v. Habeas Corpus
Even as Congress resists attempts to gut the Federal law of habeas corpus, Chief Justice William Rehnquist and his band of Supreme Court activists are racing to lobby the legislators or, if unsuccessful, to amend the law by judicial fiat.
These efforts deeply threaten the Great Writ of habeas corpus, by which Federal courts have long guarded the rights of state prisoners.
Two weeks ago the Court called for argument over whether Federal judges should give extra deference to state legal judgments, including erroneous ones, when reviewing criminal convictions for constitutional error.
Then on New Year's Day the Chief Justice delivered his annual message, calling on Congress to reduce the workload of Federal courts, especially their obligation to hear habeas corpus cases.


INSIDE
Palestinians May Avoid Talks Palestinian negotiators said they had suspended plans to attend peace talks as a protest against Israel's decision to expel 12 Palestinians.
Page 3.
U.N.
Action on Libya Sought
Before seeking sanctions, the United States and two allies will ask the United Nations to tell Libya to extradite two bombing suspects.
Page 2.
Fighting Eases in Yugoslavia
Fighting in Yugoslavia between Serbs and Croats appeared to abate as the deadline for ending hostilities under a cease-fire arrived.
Page 3.
Weapons Plant Halted Again
A radioactive leak from the Savannah River weapons plant has caused an indefinite delay in restarting a nuclear reactor.
Page 6.
Judith Anderson Dies at 93
The Australian-born actress was best known for her "Medea" on Broadway in 1947 and for the 1940 film "Rebecca." Page 27.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on Thursday about a Federal audit of Stanford University's research contracts with the Federal Government misattributed an estimate of how much money Stanford might eventually owe the Government.
A Government employee who brought charges of overbilling against Stanford used the figure $480 million; university officials did not use a specific figure.


Orders Rose At Factories In November
An otherwise listless manufacturing sector showed improvement in November largely because of a spurt in aircraft orders, the Government said today.
Orders received by factories rose a modest six-tenths of 1 percent in November, to a seasonally adjusted $243.74 billion, the Commerce Department said.
The jump was attributed primarily to a 24.7 percent rise in aircraft and aeronautics bookings.


Have You Ever Tried Feeding One Seagull


Corrections
An article on Dec. 19 about the Rev.
Al Sharpton misidentified the public-relations and booking agency that represents him.
It is Castillo Communications.


Teachers' Union Refuses to Help in the Search for Budget Cuts
In the opening salvo of a campaign to stave off further cuts to New York City's education budget, the United Federation of Teachers has ordered its district representatives not to cooperate in the search for school programs that might be eliminated.
Mayor David N. Dinkins, facing a shortfall of more than $200 million in the city's current $28 billion budget, has proposed that the central Board of Education make a midyear cut of $40 million.
That would be on top of the $430 million eliminated from the school system's budget on July 1, the start of the current fiscal year.


Four Killed in New Jersey Fire Are Buried


METRO DIGEST
DEFENDANTS SENTENCED IN WATKINS TRIAL
Saying he wanted to send a strong message to those who prey in "wolfpacks," a state judge yesterday sentenced each of the four defendants convicted in the murder of Brian Watkins to 25 years to life.
Although none of the four was armed with a deadly weapon during the attack, the judge said they were just as guilty as the person who stabbed Mr.
Watkins.
Page 1.
SUSPECT ORGANIST MAY PREY ON CHURCHES


Review/Pop; Moving to the Beat of Bahia And Tropicalia Connections
Bahian roots have become a hot property in Brazilian pop.
Bahia, the state on Brazil's northeastern coast with the nation's strongest African-Brazilian culture, emerged in the late 1960's as the cradle of the tropicalia movement, which transformed Brazilian pop by connecting local traditions to international rock.
In the late 1980's, Brazilians and foreigners became newly aware of Bahia's blocos afros, orchestras of drums and percussion that play songs about black pride and resistance.
Tania Alves, who is to perform through tonight at the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, was born in Rio de Janeiro, but her mother is Bahian.
And she is climbing on the Bahian bandwagon behind Gal Costa, tropicalia's leading interpreter, and Margareth Menezes, who is remaking current Bahian rock.
On Tuesday night, wearing a modified bikini of satin, feathers and beads and dancing with hip-swiveling sensuality, Ms.
Alves dedicated her set to the blocos of Bahia and to Brazil's "mixed blood," the source, she said, of the richness and beauty of Brazilian culture.


Correction Aide Is Demoted During Inquiry
The head of the Correction Department's legal division was demoted yesterday, apparently another casualty of the inquiry into a disputed $1.9 million New York City contract to monitor released prisoners electronically.
Allison Lewis-Smith, who had been the department's Deputy Commissioner for Legal Affairs, was stripped of much of her authority in an administrative shake-up by the city's acting Correction Commissioner, Gerald Mitchell.
Ms.
Lewis-Smith had been brought into the agency last January by Allyn R. Sielaff, who resigned as Correction Commissioner on Dec. 23, hours after he was rebuked by Mayor David N. Dinkins for his department's handling of the contract.


Utley to Attend Game
MIKE UTLEY, the Detroit offensive lineman who suffered an injury to his spinal cord in a game on Nov. 17 and is paralyzed from the chest down, is progressing well in his rehabilitation program in Denver and will attend today's playoff game between Houston and Denver.
He said he wished both teams well, but his primary interest is seeing the Lions make it to the Super Bowl.


Apple-I.B.M. Plan Backed
The Federal Trade Commission has given I.B.M. and Apple Computer Inc. approval to proceed with two ventures planned to develop advanced personal computers and multimedia consumer products.
The ventures, Taligent and Kaleida, will be set up in Silicon Valley in California with employees from both computer makers in an effort to carry out an ambitious plan hatched last year by executives of the computer makers.
The officials called the plan an effort to revitalize the computer industry.


Alan E. Himelick, 62, Retired Ad Executive
Alan Edward Himelick, a retired advertising executive, died Dec. 27 at New Milford Hospital in New Milford, Conn.
He was 62 years old and lived in Washington Depot, Conn.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Put Away the Polls: It's Time to Resume the Playoffs; Elway Takes On Moon in a Matchup of Hurlers
Even if the game has been largely ignored, it still doesn't lack for a certain kind of star quality.
John Elway and Warren Moon are undeniably two of pro football's marquee players.
But Saturday's American Conference playoff between the Denver Broncos and the Houston Oilers (Channel 4, 4 P.M.in New York) might be determined, in part, by others.
Like, for instance, Doug Widell, Keith Kartz, William Fuller and Ray Childress.


College Plans Security Force After Deaths
At a tense two-hour meeting yesterday, the trustees and Chancellor of the City University of New York closely questioned top officials of City College yesterday about their roles in planning a celebrity basketball game that turned deadly for nine young people, and then announced that they would make major changes in campus security.
The Chancellor, W. Ann Reynolds, said that the college would create its own security force as early as July, with guards who would be given new powers to make arrests.
Currently, the college uses Pinkerton's guards under a contract.
Student Government Blamed
The announcement came after a meeting at which, university officials said, the president of the college, Dr.
Bernard W. Harleston, and several top aides blamed the game's organizers -- the Evening Student Government -- for misleading the college about the nature of the event.
Dr.
Harleston, whose leadership has come under scrutiny in the aftermath of the calamity, blamed that "duplicity" for the failure to provide sufficient security.


Israelis Have Every Right Not to Hear Wagner; 'Behind the Jargon'
To the Editor:
For Daniel Barenboim, conductor of the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra, to claim that he fully understands the agony felt by concentration camp survivors (Arts pages, Dec. 17) is disingenuous.
And to claim that because Wagner's music forms part of the standard orchestral literature is sufficient reason to include it in the repertory of every orchestra is specious.
One might argue that if just one orchestra, for the most humane of esthetic reasons, excludes that music from its repertory, that is testimony to an esthetic judgment far more compelling in our time than the matter of a representative repertory.


Radio Drama Isn't Dead, Nor the Scary Sound Effects
Making the first episode of "The Radio Stage," a series of hourlong dramas that begins a new season at 7 P.M. tomorrow on WNYC-FM (93.9), was almost as scary as anything in the script.
This is radio, after all, and that means sound effects, not canned sound effects from some dusty old record lying around the control room, but real ones.
Digital audiotape recorder in hand, the director, Marjorie Van Halteren, and the engineer, Edward Haber, spent a day in Bear Mountain State Park in Highlands, N.Y., re-enacting everything but the dialogue, which was recorded back in the studio.
"That's me running through the bushes," Ms.
Van Halteren said.
"Me jumping off a stump. Me putting my foot on the fence."


Police Say Bias Is Still Possible Factor in Killing
Investigators said yesterday that they were still considering racial bias as a possible element in the fatal beating of a black man by several whites in Queens last Saturday.
The commander of Queens detectives, Deputy Chief Raymond J. Abruzzi, said that the death of John Kelley, 22 years old, was still being investigated as a possible bias-related crime, despite reports that it had been stripped of that classification.


New Yorkers Help Tourist in Trouble
To the Editor:
Last week I flew in to New York for some Christmas shopping.
I hadn't been there more than a few hours when someone reached into my shoulder bag in midtown and grabbed my wallet.
Turning for help, I saw firsthand a side of New York most of us usually don't see.
An off-duty firefighter sprang into action to help me call 911, digging through his pockets for a quarter for the phone.


Radioactive Leak at Nuclear Arms Plant Lingers in Savannah River
A radioactive leak from the Savannah River nuclear weapons plant in South Carolina has caused lingering contamination of the Savannah River and prompted the Energy Department today to postpone indefinitely the long-awaited restart of a nuclear reactor there.
The leak of 150 gallons of highly radioactive cooling water came 11 days ago during the final preparations to restart a 37-year-old nuclear reactor that the Government had spent four years and well over $1 billion to repair, the Energy Department said today. 10 Times Above Safety Limit
The leak contained tritium, a radioactive form of hydrogen, and forced a water utility downstream that serves 50,000 people in Jasper and Beaufort Counties in South Carolina, and two food companies in Savannah, Ga., to close their drinking water intake valves and shut off any flow from the river.


No War. No Peace. No Yugoslavia.
Fourteen cease-fires between Serbian and Croatian forces have failed in the past six months.
But the 15th now looks as though it might hold well enough to permit deployment of some 10,000 United Nations peacekeeping troops.
If so, great credit is due to Cyrus Vance, the former Secretary of State now serving as U.N. special envoy.
Mr.
Vance does not pretend to have resolved all the complex issues of sovereignty, territory and minority rights that led to combat.
But he has worked to halt the killing that has bled Yugoslavia and threatened to draw neighboring countries into destructive conflict.


President Is Installed At Economists Group
William Vickrey, a grand old man of public finance whose avant-garde ideas have influenced economists since the late 1930's, has become the new president of the 20,000-member American Economics Association.
Mr.
Vickrey, 78 years old, a professor of economics at Columbia University, will hold the post -- largely an honorary one -- for the usual one-year term.
As president-elect last year, he took over the new position yesterday at the start of the organization's yearly meeting in New Orleans, succeeding Thomas Schelling of Harvard University.


Chad Army Claims 2 Towns; French Paratroopers Go In
The Government said today that it had recaptured two towns taken briefly by rebels loyal to former President Hissen Habre, killing 400 of them and taking hundreds prisoner.
France, meanwhile, ordered 450 paratroopers to Chad from bases in France and elsewhere in Africa to help protect French nationals and property in the central African nation.
The new paratroops will join about 1,000 French soldiers already in Chad.


Observer; Nobody's the One!
Look, I'm just as fed up with politics and Washington time-servers as you are, but something eerie could be going on with these birds.
For instance, once-invincible President Bush has suddenly become vincible.
The polls show the Democrats can beat him as long as they don't nominate a candidate.
The minute the poll takers test Bush against a live Democrat, however, the President wins easily.
In short, ancient wisdom is failing.
The old-timers said, "You can't beat somebody with nobody." Now a new age: The only way Democrats can beat Bush is with nobody.


Threats by Phone: Free Speech or Just Another Evil?
The answering machine at Gary Hale's home has lost its angry edge.
No longer does it play back obscene messages attacking Mr.
Hale, a state senator, for casting one of the pivotal votes last summer that gave Connecticut an income tax.
But vitriolic messages left on that machine months ago, at the height of protests against the new tax, have come home to some of the people who called him.
One anonymous caller has been identified and charged with harassment.
The police say other arrests are possible.


Twins Born in Different Years
Katherine and Jessica Goddeke are twins, born this week to Susan and Paul Goddeke.
But their birth dates are in different years.
Katherine was born at 11:56 P.M.
Tuesday at St.
Joseph's Mercy Hospital, weighing 8 pounds, 3 ounces.
Jessica arrived at 12:14 A.M.
Wednesday, on New Year's Day, weighing 6 pounds, 15 ounces.
The mother, Susan, said, "We weren't exactly watching the clock, but we were ready to yell, 'Happy New Year!' "


DEMOCRATS AGREE TO SEEK END OF BAN ON BUDGET SHIFTS
Democratic Congressional leaders agreed today to move soon to break down the barriers in the 1990 budget law between military and domestic spending so savings from Pentagon cutbacks could pay for other programs, House Speaker Thomas S. Foley said.
Mr.
Foley, a Washington Democrat, and George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Senate Democratic leader, both praised President Bush for indicating during a television interview tonight with David Frost a willingness to consider removing those barriers.
"We commend the President for reviewing and reversing his position in the light of changing circumstance," Mr.
Mitchell said.


Put Away the Polls: It's Time to Resume the Playoffs; It's Best Vs. Boast As Redskins Face Falcons
The Redskins, like their coach, Joe Gibbs, are smart, methodical, relentless and almost always at their best.
The Atlanta Falcons, like their coach, Jerry Glanville, are unorthodox, flamboyant gamblers who are always boisterous and sometimes obnoxious.


Russians Find Goods Too Pricey, or Don't Find Them at All
As the hard reality of Government-ordered price increases began to take hold in Russia and other former Soviet republics, people continued today to search for goods that either were not there or cost far too much if they were.
There was no comment or evaluation of the effect of the increases from the Russian Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin, who is advocating them as a way to move the country toward a market economy.


A Bag That Lets the Golfer Put Both Shoulders Into the Game
It is common for hikers to carry their gear in knapsacks that hang by two shoulder straps across their backs.
But this concept is largely foreign to golfers, who persist in carrying golf clubs in bags that are slung over one shoulder.
Now a golf equipment manufacturer is trying to change that habit.
The Wilson Sporting Goods Company of River Grove, Ill., has introduced a golf bag with two shoulder straps, modeled after the backpack.
The new bag is designed to balance the weight of clubs more evenly across the back than single-strap bags do.


Junk Mail to Throw Into the Nearest VCR
As some companies scramble to generate sales, consumers are increasingly seeing high-tech forms of advertising -- videotapes and computer disks that promote products, including some that are mailed to consumers' homes.
Last September, for example, some newsstand copies of Elle magazine came with a videocassette that contained a two-and-a-half minute commercial for Spellbound, a perfume made by Estee Lauder.
And for Christmas, the Hartmarx Corporation, the Chicago clothing manufacturer and retailer, mailed videotaped catalogues to the homes of some 150,000 customers.


Bird Misses Game
LARRY BIRD missed the Boston Celtics' game against Cleveland last night and was expected to sit out tonight's contest at Minnesota because of a sore back.
DAVE GAVITT, the Celtics' chief executive officer, said the problem resulted from a fall the player took in practice about a month ago and was not related to Bird's off-season back surgery. (AP)


With Bullets' Record, Why Is Unseld Secure?
One call that was made and another that wasn't were sure to haunt Bill Fitch for at least an airplane ride to Chicago tonight and probably longer.
The Nets' coach slumped behind his desk, his face drained, his hopes dashed, his team's winning streak snapped at four games.
A battle with the Washington Bullets, one so fierce it belied the fact that it was for undisputed possession of fifth place in the Atlantic Division, had been lost.
It was the worst kind of defeat, with twists and turns and opportunities you can't forget.


Few Problems at Madison Square Garden Rap Concert
The first arena-sized rap concert in New York City in four years went off peacefully last night, as an increased police force circled Madison Square Garden and the performers on stage repeatedly reminded to audience to stay calm. .
Worry about outbursts at the show -- already a concern in the long absence of big rap shows in the city -- was heightened this week after the deaths of nine young people crushed at the entrance to a basketball game at City College that featured rap celebrities.
The concert was planned for months, but fell by coincidence less than week after the deaths.


Officer Finds Man's Body in a Bronx Park
A patrol officer who became suspicious when he saw two men leaving the woods in Pelham Bay Park Thursday and was dubious when they said they had gone to bury a dog went to look for himself and found a man's body, the police said.
Returning to the Bronx street where he had left the two men -- after taking their car keys with him -- the officer, David Kozlow, told the men he was going to issue them a summons.
Then he called for more help.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
NFL -- Named Denver quarterback John Elway to the AFC Pro Bowl team in place of Dan Marino who is injured and will not play.
CHICAGO BEARS -- Named Russ Riederer physical development coordinator.
DETROIT LIONS -- Placed Jeff Campbell, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
Activated Aubrey Matthews, wide receiver, from injured reserve.
Hockey  National Hockey League
CHICAGO BLACKHAWKS -- Recalled Mike Stapleton and Sean Williams, centers, from Indianapolis of the International Hockey League.
Sent Dan Vincelette, left wing, to Indianapolis.


Court Approves Plan to Shift Control of Maxwell Flagship
A plan that transfers control of the Maxwell Communication Corporation to officials appointed by British and American courts was approved by a United States bankruptcy judge yesterday.
The plan, whose approval was expected, leaves the company's board in place, but essentially powerless.
The judge approved a plan giving a United States-appointed examiner and the British-appointed administrator the right to oversee the bankruptcy proceedings.
A British court approved a comparable plan earlier this week.


Slatkin and His Affinity for the Music of America
When the New York Philharmonic was searching for a successor to Zubin Mehta a few years ago, Leonard Slatkin was regularly mentioned as a likely candidate.
At the time, Mr.
Slatkin denied that he was discussing the post and renewed his contract with the ensemble he has directed since 1979, the St.
Louis Symphony Orchestra.
Yet his ties to the Philharmonic seem to have grown stronger since Kurt Masur became music director.
This season, besides leading the Philharmonic's New Year's Eve gala, he conducted a subscription week in September and is now back for a three-week stay that ends on Jan. 21.
He is to return to conduct the orchestra again in March.
In April, he will conduct a run of Puccini's "Fanciulla del West" at the Metropolitan Opera.
And between now and then he will bring his own orchestra to Carnegie Hall for a pair of concerts in February.


Shirley Jenkins, Noted Researcher And Social Worker, Is Dead at 72
Shirley Jenkins, a noted social work researcher, author and educator, died on Monday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
She was 72 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of cancer, her family said.


Coaching Interviews In Full Gear in N.F.L.
The Tampa Bay Buccaneers, the Indianapolis Colts, the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Minnesota Vikings yesterday continued their searches for new coaches.
SAM WYCHE, who roamed and fumed on the Bengals' sideline until a Christmas Eve falling out with the Cincinnati general manager, MIKE BROWN, was interviewed in Tampa, Fla., yesterday. (Wyche issued a statement in which he said NBC and CBS were also on his list.) The next chat scheduled for the Buccaneers' vacancy is with BUDDY RYAN, the former coach of the Philadelphia Eagles, on Monday.


Sports of The Times; The Menace That Looms In the N.B.A.
When Karl Malone made like Scarface Capone and ripped a hole in Isiah Thomas's head, it made people in the National Basketball Association and beyond take particular notice.
At least, it seemed to.
But Chuck Person, among others, was apparently otherwise occupied.
On Dec. 14, in Salt Lake City, Thomas, the 6-foot-1-inch, 185-pound guard for Detroit, drove in for a shot and Malone, the 6-9, 256-pound forward for Utah, defended his basket by going for the ball, he later said.
But he missed the ball -- the Mailman was obviously suffering an unaccountable lack of coordination at that moment -- and smashed Thomas in the forehead with his elbow, causing 40 stitches.
Thomas was sidelined for a week and missed three games.


Dow Up 29, Past 3,200
The stock market rally steamed further into uncharted territory yesterday, shoving the Dow Jones industrial average through the 3,200 level for the first time.
Just a week after passing 3,100, the Dow closed at 3,201.48, up 29.07 points.
Posting its sixth straight record, the Dow rode an initial spurt of buying and then climbed gradually, reaching 3,200 in the final hour of trading.
It was the Dow's 11th consecutive rise.


Israelis Have Every Right Not to Hear Wagner; The Anti-Nazi Wagner
To the Editor:
Karl E. Meyer writes of Richard Wagner's descendants collaborating with the Nazis (Editorial Notebook, Dec. 19).
With one exception:


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Cor Therapeutics Inc., South San Francisco, Calif., a biopharmaceutical company, named Laura A. Brege chief financial officer and vice president-finance. *
Corestates Financial Corp., Philadelphia, a bank holding company, announced that George A. Butler, president of the corporation and its subsidiary Corestates Bank N.A., has retired.
Terrence A. Larsen, chairman of the corporation and the bank, will assume the added title of president.


American Piano Music
A recital of recent American piano music is to be presented at 3 P.M. tomorrow at Christ and St.
Stephen's Church, 120 West 69th Street, Manhattan.
Max Lifchitz is to play the New York City premieres of works by Harold Schiffman, Robert Stewart, Marilyn Ziffrin, Mary Jeanne Van Appledorn, Allan Blank, Elizabeth Hayden Pizer, Douglas Ovens and Howard Quilling.
Tickets are $9.
Information: (212) 787-0517.


Contract for LaValliere
The free-agent catcher MIKE LAVALLIERE agreed to a three-year, $6.3 million contract yesterday and will stay with the Pittsburgh Pirates.
LaValliere, 31, agreed to arbitration on Dec. 10.
A few days later, he agreed to the outline of the multiyear deal, but both sides needed time to work out the details.
LaValliere, who made $1,035,000 last season, gets a $600,000 signing bonus, $1.65 million in 1992, $2.15 million in 1993 and $1.9 million in 1994.
He can make an additional $120,000 a year in performance bonuses.


John Gallagher Jr., 72, Ex-Wall St. Executive  John J. Gallagher Jr., a retired Wall Street executive, died on Monday at his home in Plandome Manor, L.I. He was 72 years old.   He died of a heart attack, relatives said.


The Pet Cemetery Defense: Sloppiness, but Not Fraud
The lawyers for the two men accused of cremating dead animals en masse or throwing them into huge graves in the woods at the Long Island Pet Cemetery said yesterday that while their clients may have done these things, they had not broken the law.
Instead, the lawyers said in opening arguments in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, the pet cemetery was simply a sloppily run business that tried to do too much and found itself overwhelmed by a lack of equipment and a burgeoning volume of animals that could not always be disposed of as promised.


Weyerhaeuser Taking Big Charge
The Weyerhaeuser Company said today that it would take year-end special charges and a credit that would reduce its 1991 after-tax earnings by about $344 million, or $1.70 a share.
The charges will result in Weyerhaeuser's first annual or quarterly loss since it began reporting in 1933.
"These actions should put a number of uncertainties behind us and allow the company to begin 1992 with a clean slate," said John W. Creighton, Weyerhaeuser's president and chief executive.


Chairman of Unilever To Replace Whitbread's
Whitbread P.L.C., the British drinks and leisure group, announced on Thursday that Samuel Whitbread, 54, will retire as chairman in July.
He will be replaced by Sir Michael Angus, chairman of Unilever P.L.C., the British-Dutch consumer products company.
Mr.
Whitbread, who has been chairman since 1984, said he was retiring "to have more time available for my many other public and private interests." He will continue as a non-executive director, a position he held for 12 years before becoming chairman in 1984.
Mr.
Whitbread's retirement coincides with the company's 250th anniversary.


Writers Learn to Confront AIDS Through Poetry
The writing students exchange small talk first.
Michael Pelonero says he is starting to wake up in the wee hours drenched in cold sweat.
Tony Giordano suggests that his own problems are psychological.
"I think I'm going nuts," he says.


Helicopter Pilot Stages Daring Escape From Cuba
Cuban refugees celebrating yesterday after a pilot for the Cuban national airline commandeered a helicopter in Havana and flew 33 relatives and friends to a small suburban Miami airport.
Page 6. (Associated Press)


Corrections
An article yesterday about a study of follow-up treatments for breast cancer referred incorrectly to one comparison of possible benefits of therapies in women of different ages.
The study suggested that tamoxifen in women over 50 years old (not under 50) produces as good an effect as chemotherapy.


Quotation of the Day
"For a mother to hold a dying child in her arms, murdered before her very eyes, is a visitation that the devil himself would hestitate to conjure up. That cannot go unpunished." JUSTICE EDWIN TORRES, sentencing four defendants in the murder of a young Utah tourist in the New York subway.  [ 24:6. ]


Corrections
A report in the Religion Notes column last Saturday about Roman Catholic Holy Days of Obligation referred incorrectly to the observance on Dec. 8 for which attendance at Mass will remain obligatory, regardless of the day of the week on which it falls.
It is the Feast of the Immaculate Conception. (As noted elsewhere in the report, the Feast of the Assumption is observed on Aug. 15; for that day, if it falls on a Saturday or a Monday, the nation's bishops are proposing that the obligation to attend Mass be lifted.)


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Glastonbury, Conn. 139,000
44 Main Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 200-year-old farmhouse; beehive oven and fireplace in kitchen, formal dining room, 1 acre; taxes $2,735.
Westport, Conn. 1.3 million
66 Bermuda Road  4-bedroom, 5-bath, 15-year-old contemporary; tennis court, private dock on Long Island Sound, 0.5 acre; taxes $13,838.
Wilton, Conn. 930,000
11 Crosswicks Ridge  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; marble fireplace, intricate moldings, 2 acres; taxes $8,755.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 482,500
5 Ludlow Drive
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 60-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, den, greenhouse, playroom; taxes $7,281.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 354,500
Tatomuck Road East  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; stone fireplace, den, family room, living/dining room, 2 acres; taxes $5,183.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 1.04 million
57 Butler Road
8-bedroom, 6 1/2-bath, 56-year-old Norman Tudor; 2 fireplaces, library, sun room, eat-in kitchen, play room, sauna; taxes $23,783.
OTHER AREAS Freehold, N.J. 182,500
81 Eagle Nest Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; fireplace, patio, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $4,425.
Howell, N.J. 100,000
20 Pearl Drive
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; fenced yard, h/w floors, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $1,200.
Commack, L.I. 175,000
7 Penguin Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 29-year-old ranch; family room, basement, fireplace, deck, inground pool; taxes $4,000.


Noted With Pleasure
The Harried Novice
The lot of young actors in the Victorian theater was not an easy one, as is illustrated in a letter by Jerome K. Jerome (who later became a playwright and novelist), quoted in "Theatre in the Victorian Age" by Martin R. Booth (Cambridge University).
A stock company was organized on true repertory principles, which meant that the evening's bill could be frequently changed, and because there might be two or three pieces on the bill a new actor was faced with a bewildering and exhausting variety of parts. . . .
In the early 1880's Jerome K. Jerome wrote to a friend from a country theater about the two-week visit of a London star:
Francois Rabelais, the irreverent author of the satirical novel "Gargantua and Pantagruel," offered a surprising opinion to a friend who had asked what astronomers were predicting about the upcoming year of 1535.
His letter is included in "The Complete Works of Francois Rabelais," translated and edited by Donald M. Frame (University of California).
Summarily exposing to you about this year what I've been able to extract from the authors in the field, Arab and Latin. . . . in this year will come only machinations, carryings-on, bases, and seeds of the unhappiness to follow.
If we have good weather, that will be beyond the promise of the stars. . . .
That's what they say.
For my part, I say that if the . . . kings, princes, and communities hold in reverence the divine Word of God and according to that govern themselves and their subjects, then never in our time did we see a year more salubrious for bodies, more peaceful for souls, than this one will be: and we shall see the face of heaven, the covering of the earth, and the bearing of the people more joyous, merry, pleasant and benign, than it has been for fifty years back.
Dreaming About Going Home
We never forget the rooms in which we were raised, as Michael Ann Williams discovered from the elderly subjects she interviewed for a study of homes in the early 20th century.
This is from "Homeplace: The Social Use and Meaning of the Folk Dwelling in Southwestern North Carolina" (University of Georgia).
It is not the property or the landscape, any more than it is the physical structure, that is important.
The empty house site, or the empty house, is a symbol of the experience, or memories of the experience, of home. . . .
People who no longer have physical access to their homeplace seek solace in the power of narrative.
Through their stories people may still travel home.
Many of the narratives I heard had been polished over the years, as people studied on their pasts and gave shape to their experiences.
For the people who told them, the stories, too, were precious symbols of home.
For scholars these stories are also artifacts.
While many times I crossed snaky fields in high boots and crept gingerly across rotting porches to inspect old structures, the entrance to the home place, I found, was through these oral narratives.
The Natural Theater of the New
The art critic Robert Hughes, using Zurich's Cafe Odeon as an example, asserts that European cafes were the nurseries in which many of the most provocative, persistent elements of modern culture first emerged.
This is from "The Shock of the New" (Knopf, paper).
Today, the phrase "cafe intellectual" is a mild, obsolete insult.
Then, places like the Odeon were a medium of intellectual life, quite as much as the literary magazines.
People separated from the social order, by choice or not, needed the cafe as their study and opera house: a place to meet, work, argue, and display themselves.
It was a place for little groups, for specialists, where one met one's intellectual peers -- the essence of metropolitanism, and therefore of modernism, which in its self-referring ironies and sense of civilization was an urban sensibility, born in the cities, petering out in the country.
The cafes of Zurich, Berlin, Barcelona, Vienna, Milan and Paris were the natural home of exiles, and modernism was largely the creation of exiles and polyglots, from Picasso the Spaniard to Beckett the Irishman.
The Odeons, in short, were the natural theater of the new.
In them, the intellectuals, writers and artists could feel and behave like a class, the mandarins of change.
The Art of Asking Questions
The ornithologist Robert W. McFarlane reminds us that every advance in science begins with an exactly phrased question.
This is from "A Stillness in the Pines: The Ecology of the Red-Cockaded Woodpecker" (Norton).
Science, from one perspective, is the art of phrasing questions and identifying their attendant assumptions.
Its basic tenet is that nature has no secrets.
The obstacles to furthering knowledge lie in formulating the right questions and in circumventing ambiguous answers, never an easy task.
The best practitioners know that incisive questions and skillful analysis will ultimately yield their reward.
Artful questions may require new technology, often from unrelated disciplines.
New questions may require fresh insight, unencumbered by the baggage of past experience, and a probing mind to test old concepts.
The importance of the proper question is often overlooked, by experienced observer and novice alike.


Hilary E. Silver Is the Bride of David E. Zeltner
Hilary Ellen Silver, the director of affiliate sales for Travel Channel, a cable television channel in Mount Kisco, N.Y., and David Edward Zeltner, a New York lawyer, were married last evening at the Rainbow Room in New York by Rabbi Robert Summers.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Georgia.
She is the daughter of Albert and Rose Silver of Coconut Creek, Fla.


Ms. Dempsey To Wed in April
Mr. and Mrs.
Louis F. Dempsey of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathleen Ann Dempsey to George Edmond Malhame, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmond C. Malhame of Manhasset, L.I.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Dempsey, a registered nurse at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, graduated from the Evanston Hospital School of Nursing in Evanston, Ill.
Her father is a senior adviser to Brown Brothers Harriman in New York.


Nassau Real-Estate Office Plagued by Bias Attacks
The telephone rang for Antonio Patino, whose small realty agency was riddled with shotgun blasts early New Year's Day.
It was another hate call.
"I have a problem because you let these niggers in and they downgrade the neighborhood," said the unidentified male caller on Friday.


Parents on The Front Line
"PARENTS are really working with their children," said Carla Weir, of the Dallas public schools, local sponsors of a program that in various forms has become a growing national movement.
The program coaches parents, especially in immigrant and minority neighborhoods, to teach their young children at home simple skills like shapes, colors and listening.
In Dallas, the Home Instruction Program for Preschool Youngsters, or Hippy, reaches 220 families.
Nationally, it has spread to 8,000 children ages 4 to 5 in 17 states since the effort, Hippy USA, was organized three years ago through the National Council of Jewish Women.


Bridge
When the American Contract Bridge League was founded in 1937 by merging two older organizations, its first executive secretary was William McKenney.
He donated a trophy to be awarded to the player with most tournament success in a calendar year, and the measure was the newfangled master point.
The most active experts on the tournament trail have been fighting to win "the McKenney" ever since.
They still refer to it that way, although the national body now prefers the term "Barry Crane Top 500" in honor of a Californian, a 1985 murder victim who won the title six times.


Corrections
The Data Update chart on page 10 of the Real Estate section today misstates the percentage change in housing starts and housing sales from October 1990 to October 1991.
Housing starts were up 5.8 percent; sales were up 9.4 percent.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Commack 175,000
7 Penguin Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 29-year-old ranch; family room, basement, fireplace, deck, inground pool; taxes $4,000.
East Williston 392,000
400 Latham Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; den, finished basement, fireplace, Florida room, 2-car attached garage; taxes $7,000.
Levittown 129,000  18 Peachtree Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300.
Mineola 213,000  361 Andrews Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 34-year-old brick farm ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace; taxes $5,200.
Shoreham 159,000
16 Highland Down  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, den with fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $2,100.
Smithtown 165,000
67 Lindron Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 8-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $4,400.
OTHER AREAS Wilton, Conn. 930,000
11 Crosswicks Ridge  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; marble fireplace, intricate moldings, 2 acres; taxes $8,755.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 482,500
5 Ludlow Drive
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 60-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, den, greenhouse, playroom; taxes $7,281.
Ridgewood, N.J. 279,000
507 Summit Street
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 55-year-old colonial; family room, 10-year old addition, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $6,048.


Suddenly, Towns Fight To Keep Their Garbage
YEARS ago, the town of Babylon was so concerned about the dwindling space in its landfill that the supervisor himself patrolled the dump with a gun, turning away out-of-town garbage.
But now that the dump is closed and Babylon burns its trash in an incinerator, the town is finding itself in a strange and unforeseen situation: it wants all the garbage it can get.
It doesn't seem to make sense.
But Babylon's situation is being repeated throughout New York and New Jersey, and the reason lies in the changing nature of trash disposal in the garbage-glutted Northeast.
As alternatives dwindle and prices go up, municipalities are finding that the only way to pay for their new, expensive electricity-generating incinerators or recycling operations is to take in as much trash as possible and charge their residents hefty fees for dumping it.


Pennsylvania City Hopes It's Bouncing Back From the Bottom
This small city of 42,000 people, surrounded by the thriving middle-class suburbs west of Philadelphia, has one of the highest concentrations of urban problems in America.
Its schools and public housing rank among the worst, as do the city's rates for crime, joblessness, truancy, teen-age pregnancy and infant mortality.
Homelessness, drug abuse and AIDS are major problems.


The Man Paris Lines Up For (Even at Lunch Time)
One of the more remarkable sights in Paris this winter is the long line that forms outside the Musee d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris on the Avenue President Wilson.
Ever since the Pompidou Center was first opened, now close on 20 years ago, Paris's municipal museum of 20th-century art has been somewhat in the shadows.
But right now the line is there even at midday on Sunday, when Parisians find it hard not to sit down to lunch and even harder to get up from the table.
What draws them is the enormous exhibition of sculptures, paintings, drawings and lithographs by Alberto Giacometti that can be seen through March 15.
Giacometti's work is not, of course, an unknown quantity in the city in which he spent the greater part of his life.
There must be very few people with any interest in 20th-century art who do not know of his work since World War II -- for example, the elongated and slenderized sculptures of young women (such as "Four Women on a Base" from 1950).
Equally familiar are the rugged busts of men (above all, his brother and best model, Diego) and the paintings and drawings in which he looked at face after face, year after year, and sought to say the unsayable.
Where other artists found so-called inspiration in travel, Giacometti stayed in one place, looked fixedly at one face over and over again and thought the world well lost.


Cathy Altman Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Goldscheider of New York have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Goldscheider's daughter Cathy Sue Altman to Dr.
Russell Howard Silver, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Silver of Island Park, L.I.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Altman, 29 years old, is the chief physical therapist at Metropolitan Hospital Center in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College and received a bachelor's degree in physical therapy from New York University.
Her mother, Janet Goldscheider, and her stepfather own the International Licensing Network, a consulting concern in technology management in New York.


Ships Avoid Yugoslavia
Most -- but not all -- cruise ships that normally make calls at Yugoslav ports are steering clear of Dubrovnik, Split and Korcula and substituting more Greek and Italian ports because of Yugoslavia's civil war.
Royal Cruise Line, for example, has decided to substitute the Greek island of Corfu and Messina (the port for Taormina), Sicily, for visits to Dubrovnik and Korcula.
The changes will apply to the entire year, according to Carol McRonald, vice president-marketing.
The ships involved are the Crown Odyssey and the Golden Odyssey.


Miss Wilson Marries
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Leighton Wilson of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Griswold Wilson to Bradford Stowell Wall, a son of Patricia Q. Wall of Kittery Point, Me., and the late Dr.
Robert Allen Wall.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Wilson, 29 years old, is a consultant with Lochridge &amp; Company in Boston, management consultants.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Mr.
Wall, also 29, is the New England sales manager for the Chrysler First Commercial Corporation, a commercial money lender in Boston.
He graduated from the University of Michigan.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Dec. 21  MANHATTAN  FlatIron Area 225,000
5 West 19th Street  2,385-sq.-ft. open-loft co-op in prewar building; elevator, 2 baths, 11-ft. ceilings; maintenance $1,215, no tax deduction (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Gramercy Park Area 380,000
1 Irving Place  (Zeckendorf Towers)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. condo in 5-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, windowed kitchen, 2 exposures; common charge $975, taxes $4,560 (Broker: J.I. Sopher Co.)  Greenwich Village 930,000
1 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, marble baths, beamed-ceilings, 2 terraces, landmark building; maintenance $1,961, 40% tax-deductible (Brokers: Ann Weintraub Realty- Karen Hartnett)  NoHo 250,000
10 Bleeker Street (Mulberry St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. loft-co-op in a prewar building; elevator, marble kitchen and baths, 2 exposures; maintenance $750, 58% tax-deductible (Broker: Coleman Neary Realty)  Union Square Area 290,000
222 Park Avenue South (18th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. loft-co-op in prewar building; elevator, 12-ft. ceilings, live-in superintendent, south exposure ; maintenance $706, 10% tax-deductible (Brokers: Halstead Property Co. - Wells &amp; Gay/Stibling &amp; Associates)  West Side 360,000
10 West 66th Street  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 900-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, sunken-living room, Central Park view; maintenance $1,054, includes gas and electricity, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn Korn)  BRONX  City Island 210,000
625 King Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached house; dining area, fireplace, den, 2 rear decks, full basement, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Jacquelene Kyle Kall)  Wakefield 240,000
4346 Barnes Avenue  Detached 2-familybrick house; 4 bedrooms in primary unit; 3 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Highland Realty)  BROOKLYN  Ditmas Park 250,000
253 Rugby Road  6-bedroom, 3-bath, one-family detached wood-frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, stained-glass windows, 2 fireplaces, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  Park Slope 340,800
508 12th Street  2-family attached brownstone; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, eat-in kitchen in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; dining room in each; 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,350 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Realty Group)  QUEENS  Corona 129,000
56-14 Van Cleef Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached ranch; dining area, full basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $800 (Broker: Century 21/Elms Realty)  Forest Hills 239,000
69-30 Manse Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 26- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Eltingville 167,500
347 Cortelyou Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family semi-attached frame house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 26- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Brokers: Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors)  Silver Lake 345,000
50 Edstone Drive  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, one-family detached brick house; dining room, den, family room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Rand Properties)


Getting Off to a Fast Start in Great Neck
THE six-week-old North Street Grill in Great Neck is the Island's hottest new restaurant.
It has the look, ownership expertise and exciting menu that make it the last word in 1990's dining.
The multi-level restaurant that has emerged on the site of the old Maude Craig's is a stunner.
It is earthy, sturdy and southwestern, yet light, airy and modern.


U.S. Lifts Ban On Travel To Vietnam
The United States has lifted the ban on American travel to Vietnam.
The easing of a decades-old trade embargo clears the way for American travel agents to arrange individual and group tours there.
The Administration also lifted its prohibition on American travel companies booking hotel accommodations, local tours or transportation for Vietnamese visiting the United States..
One of the first cruise companies to offer visits to Vietnam to Americans, following the lifting of restrictions, is Salen Lindblad Cruising.
The company had been marketing its program mainly in Britain.


Ann Wierda Plans to Marry in June
Dr. and Mrs.
Daryl Wierda of Sioux Falls, S.D., have announced the engagement of their daughter Ann Wierda to Jonathan Todd Molot, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Molot of Scarsdale, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Wierda, 25 years old, graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in English literature from Oxford University and is a teaching assistant in the English department at Harvard University.
Her father is a radiologist in Sioux Falls.


Miss Horan to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred R. Horan of Massapequa, L.I., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Mary Josephine Horan and Francis Joseph Ferri, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. Ferri of New Hyde Park, L.I.
Miss Horan, 28 years old, graduated from the College of Mount St.
Vincent and is a pharmaceutical sales representative in the New York metropolitan area for Bristol-Meyers Squibb.
Mr.
Ferri, 32, graduated from St.
John's University, and is a senior accountant at Grey Direct Marketing in New York.


It's Like Strudel Without the Filling
THE new offering at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale, "In One Bed . . . and Out the Other," makes a vain attempt at being a frothy turn-of-the-century romantic farce in the manner of Schnitzler's "Ronde." The authors, Mawby Green and Ed Feilbert, have concocted nothing more substantial than a strudel without the filling.
The slim plot centers on a novelist named Didier, who has fallen in love with a married woman.
He devises a plan to meet her and then have her husband invite him to stay as a house guest.
Didier's best friend, Maurice, is posing as a butler to help expedite the affair.


INSIDE
Yugoslav Truce Taking Hold
Despite reports of local clashes, Friday night's United Nations-brokered cease-fire in the war-torn regions of the breakaway Yugoslav republic of Croatia appeared to be gaining momentum.
Page 3.
Bush's Trip to the Past
President Bush's Asian tour, particularly in Australia, seems to remind him of those halcyon days when he stood atop the popularity ratings and his jaunts overseas were political pluses instead of liabilities.
Page 12.
Kennedy Conspiracy, Take 2
The movie "J.F.K." mixes fiction with fact, but it has revived suspicions of a conspiracy in Kennedy's death.
Here, the official explanations and the various theories.
Page 18.
At Last, a City of Hope
Chester, Pa., has one of the highest concentrations of urban problems in America, but recent changes have given it hope.
Page 14.
Rap Promoter Gives His Side
The promoter of the City College event where nine died -- a rising star of rap -- gives his first detailed account.
Articles, page 22.


American Aid Worker Freed By an Afghan Guerrilla Group
Afghan guerrillas today freed an American aid worker who had been held for nearly six months, officials said.
A British relief agency said United Nations officials had helped negotiate the release.
A fundamentalist rebel group, the Party of Islam, escorted the American, Joel DeHart of Camden, N.J., across the border into Pakistan and released him to the United States consul general, Gerald Fierstein.


Big East, Big Upset: Villanova Beats Hoyas
Lance Miller made two free throws with 3.8 seconds remaining today to give Villanova a 75-73 upset victory over No. 22-ranked Georgetown on the Hoyas' home court.
The Wildcats, 3-6 over all and 1-1 in the Big East, had led most of the way, but had to rally in the closing minutes to defeat Georgetown, which was playing its conference opener.


Computer Companies Say State Tax Hampers Them
PAUL M. COFONI, vice president of Computer Sciences Corporation and manager of its center in Norwich, sees big growth for his industry in the next few years, he said.
But he is not sure whether any of that growth will be in Connecticut, he said, because the state puts a 6 percent tax on computer services.
During the next three years the total spent nationwide on computer services will grow to $15 billion from $7 billion, Mr.
Cofoni said.
"If we're successful, and we know we will be, we'll have a major share of that," he said.
But he cannot predict how many of those new jobs will be in Connecticut, he said, or whether the 500 jobs the company has in the state now will still be around.


Jim Dale Tries His Hand at Directing
THE director, hunched forward, watches intently from the third row.
He moves up front, leans back and rests his feet on the apron of the stage.
He leaps with glee when a newly hired actor gets an intonation just right.
"Lovely, lovely," he shouts, and bounds onto the stage, positioning the actor for a new scene.
Then, script and soda water in hand, he takes his place at the director's table in the middle of the house -- for the moment.


Lollipops and Languages
IN Yolanda Hall's festively decorated classroom in a public school in Montclair, N.J., every morning begins with an enthusiastic exchange of greetings.
Mrs. Hall: "Buenos dias, ninos."


John Gallagher Jr., 72, Ex-Wall St. Executive
John J. Gallagher Jr., a retired Wall Street executive, died on Monday at his home in Plandome Manor, L.I.
He was 72 years old.
He died of a heart attack, relatives said.


Organizer of Fatal Rap Event Is Hip-Hop Maestro
Five days after nine young people were crushed to death at a celebrity basketball game at City College, the man who organized the game's star-studded roster of rap players made his first public appearance.
Baby-faced and thin, Sean Combs, who is known in the rap world as Puff Daddy, faced a barrage of reporters and cameras in an ornate, gilded salon of the Plaza Hotel.
His voice quivering and his head slightly bowed, Mr.
Combs, 22 years old, said he was deeply hurt by the deaths. 'In addition to sponsoring a profitable event," he said, "my dream for this evening was to bring a positive program to my people, to people of my age and to people of my community."


Making a Difference; From Campus to Car Czar
As president of the College of William and Mary, Paul R. Verkuil is surrounded by history and quiet: his office in a Colonial building on the school's Williamsburg, Va., campus is in what Mr.
Verkuil describes as a "cocoon-like 18th-century environment."
Mr.
Verkuil is about to get a rough dose of the year 2000.
He is moving to the Orlando, Fla., area to become president and chief executive of the American Automobile Association, the 32.5 million-member emergency service cum travel agency cum insurance company cum whatever else might be useful to motorists.
He succeeds James B. Creal, who has led the organization for 20 years.


FLASHCARD
THREE college freshmen in 10 took at least one remedial course in the fall of 1989.
Twenty-one percent took remedial mathematics, 16 percent writing and 13 percent reading, according a survey of colleges and universities released by The National Center for Education Statistics.
Three-quarters of the institutions surveyed offered at least one remedial course during the 1989 fall semester, a decrease from the 82 percent found in a similar survey taken in 1983.
About 20 percent of the schools awarded degree credit for remedial courses.


A Sampling of India's Great Legacy of Art
VAST and slightly dusty halls, unexpected objects and great numbers of masterpieces -- the Prince of Wales Museum in Bombay today feels like the survivor of another era.
Art, in the 19th century, seemed less awe-inspiring (even if it was no less revered); the cultured viewer could be trusted to recognize what he saw, and the deluge of learning aids that cover the walls of modern institutions had yet to come.
Although the Prince of Wales Museum was founded in 1906 and opened in 1921, its organization and its appearance place it firmly in an earlier era.
There is neither dramatic lighting nor lengthy labeling (on occasion there is no labeling at all); but the observant visitor is offered a sample of some of the best sculpture and painting ever produced in India.
Because many American visitors arrive in Bombay, the museum can also serve as a concise introduction to some of the marvels ahead.
The very style of the building, in fact, is an important part of the experience.
A curious but highly successful blend of two apparently contradictory styles, the Indo-Saracenic and the Scottish Baronial, the exterior of the museum is as appealing as it is improbable.
Bow windows and a neo-Gothic porte-cochere give way to arcades and a vast onion dome borrowed from the 17th-century Gol Gumbz in Bijapur.
Brick, stone and faience tiles (an addition made in the last few years) continue the 19th-century tradition of polychrome architecture.
Like the neighboring Victoria Terminal, the Prince of Wales Museum, in its amiable flamboyance, ends up by looking prototypically Indian.


28 Years After Kennedy's Assassination, Conspiracy Theories Refuse to Die
Nearly three decades after the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, the film director Oliver Stone has revitalized an American obsession with conspiracies.
Mr.
Stone's movie "J.F.K." liberally mixes fiction with fact, and some have dismissed it as an outrageous distortion of history.
But the monstrous web of political, government and corporate interests that the film portrays as being behind the killing does reflect widely held suspicions that more than a single gunman was responsible for the slaying.


The Bad Boy of Insurance Ratings
Executives at the Travelers Corporation were horrified.
In August, analysts at Weiss Research Inc., an insurance-rating firm, assigned a "weak" rating to Travelers's life-insurance subsidiary.
The rating, reflecting the company's outsized portfolio of troubled real estate loans, touched off a wave of telephone calls to Travelers from jittery policyholders and agents.
So in September, a team of Travelers executives boarded the company's private jet and flew to Weiss Research's headquarters here in an attempt to get the rating changed.
As a pair of stretch limousines stood idling outside, the executives tried to persuade Weiss analysts that Travelers had ample capital to weather its difficulties.
But despite two hours of tense negotiations, the analysts, who use an A-to-F grading system, agreed only to raise their rating to C-, from D+.


CAMPUS LIFE: Connecticut College; Group Celebrates Fashion of Funk, Less the Alcohol
It may be 1992, but for many Connecticut College students here, it is still the 1970's.
Their Undisputed Funk Organization, which, despite its initials, has nothing to do with unidentified flying objects, has revived appreciation of funk music and fashion fads of that decade, celebrating them at alcohol-free social events on campus.
Begun last semester by Andre Lee, a junior from Philadelphia, and Robert Marbury, a junior from Baltimore, the group has 224 members from the college, which has 1,710 students.
Events are open to the entire campus.


Mother Teresa Is Improving
Mother Teresa's condition was upgraded from serious to fair today as she continued a slow recuperation from pneumonia, doctors said.
The 81-year-old Roman Catholic nun, who entered the Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation on Dec. 26, is no longer suffering chest pain or an irregular heartbeat, Dr.
Patricia Aubanel said.
She said Mother Teresa was slightly anemic and suffering protein deficiency, possibly from eating only the food of the poor she has devoted her life to helping.


IN THIS CORNER
Perhaps Lowell Weicker would be willing to drop his bag of Doritos long enough to contemplate a government of the people, by the people and for the people.
What Connecticut wants and does not want is obvious, regardless of who did or did not vote over a year ago.
Governor Weicker, this is your wake-up call.
DOREEN D'AMICO  Westport, Conn.


POSTINGS: Saratoga Square; New Site for Houses
Three years ago, in accepting City Hall's plan to house several hundred homeless people in the area between Bedford-Stuyvesant and Ocean Hill-Brownsville, Borough President Howard Golden of Brooklyn insisted on a broader solution to the crisis.
"What we were trying to push for was a neighborhood approach," Mr.
Golden's executive assistant, Marilyn Gelber, said last week.
"Yes, we'd approve a considerable number of homeless units but it was more important that it be part of a balanced plan."


Suzanne Heller, Student, Weds
Suzanne Heller, a law student at Hofstra University, was married last evening to Brian Mitchell Stadler, an associate at the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
Rabbi Saul Teplitz officiated, assisted by Rabbi Morris Friedman, at Temple Hillel in North Woodmere, L.I.
Mrs.
Stadler, 24 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Heller of Woodmere.
L.I.
Her father is a textile manufacturer in Oceanside, L.I.


Sunday Menu; The Recipe Calls for Lamb, but the Sauce Is Versatile
The sauce for this lamb dish is all-purpose: it will taste as good with chicken or duck or pork.
Because of the dish's North African accent, couscous is an appropriate grain, but rice would make as good a base.


Searching for Revival Signs In Oil Prices
As the United States enters 1992, the signs of economic revival are clearly visible on Wall Street, where stock prices regularly hit new highs.
Unfortunately, that completes the list of places where strength seems especially visible.
Manufacturing, which in mid-1991 was hailed as the island of activity that would lead the revival, has since fallen on hard times.
Consumers were cautious at Christmas, auto sales are miserable and the Government's leading indicators have once again begun to fall.


Talking: Small Co-ops; Shopping Around to Refinance
IT'S always difficult for a New York City co-op in a brownstone or other structure with less than 20 shareholders to find a lender willing to refinance the underlying mortgage, especially for under $500,000.
Even in the best of times -- which these are not -- most bankers shun such loans.


Let the Students Really Live the Homeless Life
Though well intentioned, it was folly for 40 college students to sleep overnight in a cardboard box to "understand the plight of the homeless"  [ Long Island Journal, Dec. 8 ]  One student slept on an air mattress near his TV, the teacher wore longjohns, and one arranged his tent "so the wind would pass over me." There was a convenient bathroom nearby, and surely all of them had a decent supper.
This sanitized expedition hardly parallels the conditions the homeless endure, many sleeping in crime-infested alleys, malnourished, suffering physical and emotional ills with no future.
These students can never be totally immersed in their plight unless they spend time with them as participant observers.
Let them feed them with the money they collected, interview them and study and analyze their predicament.
Let them tape the voices of these Americans who have lost their way in our once-proud, boastful nation that now offers few solutions for them to survive.
Let them experience compassion for these victims of society.
Let them protest after their study, to our political leaders and learn about the twisted priorities in our bureaucracy.
Let them trace the steps of the homeless in the blind alley where it began and let them find a few points of light.
Only when they weep for them, will they see the thin line between the plight of the homeless and their own fate.
NORA POLINSKY New York City


Overworked Dramatic License
To the Editor:
Once again Oliver Stone is playing fast and loose with the truth.
In his previous film he presented a portrait of Jim Morrison that bore little resemblance to the leader of the Doors.
In "Born on the Fourth of July," he had Ron Kovic being assaulted by Syracuse police, an episode that never occurred, as well as creating a fictional soldier from a fictional town (Venus, Ga.) who supposedly inspired Mr.
Kovic to join the antiwar movement.
CASEY LUTHER Buffalo


Jodi Bergstein To Wed in May
Melvyn and Dorothy Bergstein of Bernardsville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jodi Bergstein to Jonathan Hugh Rabinowitz, the son of Allan Rabinowitz and Eleanor Rovell, both of New York.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bergstein, 26 years old, is an employee assistance counselor at Corporate Counseling Associates in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, where she also received a master's degree in social work.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Clapp &amp; Eisenberg in Newark.
Her mother is a psychotherapist in Morristown, N.J.


Run, Dance and Be Noisy
TUESDAY, NEW YEAR'S EVE -- The Grand Central Partnership sponsored First Night New York a family-centered alcohol-free celebration.
The participants, who paid $9, could take part in 40 cultural events over a 12-hour period at 20 sites in midtown.
The grand finale saw the main concourse of Grand Central Terminal turned into a giant ballroom as dance bands and the Orchestra of St.
Luke's provided music ranging from swing to Strauss waltzes.
Even commuters and passers-through paused to join the high stepping in the terminal.
In Central Park that same evening, imagination was uncorralled as several thousand runners took part in a costumed midnight race under a sky bright with fireworks.


Sweet and Pungent


Items to Augment a Basic Tool Kit
MANY home repair tasks can be accomplished with only a basic kit of tools: tape measure, claw hammer, crosscut saw, hack saw, regular and Phillips-head screwdrivers, pliers, adjustable wrench and electric drill.
But owning some other tools can broaden the range of jobs one can do and make some familiar chores easier.
Following is a list of tools to augment a basic kit.
To save money, buy tools only as needed.


Camera
Last week Greg Heisler's electronic portrait of Ted Turner, with a globe made up of television images, appeared on the cover of Time magazine.
Incorporating 44 transparencies put together with a computer, it was printed as a single image.
For the first time in his career, Mr.
Heisler, a freelance photographer who lives in New York City, had turned in an electronic cassette to a client, rather than a print or transparency.
At the Atlanta airport, travelers are greeted by a huge photographic display: two Atlanta Braves baseball players, one on each side of the city's skyline at night.
The display, put up during the playoffs last fall, is one of William Samenko's contributions to the new art of electronic imaging.
The digitalized image, 16 1/2 by 4 feet, was made by combining three separate images, then printed conventionally on Duratrans display film.


Lisa Giacoio Is Wed
Lisa Anne Giacoio, a daughter of Grace L. Giacoio of Surfside, Fla., and Anthony Giacoio of Kinnelon, N.J., was married yesterday to Timothy John Egan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph V. Egan of New Brunswick, N.J.
Msgr.
William J. Capik officiated at the Seton Hall University chapel in South Orange, N.J.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from Seton Hall, as did the bridegroom.
She is a systems analyst for Ballet Makers Inc., a dancewear manufacturer in Totowa, N.J.
Mr.
Egan, 29, is an investment banker at First Fidelity Securities group in Newark and has a law degree and an M.B.A. from Seton Hall.


Fundamentals Of Self-Esteem
IT was difficult to keep straight -- the busy lives, interests and sweaters of the 16 children in Jo Ann Sokoloff's prekindergarten program at P.S. 254 in Brooklyn.
Ryan Carbonara, 4 years old, for instance, had moussed his hair.
Amy Liu had a new little sister.
And Amanda Diaro wanted to share something very special.
"It's my fish's birthday."


Ms. Fitzpatrick, a C.P.A., Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Fitzpatrick of Dix Hills, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Ellen Fitzpatrick to Thomas Paul Genovese, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rocco Genovese of San Jose, Calif.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fitzpatrick, 32 years old, graduated from Fairfield University and is a certified public accountant.
She is the chief financial officer of the Minton Company, a door manufacturing firm in Mountain View, Calif.
Her father is retired as a vice president of the Equitable Life Assurance Society in New York.


Q and A
Scaling Mount Fuji  Q.
My wife and I will be visiting Tokyo and we would like to climb Mount Fuji.
We would appreciate suggestions for nonathletes.
Arthur A. Delaney, Roslyn, L.I.


Wall Street; Pinkerton's Liability Wild Cards
The stampede in New York at a City University gymnasium that left nine people dead and 29 others injured points up a growing problem for the nation's 10,000 security firms and the people who rely on their protection: events that draw big crowds may desperately require the know-how of professional security firms, but many companies shun the work because of the risk of getting sued over a disturbance.
The nation's largest security company, Pinkerton's Inc., and third-ranked Wackenhut Corporation routinely cede crowd-control work to what analysts rank as the No. 2 rival, the Burns International Security Services, a unit of the Borg-Warner Corporation, or to smaller rivals like Command Security Corporation in Legrangeville, N.Y.


For a Limited Time Only: The Presidential Primary Season
FIRST there were no candidates willing to enter the race.
Then a non-candidate, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, stole the limelight.
Then the holidays came, and who had time to worry about a bunch of Presidential contenders slogging around in New Hampshire?
Now 1992 has arrived and it seems as if the race for the Democratic nomination is just beginning.
In fact, it's almost over.


Home Entertainment; New Rivals Target DAT
Once again the audio industry reaches into its seemingly bottomless bag of high-tech tricks.
Its publicity proclaims that 1992 will be a year for radical innovation, with at least two new methods for digital home recording to be unveiled.
The public, naturally, is expected to jump with anticipation and have the cash ready.
Remembering the heady 80's, the industry seems convinced that audio buyers can never resist novelty.
Dealers are less optimistic.
In any case, here are the audio developments on tap for the new year.


Image Is a Serious Matter
To the Editor:
Perhaps I am misreading the tone of "Image-Making, From Soup to Sales Pitch." But the need for executives to be aware of the image they project to others is more crucial, especially in these days of downsizing, than your playful tone implies.


UKRAINE BIDS FLEET TO SWEAR LOYALTY
Ukraine has ordered the entire Black Sea Fleet and all ground forces based on the republic's soil to take an oath of loyalty to Ukraine, a move that has roused ominous new tensions with Russia and within the military.
So far, the command of the Black Sea Fleet, which has its headquarters in Sevastopol in the Crimea, has refused to administer the oath, arguing that Ukraine agreed in forming the new Commonwealth of Independent States to leave the Navy under joint commonwealth command.


Commercial Property: Exhibition Halls; Coliseum, Pronounced Dead, Looks for Extra Cash
MAYOR Robert F. Wagner, who usually knew what he was talking about, called the New York Coliseum "one of the wonders of the modern world" when he opened it in April 1956.
So it might have seemed premature -- if not presumptuous -- to declare it dead at the age of 29.
As it turns out, the obituaries were a bit early.
Rather than crumble under demolition or fade into obscurity, the exhibition hall has been reviving.
This weekend it is the site of the New York Coliseum Antiques Show, one of the largest events to be held there since it closed "forever" in March 1986.


Conditioned Response
To the Editor:
Perhaps Oliver Stone, in "J. F. K.," is giving us nothing more nor less than we have come to expect of the popular media.
For many years, television has presented us with news as entertainment.
Mr.
Stone now gives us an entertainment disguised as news.
The line between the two, already blurred, may disappear completely in another generation.
JOHN MORRESSY East Sullivan, N. H.


More Pressure For Access to Insurance
"Removing Hurdles to Buying Health Insurance"  [ Dec. 8 ] , while correctly suggesting that some barriers to health coverage may be falling, could have done more to tell Long Islanders what they can do to make medical benefits accessible to all.
The Empire Blue Cross open-enrollment plans, which are available to those able to pay the premiums, are in financial jeopardy.
Legislation in Albany would preserve the plans by restricting the unfair underwriting practices of commercial insurers, who would no longer be able to reject unhealthy subscribers.


Sea Kayaks
To the Editor: In reference to your article "Kayaking in the Seas Off Belize" by David Noland (Nov. 10), I did not find identification of the type of sea kayak used on this expedition.
In addition to the rigid kayaks available, there is the Klepper folding kayak, which can be packed into two bags and carried anywhere.
Equipped with sail, Kleppers have crossed the Atlantic and raced down the Colorado River.
The advantage of the Klepper is that you can take your own boat and fly anywhere on the globe and even though it is a sea kayak, you can still set it down on any river or lake.
The design principle, a rigid frame supporting a flexible hull, originated with the early Aleutian Eskimos.
BUDD BAILIN Hartsdale, N.Y.
Cully Erdman, president of Slickrock Adventures of Moab, Utah, which outfitted Mr.
Noland's trip, comments
: David Noland used a double kayak, the Seascape I by Northwest Kayak.
Two types of single kayak were also used, the Chinook and the Sealion, both by Perception.
I have seen Klepper kayaks used off Belize, but because they have soft shells, they are not as high-performance, and require more effort to paddle.


Visionaries Rewarded By Growth of Ski Clubs
IT was on a steely cold winter Saturday afternoon, seated before his television in Roselle Park, that John Czyzewski decided he could not watch one more rerun of "Gilligan's Island." He opted instead to take advantage of the season and become a skier.
In readiness to help those new to the sport, along with meeting the needs of advanced skiers, 44 ski clubs with a roster of 10,000 members are based in New Jersey.


Survey Finds 25 Homes Tainted by Radium
After an unusual house-by-house search in 11 communities for buildings constructed with sand that had been laced with radioactive radium, a Federal agency said Friday that it had found 25 contaminated homes, including four in this western suburb of Philadelphia.
The Government offered to relocate 13 families whose homes were found to have excessively high levels of contamination.
It said one of the most extensively tainted properties was found here, with a contamination level 23 times that considered acceptable.


Managing; Nice Degree - Go Away and Use It
A leading employer here is financing higher education for its workers.
But instead of welcoming them back once they've earned their degrees, it tells them it never wants to see them again.
The novel plan, developed by Canadian Tire stores in the Vancouver area, is in contrast to programs of many large companies, which typically strive to retain employees after paying for their advanced degrees and fret if they decide to quit.


CAMPUS LIFE: Wisconsin; Planning Circle of Cities To Aid the Environment
A professor of landscape architecture at the University of Wisconsin at Madison not only has a design for the urban future but is planning a way to make it come true as well.
The professor, Philip Lewis, says he envisions a core of natural resources around which cities would be formed.
For example, there would be such a core in southwestern Wisconsin.
The cities around it would be Milwaukee, Chicago, Minneapolis, St.
Paul and Des Moines.


Recovery Is All in the Job
To the Editor:
"More Layoffs? Hold the Applause" (Forum, Dec. 1) hit the nail right on the head.
It is about time that a prominent economist stated the real reason for our current recession.


Edward M. Love Jr., Broadway Dancer, 43
Edward M. Love Jr., a Broadway dancer, choreographer and former member of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, died on Dec. 27 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 43 years old.
He died of AIDS, said his lawyer, Elliot J. Lefkowitz.


Marcia Klein To Wed in May
Dr. and Mrs.
Melvin P. Klein of Plainview, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Marcia Miriam Klein to Dr.
Steven David Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Smith of Cedarhurst, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Dr.
Marcia Klein, 26 years old, graduated from the seven-year undergraduate-medical program at the State University of New York Health Science Center at Brooklyn.
She is a pediatric resident at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
Her father is chairman of the mathematics department at Brooklyn Technical High School in Fort Green.
Her mother, Phyllis Klein, is the administrative secretary of the Central Island Nursing Home in Plainview, L.I.


Simms Is Better
To the Sports Editor:
Is Ray Handley the only person in the world who still thinks Jeff Hostetler is a better quarterback than Phil Simms?
It's one thing to want to be the boss, but to be pigheaded just to satisfy one's own ego is another matter.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CHAMBER OPERA


Smaller Craft Are Biggest News at the Boat Show
The boating market continues to reel from a two-year slowdown made worse by a widening recession.
But a glimmer of light still flickers in the ailing industry, sustained by sales of the ever-popular 16-foot outboard runabout.
Organizers of the New York National Boat Show, which begins Saturday at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan, have addressed boaters' slimmer wallets and general skittishness with plans to exhibit a variety of craft that fit the small-boat niche.
Among them will be ski boats, small aluminum fishing boats, day sailers and cruising boats.
Costs can be expected to vary between about $5,000 to $10,000.


Coins
Some of the smallest and strangest United States coins are the territorial fractional gold pieces of the mid-19th century.
These quarter- and half-dollar pieces, minted in various areas of the West, became so popular that even after they were outlawed, reproductions kept appearing until the beginning of this century.
Now a luscious collection of California fractional gold pieces is to be auctioned in Orlando, Fla., this Friday by Bowers and Merena Inc. of Wolfeboro, N.H.
The fractional coins replaced the pinches of gold dust and tiny nuggets that circulated throughout California after the 1849 gold rush.
Coins that are widely recognized and trusted for their weight and purity are a tremendous convenience; trading in gold dust or nuggets required an accurate scale and a means of testing for purity.
Mints normally fulfill those needs, but they were not available in California before 1854.
Private foundries filled that void instead.


Eastern Germans Still Flocking West for Jobs
In a troubling continuation of migration patterns that led to the collapse of the old Communist East German state, more than 200,000 citizens of Germany's eastern regions migrated to the west in the nation's first full year of unification, most of them in search of jobs or better pay, according to figures released here today.
The figures, based in part on projections, show that from July to September 1991, an average of 20,000 eastern Germans left each month to go west in search of work.


Sellout With Rangers Is a Rarity for Devils
The Devils had more than one reason to be eagerly awaiting their game with the Rangers at Byrne Meqdowlands Arena tonight.
They are seeking redemption from two losses to the Rangers at Madison Square Garden earlier this season and they will have their first sellout of the season here.


Coming: Telephone Calls That Follow You Around
EARLY one chilly morning in Washington last month, a kind of gold fever swept the halls of the Federal Communications Commission.
Elbow to elbow in the agency's main hearing room -- and in two overflow rooms where latecomers watched on television -- lawyers, lobbyists, consultants and hangers-on attended a hearing on an arcane and little-known area of telecommunications that they hope will dwarf the nearly $6 billion a year market for cellular telephones.
So new and ill-defined is the technology that it goes by two names: personal communications networks and personal communications services.
In this jargon-loving industry, the cognoscenti say "P.C.N.-slash-P.C.S."


South Africa's Trek to Democracy
Only in a world jaded by dramatic change would the earthquake in South Africa occasion so little astonishment.
The country's first interracial convention is now striving to bring about what would have seemed impossible a few years ago, a multiparty democracy, a common citizenship and no discrimination.
Prospects for achieving these goals are realistic enough to provoke increased violence by die-hard opponents of compromise.
Think for a moment of the blood and tears it took to convene this Convention for a Democratic South Africa, known as Codesa.
For most of this century, white South Africans have been deaf to demands for rudimentary racial justice.
After blacks formed the African National Congress in 1912, a white-ruled Parliament responded by limiting African land ownership to tribal reserves -- the first big step to total apartheid.


Reporter's Notebook; For Bush, Jog Overseas Beats Running at Home
After President Bush took his morning jog New Year's Day at a college in Sydney, Australia, someone asked whether he had made any resolutions.
He responded, as expected, with pledges to work for peace and prosperity and a slightly faster two miles around the track.
And then he said something revealing.
"I'll tell you something," he said.
"We are blessed with family, with kids that come home, and with the loyalty and strength that one gets when one is in public life from sons and a daughter. And so I don't have to ask for any more there, but if I were, I would simply say 'Keep it strong, Lord, because we're going into one hell of a year over there.' It's politics from tomorrow on. And it isn't very pleasant."


Islanders' Injuries Pile Up In Defeat
A visit to Memorial Auditorium on Friday night left the Islanders with one more defeat and three more injuries.
The Sabres beat them, 5-2, as Aleksandr Mogilny scored three goals.
Pat LaFontaine, an old acquaintance not to be forgotten, had three assists for the Sabres in his first game against his old team.


New Business Would be Nice But So Would Breaking Even
OF all the departures by city officials at this mid-point in the Dinkins administration, the one that is likely to prove most significant is that of the deputy mayor of finance and economic development, Sally Hernandez-Pinero.
With businesses threatening daily to leave the city, unemployment at over 10 percent and pervasive doubts about the city's ability to compete with other urban centers, the person who charts the next round of economic development policies could have great influence over the direction of the city.


Mary McDaniel To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
John S. McDaniel Jr. of Baltimore have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Perine McDaniel to Richard Oliver Chapman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ned Chapman of Raleigh, N.C.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss McDaniel, 29 years old, is a corporate bond analyst at Fidelity Investments in Boston.
She graduated from Harvard University and has an M.B.A. degree from Cornell University.
Her father is a partner in Baltimore with the Richmond law firm of McGuire, Woods, Battle &amp; Boothe.
Her mother, Emily McDaniel, who is a retired, was a psychiatric social worker.


The Way to Use Instant Replay
To the Sports Editor:
In "Games Are Hung Up By Questionable Calls" (The Times, Dec. 1), Thomas George did a creditable job but overlooked the obvious, just as the N.F.L. has done for years.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE FIFTH CORNER OF THE ROOM By Israel Metter. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.


Cynthia A. Richardson Is Affianced
Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Richardson of Rye, N.Y., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter, Cynthia Anne Richardson, and Douglas Joseph Ryan, a son of Mrs.
Erwin B. Chark of Rye and Joseph Donal Ryan of Marblehead, Mass.
Miss Richardson, 27 years old, is an advertising account executive at Gannett Suburban Newspapers in White Plains.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is a stockbroker at Wertheim Schroder in New York.


Abroad at Home; Metaphor For Failure
President Bush's visit to Japan this week, with his entourage of business executives, is a metaphor for what ails America.
There in a neat package are symbols of corporate failure, social division and lame political response.
The most prominent businessmen in the delegation are the leaders of the U.S. auto industry: the C.E.O.'s of General Motors, Ford and Chrysler.
And what is their message to Japan and the world?
That when an American leads his company into disastrous losses, his response is to whine about the competition and indulge his personal greed.


A Growing Leadership Role for Women
WHEN Dorcas T. Helfant took her first job selling homes in a small real estate office in Portsmouth, Va., in the mid-60's, she was the only person on the sales team who wore a skirt.
"I was surrounded by men in my first sales job," said Mrs.
Helfant, speaking from the vantage point of nearly 25 years in the residential brokerage business.


Series of Attacks on Policemen Worries Pretoria
A series of attacks on the police has left five policemen dead and at least two others wounded so far this year, with guerrillas loyal to a militant black group saying they committed two of the killings.
The refusal of the militant group, the Pan-Africanist Congress, to criticize the killings claimed by its supporters has raised the prospect of a bloody year for the police, whose death toll is rising as apartheid is dismantled.


A Multimedia Education
ONLY A FEW years ago, multimedia presentations were big-stage, big-screen productions involving dancers, actors and musicians -- live and on tape -- slides, a sound track, stage effects and probably a laser light or two.
Much of the machinery was computer-controlled.
Now multimedia has miniaturized; it is both practical and affordable for schools.
Teachers can easily integrate words, sounds, pictures and video (both live and animation) to produce lessons that dazzle the eye, razzle the ear and capture the imagination of students.


Making a Difference; The Hedgehog Takes Hold
Final numbers are not yet in, but Sega Enterprises Ltd. is already boasting that 1991 will be remembered in the world of video games as the year that Sonic the Hedgehog left Super Mario in the dust.
The speedy blue porcupine has become the most popular character in Sega's Genesis video-game line, which went head-to-head this Christmas with archrival Nintendo's new Super Nintendo machine.
A victory at Christmas could make Sega the standard in the new generation of video games, which are based on 16-bit computer chips, analysts say.


Birds Contribute Color to a Lively Yard
PERHAPS it is their sweet sound.
Or their bright colors or just their presence.
But feeding birds is always a plus.
One of the best ways to be sure they will come to the yard is to supply their favorite foods, especially if the winter is harsh.
This custom is also a way to learn what species are about.
To reinforce this process, keep a bird guide near the window to identify that chance rare one that may come around.
Also, keep binoculars in a convenient place for a quick grab.
These magnifiers are handy because sometimes it is difficult to detect that eye line or wing patch.
Having said all this, there still are a few pointers to keep in mind.


Close on Coaches
The music in the National Football League Coaches Scramble is slowing down, and it's becoming clearer who will get chairs and who won't.
CHUCK KNOX is apparently the man the Los Angeles Rams want.
TOM FLORES, the Seattle general manager, appears ready to name himself to replace Knox as the Seahawks coach, especially after University of Miami Coach DENNIS ERICKSON said he was flattered but not interested in moving to Seattle.
The details: After the Rams interviewed MIKE HOLMGREN, the San Francisco offensive coordinator, news leaked out yesterday via the Los Angeles Times that the Rams' owner, GEORGIA FRONTIERE, is expected to meet with Knox next week to offer him the job for a salary in the mid-$500,000 range.
Knox made more than $900,000 in his final year at Seattle.


Ms. Schulman Has Wedding
Helen Schulman, a novelist and teacher, and Bruce Handy, also a writer, both in New York, were married last evening at Michael Wager's Loft in New York.
Rabbi Emily Korzenick officiated.
The bride is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David Schulman of New York.
The bridegroom is a son of Marlene Bogel Handy of Stanford, Calif., and the late Ralph Handy Jr.


Making Trouble in Shanghai
A CHINESE ODYSSEY
The Life and Times of a Chinese Dissident.
By Anne F. Thurston. 440 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $24.95.


Writer Distorts Modern Psychiatry
I am disturbed by the publication of Ms.
Inyard's letter, "Lobotomy as Ancestor of Psychosurgery"  [ Letters, Dec. 8 ] .
As a self-proclaimed "psychiatric survivor" who "seeks alternatives to traditional psychiatric services," she clearly presents a biased and unsubstantiated viewpoint of modern psychiatry.
The belief that physicians would perform psychosurgery on the mentally ill merely to insure that these patients would be unable to contribute to society is absurd.
Psychosurgery is a treatment of last resort reserved for those persons whose mental illness is resistant to standard treatments.
There is no evidence to believe that any reputable psychiatrist would seek to harm a patient or to reduce their ability to contribute to society.


Where Was The Fourth Estate?
To the Editor:
While Tom Wicker may be right in his assertion that Oliver Stone's "J. F. K." represents an absurdly vehement presentation of one possible version of events, his condemnation of it for being a movie, and thus a powerful former of opinion, strikes me as false and disingenuous  [ "Does 'J. F. K.' Conspire Against Reason?," Dec. 15 ] .


Mary Hall to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
James Preston Hall Jr. of Greenville, S.C., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Mary Carolyn Hall, and David Loring Titus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren Irving Titus Jr. of Huntington, L.I.
Miss Hall is a certified public accountant at Elliott, Davis &amp; Company, C.P.A.'s in Greenville.
Mr.
Titus is a sales representative for General Equipment and Supply in Greenville.


New Yorkers, etc.
Tony Aylward, a movie fan since he was tall enough to reach the cashier's booth at Loews Paradise in the Bronx where he grew up, remembers his favorite movie candy as vividly as the films themselves.
"No doubt about it," he recently recalled.
"Dots and Jujyfruits were definitely the best."
Why Dots and Jujyfruits??
"They're soft and they're quiet candies," said Mr.
Aylward, an actor.
His parents, he said, had always encouraged him to respect the rights of others, and that included the right to enjoy movies in peaceful, relatively food-free surroundings.
Then, quicker than it takes to say "bon appetit," things changed.


Tricia Emery To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Emery Jr. of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Patricia Millar Emery, to Geoffrey Baker McGean, the son of J. Michael McGean of Norwich, Vt., and the late Lois Waring McGean.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Emery, who is known as Tricia, is 28 years old.
She graduated from Lake Forest College and is a nursing student at Boston College.
Her father, who is retired, was the chairman, president and chief executive of Emery Air Freight in Stamford, Conn.


Tailored Learning
AT FIDALGO Elementary School in Anacortes, Wash., a class of third graders and fourth graders are playing with blocks.
They may seem a little old for this activity, but then they seem a little young to be handling file folders marked with incomprehensible acronyms.
The blocks, in unusual shapes, are used as spatial reasoning tools in Fidalgo's Structures Of Intellect program; the folders contain class exercises for each student.


For Physicians, a Public Service Incentive
To the Editor:
In "High Cost of Training" (letter, Dec. 10), Nina Stuzen, a medical student, concurs that Americans could benefit from a health care system that provides primary care for all, but states that because she will be $125,000 in debt upon graduation, she will not pursue a career as a family physician.
If, she states, "primary care is to be a priority in this country, it's time we took a look at the financial burden of medical school." I concur, and am pleased to inform her that the Government has done so.


Hooked on Ad Claims
AMERICANS are used to being inundated with slick commercials for beer, fast food and cars, so it was probably just a matter of time until a company like Gateway Educational Products tried the approach with one of its product lines, "Hooked on Phonics."
The insistent advertising campaign has worked, if one accepts the privately held company's sales claims.
Gateway, which is based in Orange, Calif., says that more than 500,000 consumers have dialed 1-800-ABCDEFG to order "Hooked on Phonics," a $179.95 collection of tape cassettes, cards and workbooks.
But Does It Work?


John L. Schimel, 75, Noted Psychoanalyst
John L. Schimel, a noted psychoanalyst, died on Tuesday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He lived in Manhattan and had a second home in Truro, Mass.
Dr. Schimel, who was 75 years old, died of cancer, his family said.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Education Life/Section 4A A special report spotlights what works in education.
Also: Held back to get ahead.
The course not taken.
Hooked on ad claims?
A worldly quiz.


Business Diary/December 29 - January 3
ECONOMY
Mr. Bush's Road Show Hits the Pacific


The Computer As Catalyst
A FRIEND who works at home discovered one morning that his personal computer's diskette drive would not accept a disk.
His 3-year-old son observed him snarling and muttering as he tried repeatedly, without success, to get the computer to accept the disk.
"Maybe there's a penny in the hole," the child suggested.
Sure enough, dad spied a penny in the narrow slot and eventually extracted it with tweezers.
The drive still wouldn't take the disk.


TUNIS CHIEF CALLS FOR ARAB REPRESSION OF MILITANTS
The president of Tunisia, a determined opponent of Islamic fundamentalists in his own country who had been warily watching neighboring Algeria's march toward a fundamentalist government, today called on other Arab countries to repress Muslim militants who use religion as a cover to gain power.
President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, in an address to interior ministers of 16 Arab countries who are in Tunis to review, among other things, ways of cooperating against Islamic militancy, told the security chiefs: "We must combine our efforts to struggle against this phenomenon, which is grave for our Arab-Islamic society, by groups using violence and sedition."
While Mr.
Ben Ali did not mention Algeria, his remarks indicate the degree of alarm among many Arab chiefs of state - including those of Egypt, Morocco, Jordan and Saudi Arabia - about the rising tide of militant fundamentalism.


GRADY'S GIFT
Howell Raines's article "Grady's Gift" (Dec. 1) is a grand tribute to Grady Hutchinson, but more than that, it is a tribute to the many other women who have been confined by time and circumstance to jobs beneath their abilities.
My family greatly benefited from the wisdom of Beulah Wells and Beulah Groves, and my children, like Howell Raines, are grateful for that gift and for continuing friendships with these women.
GAIL KING
Henderson, Ky.


Rhonda Lupin Has Wedding
Rhonda Beth Lupin, a daughter of Saul and Marlene Lupin of Short Hills, N.J., was married last night to Ilan Nissan, the son of Charles and Esperance Nissan of Dix Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Barry Friedman officiated at the Short Hills Hilton.
Mrs.
Nissan, 27 years old, is a retail sales associate at Bear Stearns &amp; Company Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Her father is a senior partner in the accounting firm of Smolin, Lupin &amp; Company Inc. in West Orange, N.J.


GAME SHOW
I began reading Bryan Miller's Food column "Game Show" (Dec. 8) with interest, since my twin sister had her wedding reception at Perona Farms in 1981.
My interest soon turned to disbelief and disgust.
The description of the nearly all-male banquet -- a 45-course meal, consisting of slaughtered animals prepared in a variety of casseroles and pates, with hunting videos shown for entertainment -- was bad enough.
The ensuing description of these happy hunters roasting woodcock heads over wax candles as they were urged to "suck out those delicious little brains -- and theeyes, too, if you want to" was enough to make even Stephen King recoil in horror.
Perhaps King can use Perona Farms for his next book -- "Nightmare at Perona Farms"?
JEEN RUETTE
Pompton Lakes, N.J.


Dr. Venturini Engaged to Richard A. M. Smith
Mr. and Mrs.
Carl A. Picha of Somers, N.Y., have announced June wedding plans for Mrs.
Picha's daughter Dr.
Catherine Mary Venturini and Richard Antony Marston Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian Smith of London.
Dr.
Venturini, 30 years old, is a postdoctoral fellow in pharmacology at Wellcome Research Laboratories in London.
She is also a daughter of the late Robert Venturini.
Mr.
Smith, 28, is a research engineer at the Defense Research Agency in Sevenoaks, England.


Recalling an Era When Ornateness Was All the Rage
If visitors to the new galleries of 19th-century European sculpture and decorative arts at the Metropolitan Museum of Art would itemize their favorite objects, probably no two lists would be the same.
"It would even be true of the lists I'd make on different days," said James David Draper, the curator in charge of the selection and organization of items in the new Iris and B. Gerald Cantor galleries, three permanent spaces named for the donors.


Salvador War Ends for U.S. And Rebels
The occasion was short on ceremony, but hours after El Salvador's Government and leftist guerrillas reached an agreement on Wednesday to end their civil war, the United States made its peace with the rebels, too.
Bernard W. Aronson, the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, was sitting with a colleague in the Lantern, a coffee shop on East 42d Street that advertises "Egg and Cheese on a Roll with Coffee" for $1.50, when in walked a Salvadoran guerrilla commander who goes by the nom de guerre Raul Hercules.
So they had breakfast.


Wall Street; Lean Times Ahead in the High-Tech Nursery?
Last year was a lush one for the startup side of the computer industry, with a host of little companies leaving the venture capital incubator to toddle into the public marketplace through initial public offerings.
Indeed, 1991 was the best year for technology I.P.O.'s since 1983, according to Richard A. Schaffer, editor and publisher of the Technologic Partners Computer Letter.
But Mr.
Schaffer warns that there may be skimpy rations in the high-tech nursery in the year ahead.


CAMPUS LIFE: Cornell; Junkyard Finds Become Devices For the Disabled
Using what look like junkyard finds, Cornell biological engineering students design and build inexpensive durable therapeutic devices and toys for handicapped children.
So far, the students have built a radio-controlled toy truck and a battery-powered child-sized car intended to be operated by children with cerebral palsy, a zero-gravity arm sling to help children with minimal muscle tone use computers, a large four-position electrical switch that requires very little pressure to use, a car-loader to transfer children from wheelchairs to vehicles and a flying toy airplane.


A Show That Evokes the Spirit and Principles of Kwanzaa
DR.
MAULANA KARENGA is chairman of the black studies department on the Long Beach campus of California State University.
His fame derives not from this, however, but from his having instituted the celebration of Kwanzaa, in 1966.
The word is Swahili and denotes the fruits of the harvest; the holiday, which is not yet in the American calendar, lasts from Dec. 26 to Jan. 1.
By all accounts Kwanzaa is celebrated by eating, gift-giving, music, events like the recent Holiday Expo '91 at Manhattan Community College and, last but not least, the show here at Aljira.
As this demonstrates, Kwanzaa is not another field day for Mammon.
It is, rather, an opportunity for people of African descent to focus on principles vital to their survival with self-esteem.
There are seven of these: unity (Umoja), self-determination (Kujichagulia), collective work and responsibililty (Ujima), cooperative economics (Ujamaa), purpose (Nia), creativity (Kuumba) and faith (Imani).


The Rothschild Files
ERIC ROTHSCHILD likes to joke about the New York City cabdriver who asked him, when he was a young man just starting out in life, where he had gone to college.
"I told him, 'Harvard,' " Mr.
Rothschild said.
"He said, 'So, what are you going to be when you grow up?' I said, 'A teacher.' He said, 'So, for this you went to Harvard?' "
Yes, he did.
To be precise, he went to Harvard to prepare for a career teaching American history at Scarsdale High School in Scarsdale, N.Y., his alma mater.
He has taught there for 28 years, and each fall a new group of students is enthralled.
"It's like he's teaching everything for the first time," said Marc Leibert, a junior this year.
"You can't
not
be interested."


Differences Can Outweigh Similarities in Photo-Realism
IN the beginning (of the 1960's) there was Pop and it was followed by Minimalism.
Then, halfway through the decade, there came the backlash, Process Art and Photo-Realism.
The first was derived from Abstract Expressionism; the second came out of Pop yet had the affectlessness of Minimalism and, at the same time, capitalized on the public's fondness for exact replication.
No small achievement this.
But it took the critic Thomas Albright to nail the movement by quoting Roland Barthes's 1958 definition of the New Objectivity in French literature: "No alibis, no depth, keeping to the surface of things, examining without emphasis, favoring no one quality."


A la Carte: Finding Dream Dishes at Easy Prices
THE year 1991 was a mashed-potato-and-meat-loaf year on Long Island.
The recession that hit with sledgehammer impact deepened, and potential restaurant customers responded as did most shoppers, by hunting for value.
Luxurious big-ticket restaurants like Giorgio's in the Garden City Hotel and Nicola's in Glen Cove closed, but casual cafes prospered.


Across Europe, Faces of Homeless Become More Visible and Vexing
Just before midnight, an unmarked Salvation Army van pulled up to the curb outside Euston Station and a trickle of tattered men and women edged cautiously from the shadows around the railroad terminal, hunched against the biting winter air.
There were, in all, about 30 of them, many wrapped in blankets.
Most were young, in their early 20's, a few smelling sharply of alcohol.


Hungary's Abortion Opponents Depict a Nation on the Wane Foes of Abortion Depict a Hungary in Decline
As Hungarians debate the future of their relatively liberal approach to abortion, it has become apparent that the debate is not just about abortion, but about nationhood.
The Constitutional Court told Parliament recently to draft a new abortion law by next December, presenting the prospect of a change.
Yet the country may just put off the decision indefinitely; Hungarians have, after all, taken the availability of abortion for granted for 40 years.
Abortion is widely available, and although there are a few restrictions, basically anyone who is willing to go through the red tape can have one in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy, or in the first 18 weeks if she is a minor.
Abortion is allowed through the 20th week if medical reasons are established, as well as on request in cases of rape or incest.


Hoosiers Heat Up, And Down Cincinnati
Eric Anderson scored a season-high 23 points today, including 10 in the opening minutes of the second half, to rally No. 10 Indiana past Cincinnati, 81-60.
Anderson hit two jumpers and a pair of 3-pointers as Indiana (9-2) wiped out a 6-point halftime deficit.
His 3-pointer put Indiana ahead to stay, 44-41, with 16 minutes 16 seconds left.


Sports of The Times; Write-In for Rose: 3 Years Are Enough
NOW that George Steinbrenner appears to be within an unconditional surrender of returning to baseball on Commissioner Fay Vincent's terms, Pete Rose will surely be next on line outside the confessional.
Not long ago, Rose, banned after Commissioner Bart Giamatti concluded in 1989 that the Cincinnati Reds manager had bet on baseball and on the Reds, disclosed that he planned to seek reinstatement sometime this year.
If it were granted, the most avid golfer in Boca Raton, Fla., would then seek employment with the Florida Marlins, the National League expansion team that is scheduled to begin play in 1993.


Right Numbers
In her more than 13 years as the head of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Janet L. Norwood earned a reputation for having zero tolerance for numbers that lied.
Dr.
Norwood, who retired last week, is known not merely as a stickler for accuracy -- that goes with the territory -- but also for refusing to let her statistics be pressed into political service.
She would say that if you mess with the data base -- perhaps by manipulating unemployment figures to justify an economic policy -- you mess with democracy.
Such attitudes led one senator to deem her "a national treasure." Discussing her retirement last week, the 68-year-old Dr.
Norton expressed concern that Washington might not be managing the ever growing stream of economic information as well as some others.
"We are really not operating internationally as effectively as we ought," she said.
"I'm concerned about the increasing effectiveness of other countries. I worry about where we will be 10 or 15 years from now."


Promoter Gives His Account of 9 Deaths at City College
The promoter of the celebrity basketball game at City College, in his first detailed account, told a city investigator yesterday that crowd violence had begun an hour before nine young people were fatally crushed and that the police had failed to stop it and had ignored his pleas to disperse and control the increasingly restive and swelling throng.
A lawyer who was present said that Sean Combs, a 22-year-old promoter, also told Deputy Mayor Milton Mollen, the head of a mayoral panel investigating the tragedy, that contrary to earlier reports the gymnasium was well short of its 2,730-seat capacity at the time of the crush, but that the crowd outside had grown to between 3,000 and 4,000, far larger than previously estimated.


'Naked Lunch' Goes Buggy
David Cronenberg has a soft spot for bugs, and they've always been kind to him.
His first feature was a low-budget 1975 horror movie called "Shivers," a k a "The Parasite Murders" and "They Came From Within," a grotesque little story about man-made, sexually-transmitted killer parasites.
His popular breakthrough came in 1986 with his remake of "The Fly," in which a scientist played by Jeff Goldblum turned into a giant fly that drooled gallons of sickening fluid around the lab.
This penchant for insects had commercial value, but it did not seem to be an artistic obsession on the order of, say, Picasso's fascination with bulls.
Who knew what David Cronenberg would one day do with a bug?
In his smashingly funny and wise version of "Naked Lunch," bugs are the witty devices that bring the hero's unconscious desires to dizzying cinematic life.


Jill Bates Plans A May Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
James S. Bates of New Vernon, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jill Elizabeth Bates, to Roger Bernard Champagne Jr., the son of Judge and Mrs.
Champagne of North Falmouth, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Bates, 26 years old, graduated from Catholic University and is an executive assistant at the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission in Washington.
Her father retired as president of the Vanderbilt Petroleum Company, an oil marketing concern in New York.
Her mother, Louise Bates, is president of New Vernon Travel, a travel agency.


Britrail Freezes Price of Passes
The British railroad system says it is holding the price of its passes in 1992 at last year's level.
Among these tickets offering unlimited rail travel in England, Scotland and Wales is the eight-day Britrail Pass, which remains at $209 a person in standard class, and the Flexipass, good for four days' travel in eight days, which is staying at $179 in standard class.
The passes are also sold for longer periods and for first class as well as standard.
Children 5 to 15 travel for half price.
Young people aged 16 to 25 and travelers over 60 receive discounts.
Britrail is introducing a Scotrail pass, allowing travel on trains and major ferries in Scotland, for 1992.
It is available for 8 days ($129), 15 days ($189) and 22 days ($249) in standard class only.
There is no youth or over-60's discount.
More information: (212) 575-2667.


Fitch Says He's Fed Up With Rumors, Not Anderson
For any Nets owners, administrators, reporters, broadcasters, fans and reserve point guards who think Bill Fitch has a grudge against Kenny Anderson, the coach is determined to set the record straight.
"I've heard enough of that stuff," Fitch said after a workout last week.
"To say I have a vendetta against Kenny, well, I just don't see it."


Bills Can Run, Too. But Can They Slow the Chiefs?
Is there a more physical offense in the American Conference than Kansas City's?
The Chiefs use the type of muscle and bruising run-first mentality more popular in the National Conference.
The Buffalo Bills know this firsthand.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
NOBODY BELIEVES HIM
BILL WADE of Huntington is the new president of the New York Area Skeptics.
Last year he was treasurer.
It was tough being treasurer of a skeptics' group, he said.
"Nobody believed how much we had in the treasury. I had to keep giving detailed reports."


Winds From an Atlantic Storm Topple Trees and Tear at Moorings
Like a snapped spring, a "tightly wound" storm lashed at the Atlantic Coast yesterday, smacking the Jersey Shore with 60 mile-per-hour winds, toppling trees and tearing loose a 320-foot-long barge on Long Island Sound.
It wasn't the vicious nor'easter that ravaged coasts on Halloween nine weeks ago, but yesterday's storm was trouble enough.


Parcells Snubs Chance To Join the Packers
In what looks like an instant replay, Bill Parcells spurned a chance to coach the Green Bay Packers yesterday just one week after the former Giants head coach rejected a long-term offer to run the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
But talks with Ron Wolff, the Packers' general manager, apparently never progressed as far as those with Hugh Culverhouse, the Buccaneers' owner, who said he tendered Parcells a five-year, $6.5 million contract.


Santa Monica's Urban Living Room
AMERICAN cities tend to be like houses without a living room.
There are places to sleep.
Places to work.
Places to eat.
But there are very few places for people to live together, to enjoy each other in large numbers, to be the social animals we were meant to be.
Without a living room, American cities are just anthills.
Western cities tend to have even fewer living rooms than do Eastern cities.
By the time you reach California, the urban parlor has all but ceased to exist in any form.
Or at least that was the case until Santa Monica unveiled its new Third Street Promenade at the extreme western edge of America, three blocks from the Pacific Ocean.
The official opening was Sept. 16, 1989, but only in the past few months has it made a real impact on Greater Los Angeles.
Now, suddenly, some 10,000 people visit this Promenade, which is just three blocks long, every week.
Put in L.A. terms, it is a blockbuster.


Amy Ciabattoni, Nutritionist, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Louis John Ciabattoni of Chappaqua, N.Y., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter Amy Therese Ciabattoni and John Charles Keating Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Keating of Darien, Conn.
Ms.
Ciabattoni, 27 years old, is a nutritionist at Kraft General Foods in White Plains.
A registered dietitian, she graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in nutrition from Emory University.
Her father is the manager of application systems at NBC in New York.
Her mother, Therese Ciabattoni, is an academic counselor at Westchester Community College in Valhalla, N.Y.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Freehold 88,000
89 Tulip Lane
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2-year-old condominium apartment; patio, w/w carpeting; monthly maintenance $128; taxes $1,948.
Howell 100,000
20 Pearl Drive
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; fenced yard, h/w floors, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $1,200.
Jackson 105,000
118 Andover Road
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 25-year-old ranch; c/a, w/w carpeting, fenced yard, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,828.
Oakland 129,900
379 West Oakland Avenue
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old Cape Cod; handyman special, convenient to transportation, full basement; taxes $3,835.
Ridgewood 279,000
507 Summit Street
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 55-year-old colonial; family room, 10-year old addition, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $6,048.
Short Hills 435,000
113 Tennyson Avenue
5-bedroom, 4-bath, 10-year-old split level; full basement, abuts golf course, professionally landscaped; taxes $7,407.
OTHER AREAS Pound Ridge, N.Y. 300,0009
9 Rolling Meadow Lane
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 27-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, breakfast room, study, family room, 1 acre; taxes $4,900.
Commack, L.I. 175,000
7 Penguin Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 29-year-old ranch; family room, basement, fireplace, deck, inground pool; taxes $4,000.
Rocky Hill, Conn 127,000
56 Berkshire Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 41-year-old ranch; hardwood floors, close to schools and shopping, 936 square feet, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,562.


Hispanic Doctors Form Network
IN a move to meet the health needs of a rapidly growing segment of the county's population, Spanish-speaking doctors have formed the county's first Hispanic medical society.
Dr.
Felix Davila, a White Plains internist, has spearheaded the drive among Westchester doctors to help Hispanic residents who -- because of a language barrier, financial need or a lack of understanding of a new culture -- may not have access to medical care.


In Late Abortions, Decisions Are Painful and Options Few
Catherine Stern found out from a sonogram when she was seven months pregnant that she was carrying a fetus with stumps for arms and legs and possible brain damage.
"I was in shock," she said.
"I was catatonic."
Ms.
Stern, a lawyer who lives in Turnbridge, Vt., said she and her husband agonized over whether to have an abortion.
"I felt as if I was being given a choice," she said, "and if I can find any way I was going to make it a choice." She decided to terminate the pregnancy.


George Plimpton, Writer and Editor, Is Wed to Sarah W. Dudley, a Writer
Sarah Whitehead Dudley, a freelance writer, and George Ames Plimpton, the writer and editor, were married on Tuesday in Redding, Conn., at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Dudley.
The Rev.
S.
C.
Campbell Lovett, a Congregational minister, officiated.
Mrs.
Dudley Plimpton, a graduate of Columbia University, is the chairwoman of the trustees of the East Harlem Tutorial Program, of which Mr.
Plimpton serves as a board member.
Her father is the managing partner of Dudley &amp; Company, an investment counseling concern in New York.


Elizabeth Campbell and Robert Wilmot to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Campbell of New Canaan, Conn., have announced February wedding plans for their daughter Elizabeth Lee Campbell and Robert Joseph Wilmot, a son of Mrs.
Robert Lawrence Wilmot of Pittsford, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Wilmot.
Miss Campbell, who graduated magna cum laude from Duke University, is a leasing agent with the Kaplan Group, a real-estate concern in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Her father, who is retired, was the national sales manager for Lord, Abbett &amp; Company, investment managers, in New York.
Mr.
Wilmot is the vice president for leasing of Wilmorite Inc., a shopping center developer, builder and manager in Rochester.
His father was a founder of the company.


Birds Contribute Color to a Lively Yard
PERHAPS it is their sweet sound.
Or their bright colors or just their presence.
But feeding birds is always a plus.
One of the best ways to be sure they will come to the yard is to supply their favorite foods, especially if the winter is harsh.
This custom is also a way to learn what species are about.
To reinforce this process, keep a bird guide near the window to identify that chance rare one that may come around.
Also, keep binoculars in a convenient place for a quick grab.
These magnifiers are handy because sometimes it is difficult to detect that eye line or wing patch.
Having said all this, there still are a few pointers to keep in mind.


Douglas Is Back, But Friendship Suffers
The protracted holdout of Miami point guard SHERMAN DOUGLAS earned him a seven-year, $17 million contract, but may have cost him his friendship with his teammate RONY SEIKALY.
Douglas rejoined the Heat last week and came off the bench to contribute 10 points and 7 assists in a 113-109 overtime loss to Seattle Thursday night.
It was his first action after missing 30 games.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Winter Compost Q.
I have a plastic compost bin to which I've added leaves, vegetable matter and cow manure.
Should I continue adding kitchen vegetable scraps through winter and then try to turn it?
Will it continue to "cook," or should I hold these scraps till spring?  -- P. DeSavino Jr., Beach Haven, N.J.


A Deadly Night Out
THE basketball game between rap stars in a City College gymnasium was heavily advertised on radio just before it was to begin.
Promotion was, at $2,850, the biggest item in the event's $10,000 expense budget.
Security was not -- about $1,850 was budgeted for it.
But as many as 5,000 people showed up, trying to get into a gymnasium that could seat 2,730.
Windows were broken by the unruly crowd.
But the 66 police officers outside did not move in, since there were no reports of crimes or danger to the public.
Then people at the back began to shove forward.


Editorial Notebook; Penny Wisdom
Thanks to Dwight Bravo and his kind, one New Yorker is $63.84 richer.
Mr.
Bravo, a security guard at a Manhattan bookstore, told the Times reporter Eleanor Blau the other day that he wouldn't stoop to pick a penny up from the street.
That's
his
mistake.
Since St.
Patrick's Day 1989, when the undersigned started stooping in earnest, the streets and sidewalks of New York have yielded 1,604 pennies, 65 nickels, 128 dimes, 46 quarters, five subway tokens, two slugs, a miscellany of coinage from around the world, and now and then some green.
All told, $57.59 in U.S. coin and currency, plus the five tokens worth $1.15 apiece when acquired but now worth $1.25. (Some of the coins may have added value, too, as rarities, but that's not the point. The game is in the hunting and finding.)


POSTINGS: Tweed Courthouse Elevators; Glass Sheathing For Open Cages
A plan to enclose and automate two open-cage elevators in the old New York County Courthouse in Manhattan, better known as the Tweed Courthouse, was approved by the city's Department of Buildings last month.
As part of a restoration of the building, the wrought-iron elevator cars will be completely glazed with plate glass on the inside.
Another layer of glass will cover the elevator doors on each floor.
"We think the glass will be inconspicuous," said John G. Waite of Mesrick Cohen Waite of Albany, the architect that is restoring the building.


Massachusetts Town Refuses Tax Increase To Rehire Teachers
Residents of the tiny Massachusetts town of Wales, which laid off five of the seven teachers at its lone elementary school last year because of budget problems, voted Friday against increasing property taxes to pay for rehiring the teachers.
By 407-to-249, voters turned down a measure that would have raised $160,745 to bring back the teachers immediately.
By a nearly identical margin, the residents approved a second measure raising $20,000 to maintain their garbage collection services.


When Abstraction Becomes an Obsession
The New York City Ballet has announced that it will devote an entire week in May to nothing but premieres.
At least 10 choreographers will stage works; the participants range from experienced creators to comparative newcomers.
That the company will be running risks is terrific news, for it is no secret that ballet is suffering from a shortage of challenging new productions.
The scope of ballet has narrowed.
Few choreographers today are as versatile as Michel Fokine, Leonide Massine, Bronislava Nijinska or George Balanchine.
While those dance pioneers were geniuses, and genius cannot be wished into existence, we are not without talented ballet makers today.
However, too many choreographers are stuck in ruts.
For instance, there's an inordinate emphasis nowadays upon music as choreography's primary source.
Of course, music can inspire.
But ballet-making involves more than setting steps to concertos or symphonies.
A ballet must have a distinctive theatrical personality apart from its accompaniment.
Although Balanchine called music a floor for dancing, he surely conceived a ballet as a structure rising boldly from that floor and not as a piece of linoleum stretched upon it.


Data Bank/January 5, 1992
Index of Leading Indicators
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
-0.3
0.1
-0.2
New Home Sales
Monthly percent change
0.0
3.8
-4.0
Construction Spending
Monthly percent change
-0.8
0.6
0.9
Factory Orders
Monthly Percent Changes
0.6
1.9
-2.3
Economic Activity
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Purchasing Managers' Report
46.5
50.1
53.5
Farm Prices
Monthly percent change
-0.7
-2.8
-3.4
Productivity
III Q'91
II Q'91
I Q'91
Percent change
0.9
1.9
0.1
Steel Production
Dec. 28
Dec. 21
Dec. 14
Thousands of tons, weekly total
1,639
1,650
1,751


Mayor Halfway
The intelligent State of the City speech that Mayor David Dinkins gave last week contained some good ideas and sounded New York City's traditional theme of compassionate leadership for all urban America.
Yet it was just a speech, one of many he has given that reflect his performance over two years.
He certainly sounds as if he knows how to lift New York City from its recessionary torpor.
Yet he has not yet pushed hard enough to master the city's fiscal fates, never pressed his appointees hard enough and never rallied his fellow citizens insistently enough.


Texas 'River Rats' Wait Out the Flood
Standing around a fire built in a rusty oil drum, a group of men who call themselves "river rats" sipped coffee dispensed from a Red Cross truck today and surveyed the high ground where they had taken refuge.
"We can still catch all the fish we want," said Homer Fewox, 66 years old, "and we got good people to keep company with up here, some guitar pickers among them. But on the whole, any one of us would be a whole lot happier back on the bottom."


For $64,000: Who Lost in the Big Fix?
"The Quiz Show Scandal" recalls that in an era before Presidents had done much lying on television, trusting Americans were already being lied to by the shows they loved best.
"The $64,000 Question," "21" and "Dotto" were among the tube's earliest and biggest hits, bringing money and celebrity to contestants, bonuses to producers, profits to advertising agencies and fortunes to sponsors.
All were rigged.
The road to exposure, which caused much breast-beating in the 1950's, is clearly laid out on tomorrow night's edition of "The American Experience," at 9 on Channels 13 and 49 in the New York area.
Linking individual motives to institutional pressures, the program casts an unkind light on much of commercial television.


Clearing Mudd
Over the years many Government officials, including Presidents Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan, have come to believe that Dr.
Samuel Mudd was just doing his job when he set the broken leg of John Wilkes Booth.
But the United States Army has not been so easily convinced, and depite decades of appeals by his grandson, Dr.
Richard Mudd, Army records still list Dr.
Mudd as a convicted accomplice in the assassination of Abraham Lincoln.
That may change this month, when the Army Board of Correction of Military Records meets to reconsider the case of Dr.
Mudd, who was pardoned by President Andrew Johnson in 1869 after serving four years of a life sentence.
Dr.
Mudd and his family are expected to help make the case that their forebear knew nothing of the assassination.
Dr.
Mudd, who is 90 years old, admits having wearied of the long fight, but is game for finishing it.
"After 75 years, I'm getting tired of the thing," he said.
"But I'm not tired to the point I wanted to give it up."


Lisa A. Lebow, Analyst, Weds
Lisa Anne Lebow, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Poe Lebow of Baltimore, was married yesterday evening to Mark Alan Kaufman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Kaufman of Baltimore.
Rabbi Floyd Herman performed the ceremony at the Harbor Court Hotel in Baltimore.
Mrs.
Kaufman, 25 years old, is a financial analyst at LaSalle Partners in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is president of H. Poe Lebow Ltd., a clothing design and marketing concern, and her mother is a psychiatric social worker at the Keswick Home for Incurables, both in Baltimore.


Sweeping Up the Rubble of the Year
LAST year seems to have wound down in a grump, at least among some readers.
And, for the first column of 1992, we might as well get rid of some of the rocks and pebbles that have rolled this way.
A Bummer of a Bimmer?
Dear Sir:
Based on your article, "With the 325i, BMW Drops the 4th Shoe," (The Times, Dec. 1), I'm convinced you're about as qualified to evaluate cars as a graham cracker.
I own a 1992 325i and I'm exceptionally pleased with all aspects of the car.
As for the "weak detent between low and reverse," I have to force it into reverse, and my wife let the car sit in the garage for three days because she didn't know the "trick" to get it into reverse.
Maybe this BMW isn't the greatest car on the road.
Time will tell.
But it's an excellent complete package.
Come to your senses!
HOLLARD R. EARLE Long Valley, N.J
A graham cracker? I tend to think of myself as Cracker Jack.
Dear Sir:
What a travesty to condemn a terrific new car almost solely because of your inability to distinguish first gear from reverse.
I did agree with you about the air-conditioning controls: a mishmash of confusion, particularly at night.
But if I'd agreed with your obvious preference for lightweight and thin-skinned small cars like the Lexus, Maxima and Camry, I'd have bought one.
How strange to condemn BMW for being itself.
EDWARD S. DUBEL North Myrtle Beach, S.C.
I confess. I have an affinity for the thin-skinned.
Dear Sir:
After your positive impressions of the new models BMW has introduced since 1987, everyone here was surprised by your 325i review.
BMW's surprise was compounded by the fact that the 325i was on the eve of receiving significant awards from both Car and Driver and Automobile magazines, and the newspaper reviews of the car have been very good throughout the country.
Your opinions are your opinions, but one part of the article states a fact that is difficult to understand.
BMW has never been criticized for the operation of our five-speed manual transmission.
Reporting that the "reverse gear lives in dangerous proximity to low" is something new and "the problem, echoed by others who have driven the car" does not match our experience from the media or customers.
Safety is very important to BMW, so we are concerned with the emphasis you placed on an experience others have not shared.
THOMAS O. MC GURN Woodcliff Lake, N.J
McGurn is general manager of corporate communications for BMW of North America.
His opinions are his opinions.
Dear Sir:
Having purchased a new BMW 325i several weeks ago, I found your review insufficiently critical.
Let me tell you what we have encountered.
First, the windshield developed a long vertical crack at 200 miles, and at about the same time a defective sensor told us we were without coolant.
None of the heater ducts worked and much packing material had to be removed from each.
Then the power steering began to groan.
After a long wait, it was replaced.
At about 300 miles, the right cornering light fell out of its socket and was dangling by its wires while we tried to figure out why people were tooting and pointing at us.
There is more, but I will not bother you with it, except to cite one problem that BMW dealers told us is endemic in the new 325i: engine vibration.  that is felt through the accelerator and the steering column.
The new engine is quite rough, and at certain steady speeds on our freeways, you can really get quite annoyed at the vibration of the accelerator pedal and the steering column.
Compared to our '85 BMW, this really is an unpleasant car to drive.
DANIEL S. CHAFFIN San Rafael, Calif.
O.K., I'll try to be more critical.
Hit From Both Sides
Dear Sir:
Your recent article discussing the differences between the Volvo wagon and minivans ("Volvo Makes Its New 960 a Safe Bet," The Times, Dec. 15), which came complete with a few technical updates and emotional letters from mommies, left me cold.
Sideguard protection isn't new.
G.M. has been putting this type of protection into autos since the late 70's.
And your emotional mommies are just that.
If they want
all
the protection they can get, they should consider a Jeep Wagoneer, a G.M.
Suburban or maybe a production Hummer.
TOM HANDLER Cherry Hill, N.J.
It's rumored that surplus Gulf War Hummers are going for 25 bucks.
Dear Sir:
Your column about the Volvo 960 did not really address the concerns of the letter from Ellie Dunham.
Where is she supposed to seat four young children if she and her husband also want to ride in the car?
We have three children in car-seats and own a Volvo 740 wagon, and we have the same dilemma.
The Volvo wins on safety, but the minivans look attractive because they offer more seating.
Volvo does offer a third bench seat for the back of the wagon, but I am concerned about the safety of that -- tiny knees pressed up against the rear door in a rear-end collision, etc.
SUSAN SWARTZ Highland Park, Ill.
Given the volume of mail, this is a problem that is on the minds of a lot of people.
Automotive engineers are among them, and they say they are trying.
They also maintain that vans have gotten a bad rap, so to speak.
Dear Sir:
Just weeks before your column appeared, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration responded to Congressional questions on the safety of light trucks and vans and stated the following:
"NHTSA is aware of the greater use of light trucks and multipurpose vehicles such as vans as passenger-carrying vehicles. In spite of these increases, accident data have shown that the average occupant fatality rate for all types of light trucks and vans (LTV's) is identical to that of passenger cars.
"In side impact crashes, the number of fatalities per million registered vehicles for LTV's is significantly lower than that for passenger cars (25.5 vs. 57.3). Although this may be in part because the side door sills are somewhat higher on some LTV's than on passenger cars, nonetheless LTV's have a lower fatality rate, even though they have not had to meet the same safety standard as passenger cars."
We agree on this point.
For the record, the only manner in which Chrysler minivans do not meet all passenger car standards are the side-impact door beams and the unbelted driver-restraint requirement.
Both of these will be resolved in late 1993, when a passenger air bag will also be added.
One certainty about adding door beams is an increase in weight and an offsetting reduction in fuel economy.
We have preferred to invest our minivan resources in the first and only integrated child seat, the first minivan air bag, antilock brakes and all-wheel drive.
RONALD S. ZAROWITZ Highland Park, Mich.
Zarowitz is manager of car and truck safety for Chrysler Corporation.
He is also the inventor of Chrysler's new child safety seats.
But Then . . .
Dear Sir:
I'd like you to know that before your excellent column appeared regularly in Sunday Sports, this section of The Times was used at my house only for such things as wrapping fish heads, training the dog, kindling the wood stove and the like.
Now these tasks wait until I've investigated your column.
DAVID MAJERCIK Williamsburg, Mass.
Always nice to end on a high note.


Correction
A biographical note on Dec. 22 with a review of "Trollope: A Biography," by N. John Hall, referred incorrectly to the reviewer.
James R. Kincaid teaches English at the University of Southern California, not the University of California, Los Angeles.


Geneva
Ordinarily, half of Geneva's hotel rooms are empty in February, the off-off-season for this cosmopolitan city's thriving tourist business.
Not so this year.
The Winter Olympic Games in Albertville and 12 other venues in France, Feb. 8 to 23, will cast the Swiss city in the role of a major gateway to the international snow circus and as a center for logistical support and after-ski recreation.


Elizabeth Lovinger Weds John Lane
Dr.
Elizabeth Candace Lovinger, a resident in radiology at Cornell North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
John F. Lane 3d, a naval lieutenant serving aboard the U.S.S.
Detroit, a supply ship.
Cantor Raymond Smolover performed the ceremony at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y., with the Rev.
Girard Angelo, a Roman Catholic priest, attending.
The couple graduated from the Georgetown University Medical School.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from Duke University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Lovinger of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Her father is a real-estate lawyer in Scarsdale.
Her mother is a nursery school teacher at Temple Israel in New Rochelle, N.Y.


An Open Letter To Bobby Bonilla
Dear Bobby:
Congratulations on your new contract.
It must feel great knowing that you and your family are secure for life.
So Bobby, why are you so sour?
Why do you persist in bashing the Pirates' management at every turn?
Are you so concerned that selling yourself to the highest bidder doesn't square with your "great guy" image?
Does maintaining that image require the presence of other, non-economic factors?
Is that what's behind this modern-day tragedy you've created in which those simultaneously wicked and bumbling Pirates executives are solely to blame for your leaving Pittsburgh?
Bobby, are you trying to kid us or yourself?
Listen, forget the image thing and just enjoy your fortune; you're not such a great guy, anyway, and the money hasn't a thing to do with it.


Cultural Impersonators
To the Editor:
Henry Louis Gates Jr. delightfully demonstrates that however important a text's (presumed) origins may be in determining its reception, readers are bound to be as helpless before a true blindfold test as writers are incapable of controlling the multifold influences that qualify even well-intentioned "authenticity." But what
shall
we do with Dickens's clairvoyant response to George Eliot's first fiction?
Her assumption of the male pseudonym was insufficient to persuade the great genius of the English novel.


Beth Meister to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Meister of Rye Brook, N.Y., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Beth Meister, 26 years old, and George Michael Groglio, 35, a son of George and Anita Groglio of Rye, N.Y.
Mr.
Groglio is a partner in the Degatono &amp; Groglio law firm in White Plains.


This Week: Winter Greens
If evergreen boughs and a Christmas tree were part of your holiday season, don't just throw them away.
Strip the branches from the tree and use these and other evergreens to mulch plants, especially those planted in the fall.
The greens and other mulch will keep plants from being heaved from the ground during cycles of thawing and freezing.
Now that the annuals and perennials aren't coloring your garden, take a good look around the yard.
Do you have some interesting green and blue-green conifers to add interest to the winter landscape?
Siberian dogwood (Cornus alba 'Sibirica') would brighten the eye right now with its bright red-barked twigs.
Chinese witch hazel (Hamamelis mollis) has fragrant yellow confetti-like blooms that will open under a February sun.
"Arnold Promise" is another favorite witch hazel; both will do well as far north as hardiness zone 5.


Via Video, New Haven Residents Give Their Opinions to President Bush
July Rose stood still a moment before she gave the President of the United States her view of the world.
"I've worked hard all my life; no one ever gave me anything," she said.
"I'm well educated. I have a job as a writer and a marketing contractor and I can't even pay for health insurance. I'm 46 years old and why am I still struggling? Why is it getting harder?"


The Answers
1. East Pakistan, Ceylon, Rhodesia.
2.
Demilitarized Zone, African National Congress, Organization of American States, Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front.
3. Patricio Aylwin
Chile
Oscar Arias Sanchez
Costa Rica
Isabel Peron
Argentina
Anastasio Somoza Debayle
Nicaragua
Alfredo Cristiani
El Salvador
Augusto Pinochet
Chile
4. Colombia, Chile, Argentina, Peru.
5. Ifni Province
Morocco
Tabriz
Iran
Phnom Penh
Cambodia
Jalalabad
Afghanistan
My Lai
Vietnam
Khafji
Saudi Arabia
Tripoli
Libya
Managua
Nicaragua
Bhopal
India
Soweto
South Africa
6.
False.
Mohandas Gandhi was not related to Indira Gandhi; her name came from her husband, Feroz Gandhi, who was also not related to Mohandas Gandhi.
7.
These three women were elected leaders of their countries, respectively the Philippines, Pakistan and Nicaragua.
8.
Suriname, in South America, was a colony of the Netherlands; Zimbabwe, then known as Rhodesia, in Africa, was a colony of Britain; Angola, in Africa, was a colony of Portugal.
9.
It is the capital of Uganda; an Israeli raid freed more than 100 hostages held at the Entebbe airport.
10. The Falkland Islands off the coast of Argentina; Grenada in the Caribbean.
11. Now called Queen Noor, she is married to King Hussein of Jordan.
12. The feared militia of the Duvalier family in Haiti.
13. Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, former star of the Los Angeles Lakers basketball team.
14. Idi Amin
Uganda
Mobutu Sese Seko
Zaire
Robert Mugabe
Zimbabwe
Kenneth Kaunda
Zambia
Julius K. Nyerere
Tanzania
Archbishop Desmond Tutu
South Africa
Sam Nujoma
Namibia


Oh Yeah? Yeah!
Having popularly elected local school boards can indeed bring democracy to education.
But the board members, on occasion, may act like politicians.
Last week, New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez threatened to overrule a Bronx school board and rescind the appointment of six new principals after the board disobeyed the chancellor's order that the appointments be postponed.
Mr.
Fernandez ordered the postponement to investigate a dispute among the board members over the appointments.
Raul Cruz, the chairman of the Bronx board, said that a "racist and anti-Semitic" faction sought to block the appointments because two of the new principals were Jewish.
Edward Cain, a member of the dissident group said Mr.
Cruz was "an out-and-out liar" and that he opposed the appointments because at least one of them appeared to be a political reward.
A spokesman for the central board said that Mr.
Fernandez would meet with the Bronx board this week.


Dream Bowl: Sling, Knute And Friends
I dreamed I watched every minute of every bowl game, which is not possible, and when I awoke I had memories that were all my own:
An hour before the Inc.
Bowl, the one Howard Cosell came back to broadcast with Jane Fonda on CNN, the quarterback for the Hog Butchers of Chicago A&amp;M called a team meeting.
I think his name was Sling.
The coaches were pleased at first; they thought he would do their job for them, psych the animals into tearing apart the Cossacks of Moscow (Idaho) State.


Mythic


The Arab World Comes to the End of Illusions
ACROSS the Arab world almost a year after the end of the gulf war, people are comparing that crisis and its aftermath to the thunderclap of the 1967 defeat of the Arabs by Israel in the Six Day War.
That event is deeply engraved in the consciousness of an entire generation that was emerging then from school and that today administers the Arab world.
The "naksa" (setback), as it is known in Arabic, set off a chain reaction that changed the Arab status quo in the late 1960's and 70's.
Eventually Egypt made peace with Israel, and some Arab countries, notably Egypt and the Arab gulf states, realigned themselves with the West even as anti-Western leaders like Saddam Hussein and Muammar el-Qaddafi consolidated their power.


Tropical Tresses
A recent issue of British Vogue features the model Claudia Schiffer cavorting about St.
Barts in a glamorous assortment of resort clothes.
As usual, she looks like Brigitte Bardot, circa 1959, with volumes of blond hair -- windblown, shiny and blissfully frizz-free.
The look is utterly effortless, which is precisely what Frederic Fekkai, the Fifth Avenue hair wizard who styled Schiffer's tresses, wanted.
But achieving such a silky style -- one that glistens with health -- was, according to Fekkai, "a challenge."


Don't Equate Red With 'Bimbo'
To the Editor:
Camille Lavington should use some of the "$10,000 a day" she earns to hire someone to check her remarks before they appear in print. ("Image-Making, From Soup to Sales Pitch," Executive Life, Dec. 8.) There are quite a few of us professional women business owners who proudly wear Borghese Red lipstick and nail polish and take umbrage at being called "bimbo." As she should know, good manners begin at home.
ELAINE ADES SACHNOFF  Evanston, Ill., Dec. 8


Quotations of the Day
"The Black Sea Fleet must be Ukrainian and is part of the armed forces of the republic." -- COL.
GEN.
KONSTANTIN MOROZOV, Defense Minister of Ukraine.  [ 6:3. ] "All our soldiers must feel secure -- they will be under the protection of the Russian Government." -- RUSLAN KHASBULATOV, Speaker of the Russian Parliament.  [ 6:6. ]


Tech Notes; All Aboard For Virtuality
Virtual reality is becoming reality.
W Industries of Leicester, England, is manufacturing a virtual reality system for use in video arcades and other entertainment spots to be distributed in the United States this year by a division of Edison Brothers Stores of St.
Louis.
Game software is being provided by Spectrum Holobyte of Alameda, Calif.
In virtuality, participants wear helmets containing screens that show three-dimensional computer-generated images.
The helmets also block out the real world, giving participants the illusion of being completely immersed in the computer's fantasy world.


The View From the Front Of the Bus
IN my nightmares I stand in front of a bus facing 44 restless tourists, of all ages, personalities, expectations and demands.
I'm supposed to describe the passing scenery to them, supply colorful anecdotes from local history, but the windows are all fogged up, and what's more I've forgotten my spiel, other than the words
encompassing three geological epochs.
The bus skids along on its chassis, the wheels having fallen off; a man with a foghorn voice sitting in back shouts out complaints about our lunch stop; I have marinara sauce on my necktie; my driver has lost his way.
Such, 10 years later, is the psychological residue of the three seasons I spent as a tour director for one of America's largest bus-tour companies, leading their "Cape Cod and the Islands" tour of southeastern New England.
Seven days a week, 20 weeks in a row, I worked as a combination nursemaid, lecturer, social director, group psychologist, diplomat and scout (
shepherd
is the occupation I listed on my tax forms each year). It was a demanding job, but not a bad one for an apprentice novelist; a heavy dose of real and not-so-real life, followed by seven months off in which to recuperate from the mileage and to write.


Lesbian Presbyterian Pastor To Lead Church in Rochester
The Presbyterian Church's first openly lesbian minister has been appointed a local church pastor, becoming the first lesbian to reach that post, the denomination said today.
In a briefing sent to leaders of the 2.9 million-member Presbyterian Church (USA), the church's news service said the Rev.
Jane Adams Spahr has been appointed co-pastor of the Downtown Presbyterian Church of Rochester, effective April 1.


Supporters of Georgia's President Stage a Protest Without Incident
Heavy gunfire echoed today through the Georgian capital, Tbilisi, but a demonstration by supporters of President Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia went ahead without bloodshed.
The gathering of about 300 people had raised fears of a repetition of the violence that took place on Friday, when opposition gunmen opened fire on Gamsakhurdia supporters who defied the rebels' ban on demonstrations.


Karen K. Miller To Wed in May
Karen Kay Miller and Frank James Pensiero, both editors at The Wall Street Journal in New York, are engaged to be married in May.
Miss Miller, 28 years old, is an assistant news editor on the paper's overseas copy desk and a graduate of the University of Missouri.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Robert and Dr.
Phyllis Miller of Columbia, Mo.
Her father is a department director at the University of Missouri's College of Veterinary Medicine.
Her mother is an assistant director of the Instructional Materials Laboratory at the University of Missouri, a curriculum development laboratory for the university and for the State of Missouri.


Righting, Not Rewriting History
To the Editor:
If Tom Wicker originally covered President Kennedy's assassination with the same naivete on the politics of power in the United States displayed in his article on "J. F. K.," it is no wonder people like Oliver Stone still have to work to get to the truth.
In doing so, Mr.
Stone has come to the conclusion, as have many others -- including the House Select Committee on Assassinations in 1979 -- that the Warren Commission was incorrect in its lone-assassin theory.


All About/Basketball Shoes; High Tops: High Style, High Tech, High Cost
When Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls basketball team began advertising basketball shoes a few years ago -- the Air Jordan line by Nike Inc. -- he was selling high-tech style as much as performance.
Unlike their low-tech, black-and-white predecessors, today's basketball shoes are made of light-weight leathers and synthetics dyed in a dazzling array of colors with vivid, high-contrast, graphic designs.
They are also constructed with sophisticated cushioning devices and fitting systems.
And they are expensive.
PF Flyers and U.S.
Keds, the standbys of a generation or two ago, rarely cost more than $10 or $15 a pair -- roughly $20 now.
Today's popular styles can cost as much as $160.


Chess
The first shock from China was 21-year-old Xie Jun's winning the women's world championship in October.
The second is that three of the six players who took top places in the women's interzonal tournament, qualifying them for the next round of eliminations to pick a challenger for Xie in the fall of 1993, are her compatriots.
Considering that China was not a part of the International Chess Federation until 1975, this is extraordinary.
In the tournament, which ended on Nov. 25 in Subotica, Yugoslavia, Nona Gaprindashvili, a former titleholder from the Soviet Union, shared first place with Peng Zhaoqin of China, each scoring 9-4 in the 34-player Swiss-system event.
Third place was shared by Irina Levitina of Teaneck, N.J., and Nana Ioseliani of the Soviet Union, each tallying 8 1/2-4 1/2.
The last two qualifying places were taken by Wang Pin and Qin Kanying of China, each with 8-5.


The Course Not Taken
WHILE many people recall their college years with a mixture of satisfaction and nostalgia, some have regrets.
Given what they know today, these alumni look wistfully back at the course not taken, the class that could have changed their life -- if only they'd bothered to register.


Saralyn Mark To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Andre Mark of Denver have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Saralyn Mark to Jonathan Seth Wolin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold L. Wolin of Hewlett, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Dr.
Mark, 30 years old, will become a fellow in endocrinology in July at the University of California at San Francisco.
She graduated from Barnard College and received her M.D. from New York University.
Her father owns Andre Mark Realty in Denver.


Catching a Mediterranean Flavor With Salt Cod
SALT COD (also known as baccala in Italy) is a humble food that has become something of a luxury.
Dried in the sun and salted, it has for centuries been a basic dish in Europe, particularly around the Mediterranean.
It is the main ingredient in the famous French dish called brandade, in which salt cod is whipped into a puree with potatoes, garlic and olive oil.
It is also extremely popular in Italy, where it is traditionally eaten at Christmastime and New Year's.
In the United States, salt cod can be found in Spanish, Portuguese, Greek and Italian markets, in specialty stores and in some of the larger supermarkets.
Choose plump, soft pieces with an ivory-colored flesh and, if possible, avoid stringy tail ends, which may never lose their leathery quality even when cooked.


Wired Strings


Items to Augment a Basic Tool Kit
MANY home repair tasks can be accomplished with only a basic kit of tools: tape measure, claw hammer, crosscut saw, hack saw, regular and Phillips-head screwdrivers, pliers, adjustable wrench and electric drill.
But owning some other tools can broaden the range of jobs one can do and make some familiar chores easier.
Following is a list of tools to augment a basic kit.
To save money, buy tools only as needed.


On the Street; An Italian Outdoors on Fifth Avenue
Fifth Avenue over the New Year week was alive with Italian tourists on shopping splurges or stopoffs on the way to the Caribbean.
New York City's luxury hotels were jammed with women dressed in their functional everyday idea of status dress.
They appeared in a harmony of spice colors: cinnamon, mustard, nutmeg, paprika, thyme, ginger and clove, along with taupes and bone colors anchored by terra cotta and olive green.
That seemed the first rule of the Italian look.
The second was apparently that the silhouette must be rigorously adhered to, creating an unmistakable national fashion identity for the Italians, unlike the American mandate to "do your own thing."


Social Events
Ice Skating Party
Jan. 14 -- For 76 years, the Irvington Institute for Medical Research on East 56th Street has supported programs and researchers in immunology, with much of its effort now directed at seeking a cure for AIDS.
The institute's annual winter skating party to raise funds will be from 7 to 11 P.M. at the ice skating rink at Rockefeller Center.
The evening includes dinner at the American Festival Cafe at the rink.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 758-8250.
Evening for Jewish Guild
Jan. 14 -- The Jewish Guild for the Blind will hold its annual dinner and dance at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street, starting with cocktails at 7.
The benefit, which also includes games, will help support the guild's numerous programs for people who are blind or have multiple handicaps.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 769-6239.
Richmond Center Musicale
Jan. 15 -- Marvin Hamlisch will present an evening of music and commentary at the Harmonie Club, 4 East 60th Street, to benefit the Richmond Children's Center, which has cared for children with severe handicaps since 1973 in its buildings overlooking the Hudson River in Yonkers.
The evening starts with cocktails and hors d'oeuvres at 6; entertainment at 7.
Tickets, $150, from (914) 968-1900.


Holy Cross Coach
PETER VAAS, a Notre Dame assistant, became head coach at Holy Cross yesterday, and called the chance to head his alma mater's football program "a dream come true."
Vaas, 39 years old, was quarterbacks coach at Notre Dame and is also a former head coach at Allegheny. (AP)


Tragic Twist to a Difficult Season Strengthens Lions' Resolve
The flickering image of tackle Mike Utley making a block on film is at once eerie and then heartening to Detroit tackle Roman Fortin, Utley's best friend and teammate with the Lions.
Fortin was watching Utley's work in film of the Lions' Oct. 27 game against Dallas in preparation for this afternoon's National Football Conference divisional playoff game against the Cowboys at the Silverdome.
A scant three weeks later, Utley was paralyzed from the chest down after making a block in a game with the Los Angeles Rams on Nov. 17.
Utley, confined to a wheelchair, is now a undergoing rehabilitation at Craig Hospital in surburban Denver.


Stabilize the Banks and Reverse the Recession; Pension Borrowing
To the Editor:
In "The Economy: Go Fast, and Slow" (editorial, Dec. 19), you imply that a business could borrow from its own pension fund and use these "tax-subsidized" dollars for "tax-subsidized" investments.
This ambiguity results from the preceding sentences, which paraphrased read: It makes little sense to allow businesses to deduct the entire cost of long-lived investments with tax laws that also permit tax-free contributions to pension funds.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SUBWAY LIVES 24 Hours in the Life of the New York City Subway.
By Jim Dwyer.
Crown, $20.


Gertrude Shurr, Dancer, 88, Dies; Was Among Pioneers of the 20's
Gertrude Shurr, who performed in the 1920's and 30's with such pioneering American modern dance companies as Denishawn, the Humphrey-Weidman Concert Company and the early Martha Graham company, died on Thursday at her home in Tucson, Ariz.
She was 88 years old.
She died of congestive heart failure, said Dr. Rachael Yocom, a friend.


Miss Hoit Plans A June Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Roger O. Hoit of Hingham, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sarah Overton Hoit, to Burke William Whitman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Homer William Whitman Jr. of Atlanta.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Hoit, 25 years old, is studying for an M.B.A. at Harvard University.
She graduated from Dartmouth College, as did her fiance.
Her father is president of the architectural firm of Strekalovsky &amp; Hoit in Hingham.
Her mother, Nancy Rosenberry Hoit, was until recently the executive director of the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children in Boston.


Ms. Shackman Weds
Beverly Sisskind Shackman, an associate in the law firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby &amp; MacRae, and Dr.
Lawrence J. Cohn, an attending cardiologist at Lenox Hill Hospital, both in New York, were married last evening at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Sica in Bronxville, N.Y.
Rabbi James Perman officiated.
Mrs.
Cohn's first marriage ended in divorce, as did her husband's.


Birds Contribute Color to a Lively Yard
PERHAPS it is their sweet sound.
Or their bright colors or just their presence.
But feeding birds is always a plus.
One of the best ways to be sure they will come to the yard is to supply their favorite foods, especially if the winter is harsh.
This custom is also a way to learn what species are about.
To reinforce this process, keep a bird guide near the window to identify that chance rare one that may come around.
Also, keep binoculars in a convenient place for a quick grab.
These magnifiers are handy because sometimes it is difficult to detect that eye line or wing patch.
Having said all this, there still are a few pointers to keep in mind.


What to Call the Russians
HAPPY NEW YEAR, C.I.S.!
Or should that be -- Welcome to the list of the names of nations, S.N.G.!


Corporate Incentive To Teach
SCHOOLS clamor for dedicated teachers, while corporations send managers to the unemployment lines.
Doesn't seem fair, does it?
The Chevron Corporation doesn't think so.
To pare down payroll with a minimum of pain, the San Francisco-based oil company is letting employees with five years' experience, no matter how young, take early retirement.
And, in a fillip stemming from equal parts philanthropy and self-interest, Chevron will pay $4,000 toward tuition if they go to school for teaching credentials.


Recycle the Budget Agreement
One year after its implementation, the budget agreement of 1990 has achieved a bizarre status: worshiped as a kind of totem by the Bush Administration, it is simultaneously scorned by fiscal zealots as a sham that did nothing to reduce the Federal deficit.
Both views are wrong.
The budget agreement did cut the deficit.
It's just that cutting the deficit did nothing to help our stagnant economy, which, as a perverse consequence, will yield a record $362 billion deficit in fiscal 1992.
In short, the budget agreement performed as advertised and failed miserably anyway.


Danielle Lerner to Marry in April
Mr. and Mrs.
Saul Lerner of Baldwin Harbor, L.I., and Lauderhill, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Danielle Suzanne Lerner to Paul Nicholas Eliades, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Eliades of Baldwin, L.I.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Lerner, 24 years old, is an account executive with Eastern News Distributor, a Hearst Corporation subsidiary that distributes magazines, in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Adelphi University.


A Limo in Time
To the Editor: At 2 P.M. on a Monday in August, I was at home here in Waterford, Conn., when I got a call from a friend on his way to a 7:30 P.M.
London flight out of Kennedy Airport.
John had just realized he had left his passport at home in nearby Groton Long Point.
For me to deliver the passport by trying to get from New York City to eastern Connecticut, then to Kennedy was pure folly -- especially without a car; there was just not enough time.
Well, the solution was as elegant as it was simple.
"No problem," was the answer when I spoke to a young person named Florine at Connecticut Limousine Service.
"What was the person's name; the airline, the flight number, the departure time?" If I would bring the passport to the New Haven terminal (half an hour from Waterford), there would be a labeled envelope waiting (it was) and the counter person would put it on a bus in time to reach my friend at the airport.
She did, and it did.
The charge for all this was
zero!
(I did give the counter person $10, which she was reluctant to take, $5 for the driver and if I ever see Florine, I'll give her $5, too).
These people saved me eight hours of driving, and avoided complication and disarray for my friend.
EDWIN WILLIAM POWELL Waterford, Conn.


Cultural Impersonators
To the Editor:
In 1956, Jorge Luis Borges, who can be read via the categories of Latin American, visually impaired and sui generis, anticipated Henry Louis Gates Jr.'s discussion of literary authenticity.
His
ficcion
"Pierre Menard, Author of Don Quixote" imagines a 20th-century novelist rewriting chapters of "Don Quixote" verbatim but creating a book quite distinct from Cervantes', precisely because the context of its production and reception is so radically different.
If a monkey doodling at the typewriter happened to pound out the precise text of "Hamlet," the result would be a dramatic experience as different from Shakespeare's as if authorship by the Earl of Oxford were definitively established.
If Sholom Aleichem were somehow proved to have composed "Mein Kampf," reading the book would suddenly become a very different matter from what it is now.
While authorship should not be used as a stamp of kashrut, our awareness of it ineluctably and profoundly shapes the transaction that we call reading.
Discovery that a venerated "Vermeer" is a forgery does not necessarily diminish the painting's brilliance; it will still be the same arrangement of shades and shapes.
But it does and should color our viewing.
STEVEN G. KELLMAN San Antonio


Donations to Neediest Cases Make an Operation Possible
When the doctor told Lucilla Santiago two months ago that she needed an operation to remove a tumor from her ovaries, she asked him, "How much?"
The answer -- $4,000 -- was more than she had.
But she hardly heard the doctor, for she was thinking about her husband, and his decision to cancel his life insurance policy just before he died of a heart attack in 1986.
She also thought about the arthritis


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
BATMOBILE IN CAR SHOW
The original Batmobile from the 1950's "Batman" television series will be one of more than 100 unusual cars on display at the White Plains Custom Car Show next weekend.
Held each year since 1981 in the County Center in White Plains, the event is scheduled Friday from 6 to 11 P.M., Saturday from noon to 11 P.M. and next Sunday from noon to 10 P.M.


Getting About by Computer: Step-by-Step Programs
WHERE'S a good, affordable place to stay or dine in Dallas or London?
How can you make the most of frequent-flier miles?
What's the most direct way to drive from New York to Cleveland, or the most interesting?
Traditionally, people have turned to books, periodicals, travel agents or friends for answers to such questions.
But now, software can help.


An Adviser Speaks Out
To the Editor:
Tom Wicker castigates the former District Attorney of New Orleans, Jim Garrison, for trying to do what Texas law officers and courts have studiously avoided.
Mr.
Garrison attempted to the best of his ability to prove what men like Lyndon B. Johnson had come to believe: that the assassination in Dallas had been part of a conspiracy.
Because Mr.
Garrison's account of that trial provides Oliver Stone with a complete panoply of "assassination lore," it gives him an excellent foundation for that part of his broad drama.
From that base Mr.
Stone goes on to present a full spectrum of facts, such as President Kennedy's documented plan to withdraw all Americans from Vietnam by the end of 1965 and to bring 1,000 of those men home by Christmas 1963.
That Presidential directive created enormous pressures within the United States political and industrial complex.


Why Japanese Adore Vending Machines
Vending machines are everywhere in this supposedly tradition-bound country, dispensing nearly all of life's necessities, and many of the frills.
In addition to the usual train tickets, soft drinks and cigarettes, Japan's colorfully turned-out machines dispense jewelry, fresh flowers, frozen beef, rice, whisky, hamburgers, pornographic magazines, videocassettes and batteries.
From bustling urban intersections to the most bucolic rural lane, there is sure to be a humming box to satisfy a consumer's needs for a few coins.


Paris as It Used to Be: The Surprising 10th
ON a recent visit to Paris I got two distinct reactions when I mentioned the city's 10th arrondissement.
An American journalist based in Paris sniffed slightly and gave a good imitation of the classic Gallic shrug.
It's pretty grimy, he said, and if you weren't interested in streetwalkers there wasn't much to draw you up there except the New Morning jazz club.
But a French pianist who has lived in Paris for more than 20 years smiled and spread his arms.
"The
tennnth
," he said, drawing out the number with evident affection. "That is Paris as it once was, without the Americans and before the Japanese."
Both were right.
The 10th is in many places -- but not all -- grimy of aspect, its often narrow streets crowded and boisterously commercial, and at night along Rue du Faubourg St.-Denis there is a woman artfully posed in almost every other doorway.
But the resident pianist was right, too, both in his affectionate regard for this district, which contains so many surprises, and in his observation that it remains immune from those chic foreign influences that have so transformed the arrondissements of the city's inner ring.


State of the City: Trouble Ahead
AS he took stock of his city last week, Mayor David N. Dinkins let his fellow New Yorkers do much of the talking for a change, quoting a homeless man on a breadline, a mother struggling to find child care, the family of a gay man slain in a bias attack, and promising to listen and help them all.
But if the Mayor's State of the City speech was a reaffirmation of his sensitivity to the problems that surround him at the midpoint of what he pointedly called his first term, it was also a reminder of the work ahead.
Absent were specifics on how he will carry out his proposals, from revamping neighborhood health clinics to speeding up city construction projects to boost the economy, or on the deep spending cuts he will announce when he presents his preliminary budget in two weeks.


Playing as a Team
KURT WOLFF
A Portrait in Essays and Letters.
Edited by Michael Ermarth.
Translated by Deborah Lucas Schneider.
Illustrated. 223 pp.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. $24.95.


At Last, Women In the Biathlon
This was the moment that a group of young women, considered eccentric by some, had worked for, winter and summer, for four years.
So why shouldn't Joan Smith's brother pop a champagne cork?
And why shouldn't a disappointed Anna Sonnerup walk off with tears in her eyes?


Amid Bright Colors, an Oasis of White
White is hot.
It's also cool.
At a time when color is exploding all over the fashion world, white is soothing.
Its impact will be growing in the next few seasons.
Most designers like it neat: no jewels, no color accents, no complications.
Women whose bodies can take the glare have long known that the most dramatic style they can wear to the beach is a white swimsuit -- black is the second.
The impact of a white organdy blouse or even a white T-shirt is unchallenged.
White silk, linen or cotton pants have long been a summer staple in smart women's summer wardrobes.


Chad Says It Crushed Rebellion, Killing 425
The Government said today that it had crushed a rebellion by forces loyal to former President Hissen Habre and killed 425 of his troops in fighting west of Ndjamena, the capital.
An official communique on the state radio said hundreds more rebels had been wounded when Government forces recaptured the town of Bol and three smaller army bases in the Lake Chad area of this African country.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Bear, Del.;
A COMMUNITY of town houses is enjoying brisk sales thanks to a partnership created to stimulate affordable housing.
The community, Amberfield, about six miles southwest of Wilmington off Interstate 40 in the small community of Bear, is the first development to offer homes to moderate-income buyers under the new Delaware Housing Partnership, whose members include the state Housing Authority, New Castle County, the Delaware Business Roundtable and the Delaware State Chamber of Commerce.
Its creation, meant to bring home ownership over the next three to five years to up to 800 buyers with incomes as low as $24,900, was announced by Gov.
Michael N. Castle in September.


Catching a Mediterranean Flavor With Salt Cod
SALT COD (also known as baccala in Italy) is a humble food that has become something of a luxury.
Dried in the sun and salted, it has for centuries been a basic dish in Europe, particularly around the Mediterranean.
It is the main ingredient in the famous French dish called brandade, in which salt cod is whipped into a puree with potatoes, garlic and olive oil.
It is also extremely popular in Italy, where it is traditionally eaten at Christmastime and New Year's.
In the United States, salt cod can be found in Spanish, Portuguese, Greek and Italian markets, in specialty stores and in some of the larger supermarkets.
Choose plump, soft pieces with an ivory-colored flesh and, if possible, avoid stringy tail ends, which may never lose their leathery quality even when cooked.


Herzog, Still Shopping, Makes Up With Gilbert
A few weeks ago, Whitey Herzog seemed ready to bury a hatchet in Dennis Gilbert's head.
Now, reality has overridden anger, and Herzog has buried the hatchet with the agent.
As a result, the friends-again will meet Tuesday to talk about the best baseball free agent still unsigned, Danny Tartabull.
"I called Go-Go the other day," Herzog said, referring to Gilbert by the name he acquired as a minor league player with the Mets.
"I said let's forget about the Bonilla thing and let's go from there."


Barcelona Theft
To the Editor: My friend and I were mugged in Barcelona on Aug. 26.
Although warned by our hotel clerk not to venture into the area of the Iglesia de San Pablo del Campo, since we had traveled all over Spain in August with only two minor incidents -- one in Madrid and the other in Seville, we went to this site, just off the Ramblas.
There wasn't much to see -- the church was closed -- and we walked a short distance to the subway to return to our hotel.
On entering the subway, a young man. came from nowhere and grabbed at my bag.
It was hard to take off easily, so he knocked me to the ground and my friend was pushed and went flying down.
I was kicked in the shins and had many bruises.
Of course my bag was taken.


Falcons Needed the Run-and-Bumbershoot
When the Atlanta Falcons arrived at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium this morning and saw the steady rain pelting the field and turning it into mud, they knew that their Red Gun offense could drown and that their playoff hopes might go down with it.
"I expected problems with footing in the passing game," said the Falcons' quarterback, Chris Miller.
"There was no way I thought it would come to this."


Items to Augment a Basic Tool Kit
MANY home repair tasks can be accomplished with only a basic kit of tools: tape measure, claw hammer, crosscut saw, hack saw, regular and Phillips-head screwdrivers, pliers, adjustable wrench and electric drill.
But owning some other tools can broaden the range of jobs one can do and make some familiar chores easier.
Following is a list of tools to augment a basic kit.
To save money, buy tools only as needed.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 5, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Plume, $15.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
2
35
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
3
7
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
4
6
COLD FIRE, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A despondent reporter finds hope and romance while she tracks the course of a good Samaritan.
5
10
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $6.99.) The experiences of a couple on a trek across Europe during the ice age.
6
1
COYOTE WAITS, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The murder of a Navajo tribal policeman involves an ancient artifact.
7
3
STAR TREK VI: The Undiscovered Country, by J. M. Dillard. (Pocket, $4.99.) Enemies of the Federation capture Captain Kirk and Dr.
McCoy.
8
28
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
9
19
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four tales of late-night horror.
10
6
PRISONER OF MY DESIRE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 12th-century English belle seeks to capture the heart of a lord.
11
4
THE FOURTH K, by Mario Puzo. (Bantam, $5.99.) The tumultuous career of President Francis Xavier Kennedy, cousin of John.
12
2
MURDER AT THE NATIONAL CATHEDRAL, by Margaret Truman. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A professor-sleuth investigates the death of an Episcopal priest.
13
2
THE WITNESS, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $4.99.) A Philadelphia cop finds himself on the hit list of a band of robber-terrorists.
14
1
SLIVER, by Ira Levin. (Bantam, $5.99.) An editor is watched, haunted and menaced by the man who owns her apartment building.
15
7
POSSESSION, by A. S. Byatt. (Vintage, $12.) A pair of British academics pursue the relationship between two Victorian poets.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
111
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED dd bks/no con IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.
2
31
THE CAT WHO CAME FOR CHRISTMAS, by Cleveland Amory. (Penguin, $7.95.) A self-styled curmudgeon's memoir of a cat that adopted and soon owned him.
3
41
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
4
25
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman.
5
33
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
6
9
A LIFE ON THE ROAD, by Charles Kuralt. (Ivy, $5.99.) The memoirs of the television newscaster.
7
2
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
8 *
26
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
9
10
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, feel, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
10
426
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
21
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
14
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
3
10
UNNATURAL SELECTIONS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Far Side" cartoons.
4
6
A SOUTHERN BELLE PRIMER, by Maryln Schwartz. (Doubleday, $10.) A guide to propriety and protocol below the Mason-Dixon line; humor.
5
2
AN ALTOGETHER NEW BOOK OF TOP TEN LISTS, by David Letterman, Steve O'Donnell, et al. (Pocket, $10.) Humor.
6 *
4
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1992. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Assistants Named
RICHARD WILLIAMSON, the former head coach of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, has been hired as Cincinnati's receivers coach by DAVID SHULA, who recently took over the Bengals.
Meanwhile in San Diego, BOBBY ROSS, the new Chargers' coach, hired two assistants from his Georgia Tech staff and might hire two more.
Ross said CHUCK PRIEFER, who coached Georgia Tech's defensive backfield the last four seasons, will coach the special teams, and JOHN MISCIAGNA, Tech's director of recruiting, will coordinate the Chargers' computerized game analysis. (AP)


Jose Guerrero, 77, Painter Known for Colors and Abstract Imaginery
Jose Guerrero, a Spanish-born painter who worked for many years in the United States, died in Barcelona on Dec. 23.
He was 77 years old.
His death was caused by complications from multiple myeloma, a form of cancer, said his son, Jose Antonio Guerrero.


May Wedding For Miss Miele
Mr. and Mrs.
Joel A. Miele of Howard Beach, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter Janet Ann Miele to Ronald Richard D'Angelo, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald V. D'Angelo of North Arlington, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Miele, 25 years old, is an administrator trainee at Peninsula General Nursing Home in Far Rockaway, Queens.
She graduated from Hofstra University, where she also received a master's degree in health administration.
Her father is a senior partner in Miele Associates, an architectural and engineering firm in Middle Village, Queens.


Results Plus
HOCKEY A Bronze for the U.S.
The United States won the bronze medal in the World Junior Hockey Championships at Fussen, Germany, yesterday, beating Czechoslovakia, 3-2, to finish with the best record ever for an American team in the tournament.
The gold medal went to the Commonwealth of Independent States, formerly the Soviet Union, which beat Canada, 7-2.
Sweden won the silver by beating Finland, 6-4.


Miss Schooler Is to Be Married
The engagement of Kimberly Ilene Schooler, a daughter of Sheila Schooler of Port Jefferson Station, L.I., and Gerald Schooler of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., to Bradley Robert Peters, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
G.
Michael Peters of Belle Terre, L.I., has been announced by their parents.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Schooler, 22 years old, is the Project Reach Out coordinator for Catholic Charities in Syracuse.
She graduated from C. W. Post College.
Her father is a car salesman in Fort Lauderdale.
Her mother is a receptionist for the J. P. C. Development Corporation, a real estate concern in Smithtown, L.I.


A COSMOLOGICAL EVENT
Having just read Timothy Ferris's article "A Cosmological Event" (Dec. 15), I find myself marveling not at the "course of cosmic history" but at the dialectical gymnastics required to avoid the obvious.
Ferris considers the astonishing tales of hikers in free fall and determines, as a result, that the near-death experience may well be a matter of polypeptides.
He asks why human beings undergo not agony but ecstasy on their deathbeds, and concludes: "It may not be unreasonable to suppose that life on earth resonates with internal and external harmonies as yet unnoticed by science."
Pardon me, but I fail to understand why harmonic communication with the forces of earth should be a more plausible explanation for near-death experiences than the presence of an afterlife.
Where Ferris sees polypeptides, I see God.
AMY BIANCOLLI RINGWALD
Albany


George Fichtenbaum, Travel Executive, 66
George L. Fichtenbaum, a retired travel industry official, died on Monday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 66 years old and lived in Little Neck, Queens.
He died of complications from cancer, his family said.


Mutual Funds; Strategies for a New Ball Game
After a banner year, when the average stock fund rose 30.7 percent, mutual fund investors may wonder where to go from here.
The outlook is not so bright for 1992.
Most experts predict a less-than-robust economic recovery that slows investment returns to just 10 percent or so.


Say Hello To the Nanny From Hell
A happily married Mother-to-be is sexually molested by her gynecologist during a physical examination.
After the distraught woman complains to the authorities, the doctor commits suicide.
In the turmoil that follows, his widow, who is also pregnant, suffers a miscarriage.
Emotionally shattered and financially ruined, the widow is bent on revenge against the woman who she believes has destroyed her life.
A number of months later, she hires herself out as a mother's helper to the unsuspecting victim.
And that is only the first 10 minutes of "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle."


FLASHCARD
MORE American teen-agers believe in heaven than in hell.
The latest Gallup Youth Survey reports that 90 percent of the teen-agers interviewed said they believe there is a heaven where people who have led good lives are eternally rewarded.
By contrast, 75 percent of the 513 youngsters ages 13 to 17 said that they believe in a hell where the wicked are punished.
The nationwide poll found that teen-agers who have attended religious services during the previous week were more likely to believe in either heaven or hell than those who did not attend services.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Thursday
Producer price index, percent change
0.2
0.2
Producer prices, without food and energy
0.3
0.2
Initial jobless claims, in thousands
n/a
440
Money supply, change in billions
n/a
$2
Friday
Non-farm payrolls, thousands
-241
-45
Unemployment, percent
6.8
6.8
Monday: Late December auto sales
Tuesday: President Bush visits Tokyo
Wednesday: Auction of $9.75 billion of seven-year Treasury notes
Thursday: Money supply * Germany's Bundesbank council meets
Friday: Wholesale trade
(Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


What, Exactly, Makes a Nation a Nation?
To the Editor:
"Birthing a Nation: What Europe and the Soviets Face" (The Week in Review, Dec. 15), your essay on political changes in western Europe and Russia, may have chosen a wrong headline for its argument.


UP AND COMING: Kimberly Williams; For an Actress, Life Rivals Art, But Only So Much
Kimberly Williams, the 20-year-old actress who plays the bride in "Father of the Bride," would like to make one thing clear: she does not intend to have a fancy wedding.
It's the question of the hour for this newcomer of the season, and over a shrimp cocktail at the Regency Hotel in Manhattan, she is forced once again to disabuse a reporter of the notion.
"My parents have already assured me that I'm not going to have a wedding like that," she says, referring to the movie's silk-and-satin, swan-bedecked, $250-a-plate extravaganza.


POSTINGS: On the Waterfront; More Office Space for Jersey City
Harsimus Cove South, the name given to a 52-acre development site along the Hudson River in Jersey City, is adjusting to the times.
Its developer has begun to market it to builders primarily as a commercial site and has changed the name in the process.
The project is now called Hudson Exchange.
The site, filled with scraggly marsh weeds, lies between Newport, the big Lefrak Organization residential-retail-office project to the north, and the Harborside Financial Center to the south.
Initially, Harsimus Cove South was to have up to 2,200 apartments and town houses and eight million square feet of offices.
An additional 30 acres, which are under water, are to be used for a 250-boat marina.
But now "we are changing the development's emphasis by replacing housing along the water's edge with offices and adding more retail than orginally planned," said Thomas Leane, the project manager for the owner, National Bulk Carriers of Manhattan, which is owned by Daniel K. Ludwig.


OPENING THE DOOR
As someone who has lived in a Manhattan brownstone, I, too, have experienced middle-of-the-night pleas for help for a variety of emergencies.
Sadly, I have ignored most of them.
I have a family, and it comes first.
Once, when a request sounded legitimate, I offered to make a phone call (in this instance, the stranger left when I offered to do this).
I find it hard to understand why Grossman did not exercise this much safer option.
SUZANNNE DeYOUNG
New York, N.Y.


More Ratted On than Ratting
THE TANGO PLAYER
By Christoph Hein.
Translated by Philip Boehm. 220 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $20.


Philippa McC. Bainbridge Affianced
Mr. and Mrs.
Frank M. Bainbridge of Birmingham, Ala., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Philippa McClellan Bainbridge, to Michael Straus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Straus of South Orange, N.J., and Delray Beach, Fla.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Bainbridge, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Alabama and its law school.
She was until recently an associate at the New York law firm of Davis, Markel &amp; Edwards.
Her father is a partner in the Birmingham law firm of Bainbridge, Mims &amp; Rogers.


U.S. Sees Major Policy Shift in Plan for Commonwealth Loans
The United States' decision to endorse full membership in two international lending institutions for six former Soviet republics is the latest sign of a sweeping change in American policy toward taking responsibility for their economic recovery, Administration and banking officials said yesterday.
The changes, first spelled out by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d last month in his Soviet policy speech at Princeton, are forcing agencies across the Federal Government to reconsider longstanding policies.


Redskins, Broncos Advance in Playoffs
The Redskins reached the National Football Conference's title game with a 24-7 playoff victory over the Atlanta Falcons in Washington.
In the American Conference, the Broncos rallied for a 26-24 triumph over the Houston Oilers in Denver, winning on a field goal with 16 seconds remaining. (Some copies of the sports section went to press before the end of the Houston-Denver game.)
SportsSunday.


In This Book, The ABC's Of Therapy
FOR a young child about to embark on psychological counseling, the world can become full of anxious questions.
Trying to allay those anxieties, two psychologists, Marc A. Nemiroff and Jane Annunziata, have written "A Child's First Book About Play Therapy."
Using large type and colorful illustrations, the authors take children ages 4 to 7 through the process of play therapy, a form of psychotherapy in which children convey their emotions by playing with dolls and toys.


Eve M. Kahn, Writer, to Wed
Dr.
Samuel and Renee Kahn of Stamford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Eve Marya Kahn, to Bradley Grant Kulman, a son of Margot Green of New York and Peyton Kulman of Boca Raton, Fla.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kahn, 29 years old, is a freelance writer specializing in design.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a child psychologist in Stamford.
Her mother is an adjunct professor of art and architectural history at the University of Connecticut and a historic preservation consultant.


In Hartford, a Revival of Albee's 'Virginia Woolf'
THE word was out even though the reviews were not yet in.
A stunning new play, the first full-length work by an acknowledged Off Broadway playwright in his Broadway debut was about to open and it was already a hot ticket.
Paul Weidner remembered that he was "lucky to get a last-minute cancellation in the fifth row at preview prices" for "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" by Edward Albee.
Then a 27-year-old Yale Drama School graduate, Mr.
Weidner held odd jobs as a gofer, an Off Off Broadway actor and a stage manager, he said.
"I was a hopeful director, eager to break into theater, expecting it to turn into something wonderful."


Competition Winner Makes a Connecticut Debut
AT 3 P.M. today in Cathedral Theater in Hartford, Chamber Music Plus presents one of the first recitals of the new year, an excursion into "Viennese Verve," with Sonatas of Mozart and Robert Starer leading to the B-flat Trio of Franz Schubert.
The violinist Renee Jolles joins the group's founders, the cellist Harry Clark and the pianist Sanda Schuldmann (232-0085).
Competitions are popular these days but not all artists can play their best under the pressure of auditions and the glare of press coverage.
For those reasons, several alternatives have been developed.
The Avery Fisher Prize for instrumentalists and the Marian Anderson Award for singers are prime examples of prestigious recognitions given to artists who, in most instances, are unaware they are being considered for the honor.
The selections are made by a panel of musicians, managers and others weighing reviews, artist recommendations and evaluations.


Ms. Portman Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Miles B. Portman of East Meadow, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Natalie Iris Portman, to Lawrence Robert Marsh, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gene Marsh of Wyckoff, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Portman, 27 years old, is the women's program coordinator at Covenant House in New York.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Oneonta and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University, as did her fiance.
Her father is the vice president of the American Boarts Crushing Company, an industrial diamond concern in Woodside, Queens.
Her mother, Tamah Portman, is a painter and the president of VIP Parties Inc., a party-planning company in East Meadow.


A Battle Looms for Bush On Another Asian Front
WHEN President Bush returns to Washington this week, he is likely to find that many members of Congress are at least as disturbed by his policy toward China, which is not included on his Asian trip, as they are about his policy toward Japan.
A common lament on Capitol Hill is that the President does not have a consistent or credible policy for dealing with Beijing, whose human rights record is flawed, whose support of authoritarian regimes in Asia is expanding, and whose role in the international arms market is a cause of concern worldwide.
The perception that China policy -- or the lack of it -- is a weak point in Mr.
Bush's handling of foreign affairs stands out all the more because he has more personal knowledge of the Chinese than did any of his predecessors.
In 1974-75 he headed the United States Liaison Office in Beijing, the precursor to the embassy.


Huff-Huff, Bang-Bang: It's Run-and-Shoot Fever
Three of the eight teams that made the National Football League divisional playoffs were run-and-shoot teams, an indication that something about that offense must be working.
Only a few years ago most N.F.L. coaches were saying that the run-and-shoot was a fad that would never take root in the league.


Swiss Tolls
To the Editor: Not long ago I crossed the whole length of Switzerland by car on one of the main expressways, entering from Liechtenstein and exiting at Geneva.
Afterward, I was told by friends that a toll is due for driving on the Swiss expressways and that I could have been heavily fined.
There was not the slightest indication anywhere on the route I took that a toll was due, so I checked with the Swiss Tourist Office in New York.
Yes, the young woman said, a toll was indeed due in the form of a sticker or "vignette," costing 30 Swiss francs.
When I said that I could see no indication that one was required, I was told that signs are posted at border crossings and that one should familiarize oneself with foreign driving regulations.


POSTINGS: $185 Million in Improvements; New Laboratories for City College
As part of a $185 million campus improvement project at City College, the 30-year-old Steinman Hall laboratory building is now under renovation.
The six-story, 300,000-square-foot structure on Convent Avenue, between 140th and 141st Streets, is to get new laboratories, a new facade of steel panels and an additional 14,000 square feet.
The architects are Pomerance &amp; Breines and the mechanical engineers are Ambrosino, DePinto &amp; Schmieder, both of Manhattan.
"The Steinman Hall project is merely one of many ongoing and just-completed renovations," said Prof.
Richard Zerneck, acting director of facilities and space planning.
Also under rehabilitation are Shepard Hall, Harris Hall and Compton/ Goethals Hall.
In January, Professor Zerneck said, the college expects to begin work on the new Herman Goldman Center for Sports and Recreation -- a soccer and lacrosse field ringed by a 400-meter track, with bleachers for 1,500 people.


U.S. Hockey Team Hits Lots of Bumps on Road
The road to Albertville, France, or more precisely to the nearby village of Meribel, has been long and arduous for the United States hockey team.
And the end is still not in sight.
The tired squad, its players weary of life on the road, lost nine straight games before a seven-day Christmas break.


A Shelter Reaches Out to 'Children in Crisis'
A FEW months ago the parents snapped.
They deposited their three children -- 2, 4 and 6 years old -- on a neighbor's doorstep, saying only, "Please take care of them." Then the couple, residents of an affluent town in lower Fairfield County, took off.
The youngsters ended up in three different foster homes across the state.
If they had been 12 and older, they could have found help together at the Youth Shelter on Prospect Street in Greenwich, which provides around-the-clock crisis intervention and is a temporary home for teen-agers with family problems.


In Chappaqua, the Revival of a Chamber Group
CHAMBER MUSIC lovers can look forward to next Saturday at the Chappaqua Library Theater, when the renamed and reorganized Chappaqua Chamber Orchestra performs a revival program.
"Friends of chamber music can mark a joyous event on their calendars," said Mary Rohde, publicity chairwoman of the group.
"Both players and former subscribers have been eager for this community orchestra to resume its excellent concerts."


Q and A
Right to Sue  Question: We bought a small building in Manhattan.
Before signing the contract, we showed the building to a licensed building engineer.
The report said that the mechanical systems and appliances were in good condition.
However, after closing, it was discovered that the wooden columns in the basement were damaged, probably as a result of long-term water action.
The damage had been concealed by the previous owner, who we believe had covered the columns with plasterboard.


Making a Difference; Mr. Oshman's Second Act
Few Silicon Valley entrepreneurs hit the big time twice.
M.
Kenneth Oshman is hoping to be an exception.
Mr.
Oshman, 51, co-founded and was president of the Rolm Corporation, which grew into a major telecommunications equipment company before running into trouble after its acquisition by the International Business Machines Corporation in 1984.


World Markets; The Strange Appeal of a Slowdown
The pace of investment by those who helped to discover the world's emerging stock markets is slowing down because many of the great bargains, like Latin America, have already been well mined.
According to a survey by Kleiman International Consultants, a majority of institutional investors in these markets said they expect to hold onto their current level of investment in these volatile markets in 1992.
Those who plan to increase their share of investment expect it to be at a rate lower than last year.


Outing Peter Ilyich
TCHAIKOVSKY
The Quest for the Inner Man.
By Alexander Poznansky.
Illustrated. 679 pp.
New York: Schirmer Books.


At the Met, Ghosts Come to Applaud 'Ghosts'
First Figaro appeared on-stage in drag, his phony bust nearly bursting out of his bodice as he tried to offer Count Almaviva a fig.
Then he was chased about in a Keystone Kops-style melee, until he leaped onto a giant plastic sultan and set off fireworks from the turban.
But well before this finale to the first act of the new opera "The Ghosts of Versailles," it was clear enough to the laughing audience at the Metropolitan Opera that the composer John Corigliano and the librettist William M. Hoffman were not really writing a conventional sequel to "The Marriage of Figaro."
The characters were the same, many of the allusions similar, and Beaumarchais's own sequel inspired the festivities, but here Figaro was embedded in a fantastical farce, including floating ghosts, perverse villains, Beaumarchais himself and music that merrily and sentimentally plundered from Mozart and Rossini.
The laughter was partly due to funhouse thrills; it even had an edgy, nervous quality.


A Hollow Catharsis
To the Editor:
It appears to be fashionable these days to expend great quantities of creative energy making bold statements about victimized American citizens.
The arts, of course, reflect society in general.
A prolonged recession has hurt many of us and has scared the rest.
Artistic endeavors like "J. F. K." capitalize on our fears by reinforcing the attitude that we aren't responsible: someone else did it -- we need to get even.
Instead of being ennobled by the creative experience, we get a hollow catharsis of anger and defensiveness.
It's a cheap substitute.


In the Real World
To the Editor:
In "Reducing Tenure in the Boardroom" (Forum, Dec. 22), Jayne Barnard points out a problem of lingering unproductive corporate directors.
But her suggestions to address the problem ignore some realities of the world of corporate governance.


Staying by the Beach: Hotels of All Sizes
VISITORS to Santa Monica, drawn by its setting on the Pacific and its proximity to some of the West Coast's best restaurants and museums -- the Getty is only 10 minutes away -- have an appealing choice of accommodations, ranging from the new and modern to the slightly funky to an intimate bed-and-breakfast.
Loews Santa Monica Beach Hotel
Certainly no Santa Monica hotel is better situated than Loews, a 350-room extravaganza on the Pacific that was opened two and a half years ago.
To take advantage of the light and the sweeping views of wide flat beaches, the hotel is built around a five-story glass atrium with a skylight.
To enhance the maritime flavor, the lobby has been decorated in pale blues and pinks, with bamboo sofas and potted palms.
The exterior of Loews Santa Monica Beach Hotel relies on the pinks and beiges popular in seaside resorts.


Oliver Stone Manipulates His Puppet
Oliver Stone's "J. F. K." achieves an unintended irony when it exhorts its audience to be suspicious of unreliable information, since the figure who emerges from this three-hour-and-eight-minute harangue as the most suspect is the film maker himself.
This has nothing to do with Mr.
Stone's opinions about who may have been responsible for the assassination of John Fitzgerald Kennedy, and everything to do with the way those opinions are expressed.
If there's anything that the recent firestorm of front-page news about "J. F. K." makes evident, it's that Mr.
Stone is his own best invention.
As a once-conservative, now-disaffected figure free to question authority and celebrate iconoclasm, he has perfected a beleaguered public posture and a raffish world-weary manner.
This plays very well on talk shows and even better on the screen, where most of Mr.
Stone's heroes have embodied similar attitudes in their quest for truth.


Making a Difference; A Big Break in Biotech
A long-awaited breakthrough finally came late last month for 10-year-old Crop Genetics International and Joseph W. Kelly, its 47-year-old chairman and chief executive.
On Dec. 27, Crop Genetics announced that it had formed an alliance with E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company to develop naturally occurring insect viruses into pesticides.
Without financial and marketing support from large corporate partners, few startup biotechnology companies can hope to survive.
And though Crop Genetics has a long way to go before it can compare its success in developing such alliances to companies like Mycogen and Calgene, even one such deal wins kudos on Wall Street.


The Theater of AIDS: Attention Must Be Paid
In a country beset with so many problems that it is hard to know where to direct a helping hand, the theater seems to have paid greatest attention to AIDS.
The concern is understandable.
The ravages of the epidemic have been particularly acute in the theater, which has suffered horrible losses across the board -- playwrights, performers, designers, as well as all those who labor behind the scenes.
This is not to deny the awful facts of homelessness or the deterioration of the environment or society's increasingly callous disregard for the welfare of its children.
But you fight the scourge on your doorstep first.
And in the theater that's been AIDS.


CAMPUS LIFE: Tufts; A Fraternity, Disciplined Twice, Faces New Threat
It all began last September when members of the Psi Upsilon fraternity chapter were accused of spray-painting obscenities and nude figures on the hood of a student's car.
Within two months, six fraternity members were put on probation and the fraternity itself was suspended for the spring semester.
Now the six students may be dislodged from their off-campus residence in Somerville, a town where many of the university's academic and residential activities are centered.
That is the goal of an angry Somerville alderman, Jack Connolly, who says of the fraternity: "They have an 'Animal House' reputation."


GRADY'S GIFT
I am a descendant of several "Gradys." My mother, grandmother, godmother and aunts have all worked, some longer than others, as domestics in white households at varying points in their lives.
It is within this context that I read Raines's article on his coming of age in Birmingham, Ala.
Regardless of how much Grady may have enriched their lives, the Raines family perceived her largely in terms of the position she held as a maid in the household.
Had they seen her as an individual, with dreams and ambitions, perhaps they might have assisted her in some way in achieving her goals.
The lesson to be learned is that proximity to the powerful is not necessarily beneficial.
This may help whites to understand why so many African-Americans grimace in anger when they hear that a former servant was treated "just like a member of the family." YVONNE V. JONES
Louisville, Ky.


America's Cup In San Diego
A series of tour packages for yacht racing enthusiasts who plan to attend the America's Cup to be held in San Diego from Jan. 14 to May 23 is being offered by Aerotours International.
The programs consist of three nights at the Regency Plaza Hotel in San Diego, a car for four days from Dollar Rent-A-Car (economy class, unlimited mileage), valet parking at the hotel, a one-day pass on the America's Cup viewing vessel and a discount card providing access to several syndicates' compounds and discounts on sightseeing, shopping and local attractions.
The card allows two days at SeaWorld, a day at the San Diego Zoo and a one-day cruise to Ensenada, Mexico, aboard the Pacific Star.
Prices for the fly-drive packages are $222 a person from Jan. 14 to March 26; $267, March 27 to April 13; $346, April 14 to 30; $465, May 1 to 24.
All prices are based on double occupancy; single supplements are available.
AeroTours, which specializes in trips to Australia, organized visits to Perth during the Cup events in 1987.More information: Aerotours, 36 East Third Street, New York, N.Y. 10003; (212) 979-5000 or (800) 223-4555.


A COSMOLOGICAL EVENT
It is possible that some of the visual phenomena associated with near-death experiences, particularly phenomena relating to a dark tunnel followed by brilliant, radiant light, may have to do with successful resuscitation and recovery.
This would be the expected sequence of events if the visual centers of the brain, the occipital lobes, were deprived of, and then resupplied with, blood.
This would happen if the heart stopped and was then restarted.
I trust that a mechanistic explanation does not detract from the beauty or significance of these experiences.
CHARLES B. BRILL, M.D.
Philadelphia


Stabilize the Banks and Reverse the Recession; Help Small Business
To the Editor:
The state of the economy has produced an environment that allows our major corporations to downsize rapidly.
The news media have been making much of this, though it has been going on for some time without fanfare.
With the coming Presidential election, our politicians have noted the increasing number of unemployed.
What has gone unnoticed is that many of the people losing jobs at large companies have been re-employed by small companies.
Small businesses provide more jobs than big business.
Yet we seem to do everything possible to stifle the creation of new companies.


Redskins Score a Very Mushy Victory
The playoff game here this afternoon wasn't pretty, not with the heavy rain or the muddy grass field that became so treacherous -- and certainly not with the Falcons' inability to hold on to the ball, which resulted in six Atlanta turnovers.
It wasn't efficient, not with the wasted turnovers and the never-ending field-goal attempts wide of the goal posts.


Women Take To the Field
NORTHBROOK, ILL., was a sports town even 25 years ago, and not just for men.
Several young women were training for the United States Olympic speed-skating team, and at Glenbrook North High School the largest club was the Girls Athletic Association.
But it didn't seem odd that the school's 1967 yearbook devoted 38 pages to boys' sports and 5 to girls', or that on the faculty there were 22 male coaches and 6 women, or that girls had no interscholastic teams.
That was just the way things were.
Now, Glenbrook North offers 11 interscholastic sports for boys and 11 for girls.
More than 40 percent of the girls are on these teams, and others play intramural sports.
"We can't complain about wanting for anything," said Marilyn Bradley, assistant athletic director.
Girls use the main gym and work out in the weight room.
That's the way things are.
Title IX plus 20


New &amp; Noteworthy
A DANGEROUS WOMAN, by Mary McGarry Morris. (Penguin, $10.) The author of "Vanished" tells the bleak and arresting story of Martha Horgan, a disturbed woman in a small Vermont town whose desperate efforts to be accepted alienate every life she touches.
"At once thrilling and deeply affecting, 'A Dangerous Woman' should burnish Ms. Morris's reputation as one of the most skillful new writers at work in America today," Michiko Kakutani said in The Times last year.
LONELY HEARTS OF THE COSMOS: The Scientific Quest for the Secret of the Universe, by Dennis Overbye. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Somehow, about 10 billion years after the birth of the universe, conglomerations of atoms (little packets of energy forged in stars) congealed into astronomers and cosmologists with the disturbing ability to wonder what it all means.
Last year our reviewer, James Gleick, said Dennis Overbye's spirited chronicle of their scientific adventure makes for "vivid and passionate telling. . . . For his sense of their culture of science -- the traditions, the slang, the rivalries, the unwritten rules -- Mr. Overbye makes himself a wonderful tour guide."


Catching a Mediterranean Flavor With Salt Cod
SALT COD (also known as baccala in Italy) is a humble food that has become something of a luxury.
Dried in the sun and salted, it has for centuries been a basic dish in Europe, particularly around the Mediterranean.
It is the main ingredient in the famous French dish called brandade, in which salt cod is whipped into a puree with potatoes, garlic and olive oil.
It is also extremely popular in Italy, where it is traditionally eaten at Christmastime and New Year's.
In the United States, salt cod can be found in Spanish, Portuguese, Greek and Italian markets, in specialty stores and in some of the larger supermarkets.
Choose plump, soft pieces with an ivory-colored flesh and, if possible, avoid stringy tail ends, which may never lose their leathery quality even when cooked.


Sports of The Times; The Mud Is Redskins' Element
SOMEDAY soon, it will all be antiseptic, the players laboring dry and clean on some artificial carpet in the sterility of a dome.
And what a shame.
The spectacle of the Redskins and the Falcons, slogging in the mud of Robert F. Kennedy Stadium, was a gripping throwback to the old days well beyond the Decatur Staleys and the Frankford Yellow Jackets, back to the time when tribes would battle each other on some rainswept plain.


Man Sought in Rape of 5 Women In Three Queens Neighborhoods
Attacking lone women after they get off buses or jitneys, a man has raped and robbed five women in three Queens neighborhoods since September, New York City police officials said yesterday.
In each case, the suspect has grabbed the victim from behind as she walked home from the bus stop, placed a metal object that may have been a gun to her head, and demanded money.
He then put a knit cap over the woman's face and forced her to an isolated spot where he sexually attacked her, according to the police reports of the five incidents.


China's Party Chief Plans Trip to Japan
China's Communist Party leader will visit Japan in the first half of 1992, the two Governments said today in an announcement that underscores Japan's decision to lead the way among industrialized countries in rebuilding ties with Beijing after the 1989 Tiananmen crackdown.
The announcement represents a modest triumph for the Communist Party leader, Jiang Zemin, who is officially described as the successor to Deng Xiaoping as China's paramount leader, although real power is expected to remain with Mr.
Deng during his lifetime.
Mr.
Jiang has visited the Soviet Union and North Korea, but with the collapse of Communism abroad there are fewer and fewer countries for him to visit to promote party-to-party ties.


Arabs Delay Leaving for Talks But U.S. Expects a Resumption
Syria, Lebanon and Jordan postponed the departure of their negotiating teams today for the second round of peace talks with Israel in Washington, joining the Palestinians in protest over Israel's planned deportation of 12 Palestinians from the occupied territories.
United States officials said, however, that they expected the Palestinians, Syrians, Jordanians and Lebanese to turn up in Washington, where the talks are scheduled to resume at the State Department on Tuesday.
The officials said that the four delegations apparently felt the need to make some gesture of protest over the Israeli actions, but that none of them appeared to want to scuttle the talks over the issue.
More Explosive Issue
The chief Palestinian spokeswoman, Hanan Ashrawi, said by telephone from her home in the West Bank that the Palestinians "are making our point" by delaying their departure.
But she said it was her "surmise" that the Palestinians and others would end up going to Washington, now that the United States has strongly condemned the Israeli deportation orders.
At the first round of Washington negotiations in December, Israel postponed its delegation's arrival in protest the venue of the talks, which Israel had wanted to hold in the Middle East.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CHAMBER OPERA


OLYMPICS: Albertville Profile; Yamaguchi Has Her Sights Set at a Higher Level
There are skaters all around her, gliding and floating through the air and causing a maze of bodies that intersect but somehow never seem to collide.
Yet Kristi Yamaguchi, her smallish figure breezing from one end of the indoor rink to the other in balletic gusts, appears solitary.
She is so lithe and light, and so wonderfully graceful, that even in the midst of a routine practice session with her coach, Christy Kjarsgaard-Ness, Yamaguchi stands apart from the crowd.
There is the temptation to find a gold medal to place on her shoulders.
But there is time for that.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BOY MEETS HORN By Rex Stewart.
Edited by Claire P. Gordon.
University of Michigan, $22.95.


Mt. Vernon Challenges Definition Of a Family
FOR the last two years, the city of Mount Vernon has been trying to prevent a nonprofit housing group from building a two-family house in a depressed neighborhood for use as a communal home for 12 elderly people.
The project would cost the city nothing, provide affordable housing for the city's growing population of low-income elderly and improve a site that has been an abandoned lot and garbage dump.
But Mount Vernon has opposed the establishment of what it calls a boarding house, a use the city prohibits in a residential neighborhood with single-family zoning.


On the Appalachian Trail, Lessons in Living
LAST April 8, after nine months of marriage, Leticia Lacativa and David Fleischman set out from Springer Mountain in Georgia to walk the Appalachian Trail.
Five months and more than 2,000 miles later, on Sept. 13, the couple reached Paxter Peak on Mount Katahdin in Maine, the trail's end.
Their story, shared recently over coffee in their cozy home here, tells of the joys of achievement, the surprises of unexpected friendships and the strains that for a time threatened to pull their relationship apart.


A G.O.P. Leader Aims At 'Welfare State' Values
Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the second-ranking Republican in the House, has laid down a confrontational approach to this year's Congressional session by claiming to be Washington's "true revolutionary" and pledging to spend the year battling the "welfare state."
A speech Friday by Mr.
Gingrich set out an election-year theme that reflected his belief that his party will never escape minority status in Congress by working with the controlling Democrats.


If You Love Gloves, Clap Your Hands
Gloves can be among the most important accessories in a wardrobe.
They suggest character and give the wearer an excuse to "talk" with her hands.
Sometimes they speak for themselves.
Daniel Storto, for instance, sometimes creates glove designs as a protest of society's morals, like his "Ten Commandment" style, in which a commandment is inscribed on each pair in bold, white block letters on black suede gauntlets.


Ms. Canaday To Wed in June
Siesel E. Canaday of Old Lyme, Conn., and Katherine M. Canaday of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Bryan Canaday to Patrick Thomas Holleran, a son of Mary Steffen Holleran of Carlsbad, Calif., and the late Dr.
Walter M. Holleran.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Canaday, 27 years old, is a postproduction coordinator for Saban Entertainment, a cartoon animating company in Burbank, Calif.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father, who is retired, was an investment banker in New York with John Nuveen &amp; Company.
Her mother is a volunteer coordinator for Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York.


Yeshivas Defy The Odds
THIRTY years ago the Rabbi Jacob Joseph School was in a dilapidated building surrounded by tenements and rubble-strew lots on the Lower East Side of Manhattan.
The school, called a yeshiva, had 500 boys in its elementary division and I was one of them.
I have memories of rabbis who spoke with the accents of Eastern Europe, of recesses spent playing punchball in the streets and of general studies teachers who went on strike when paychecks were late.


Suspended Player Says He'll Tell All
A University of Texas basketball player who was suspended earlier this season for having accepted a gift of money when he graduated from a Texas junior college in 1990, said Friday that he would tell a National Collegiate Athletic Association subcommittee about improper offers of money that he received two years ago from prominent N.C.A.A. schools.
The player, Dexter Cambridge, is scheduled to meet with the N.C.A.A.'s subcommittee on eligibility appeals for Division I in Anaheim, Calif., on Tuesday to appeal his suspension.
The suspension was imposed on Nov. 20 after the N.C.A.A. ruled he had accepted a $7,000 check from Keith Heingartner, a former assistant coach at Lon Morris Junior College in Jacksonville, Tex.


BEST SELLERS: January 5, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
13
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
2
12
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
3
3
7
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the lives and fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
4
4
20
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
5
8
14
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II. (LP)
6
9
17
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate an accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force. (LP)
7
5
33
THE POLAR EXPRESS, written and illustrated by Chris Van Allsburg. (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.) A small boy's Christmas Eve train ride.
8
6
3
THE JOLLY CHRISTMAS POSTMAN, written and illustrated by Janet and Allan Ahlberg. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) A mailman delivers letters to nursery rhyme and fairy tale characters.
9
11
43
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
10
7
5
WLT, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $21.95.) The birth, prosperity and decline of a down-home Minneapolis radio station.
11
10
2
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
12
14
10
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) A diplomat, returning to his native Gloucestershire, finds that his past life in horse racing may help save others.
13
13
8
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Macmillan, $21.95.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.
14
12
10
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $22.50.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide. (LP)
15
15
92
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
16
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
2
2
19
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies. (LP)
3
5
5
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
4
3
12
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
5
4
9
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel, with his view of the Iran-contra affair.
6
6
5
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A reporter's account of an N.B.A. championship season spent with Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls.
7
7
9
CHILDHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Putnam, $14.95.) The entertainer recalls his boyhood and reflects on the ways of today's kids.
8
9
3
THE WORLD IS MY HOME, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) The autobiography of the popular novelist. (LP)
9
8
20
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
10
1
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning from the 19th-century American Indian.
11
10
10
PRAIRYERTH, by William Least Heat-Moon. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A close look at the people and mores of Chase County, Kansas.
12
11
29
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
13
12
8
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
14
14
3
ANNIE LEIBOVITZ: Photographs, 1970-1990. (HarperCollins, $60.) An album of portraits of musicians, politicians, writers, athletes, dancers and artists.
15
15
7
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
5
5
THE BEST TREATMENT, by Isadore Rosenfeld. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Advice from a physician on a host of medical problems.
2
3
43
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) An illustrated book in which the game is to find a fellow named Waldo as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
3
1
60
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find Waldo the hitchhiker.
4
2
100
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
5
1
THE FRUGAL GOURMET CELEBRATES CHRISTMAS, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $25.) A collection of holiday recipes, Christmas Day menus and family memories.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
ARCHITECTURE: The Natural and the Manmade, by Vincent Scully. (St. Martin's, $40.) In what is nothing less than an interpretation of the whole history of Western architecture from the beginnings, Yale's revered teacher of architecture for some 40 years explores the relationship of buildings to landscape.
LOUIS I. KAHN: In the Realm of Architecture, by David B. Brownlee and David G. De Long, with essays by others. (Museum of Contemporary Art/Rizzoli, cloth, $60; paper, $40.) The first comprehensive account of the career of probably America's most important post-World War II architect, gloriously illustrated.
RICHARD WRIGHT.
Early Works: "Lawd Today!" "Uncle Tom's Children." "Native Son." (Library of America, $35.) Later Works: "Black Boy (American Hunger)." "The Outsider." (Library of America, $35.) Conscientiously edited by Arnold Rampersad, this superb version of Wright's major works and some minor ones restores matter cut in some earlier editions.
AN AMERICAN ENGINEER IN STALIN'S RUSSIA: The Memoirs of Zara Witkin, 1932-1934, edited by Michael Gelb. (University of California, $29.95.) This fascinating memoir relates the struggles of an American socialist and civil engineer, in love with a Russian movie actress, in a country where already nothing worked.
SISTER'S CHOICE: Tradition and Change in American Women's Writing, by Elaine Showalter. (Clarendon/Oxford University, $21.95.) Ms.
Showalter's latest book of literary criticism takes its title from a quilting pattern that becomes an organizing metaphor for some of the distinctions between women's writing and men's.
TROLLOPE: A Biography, by N. John Hall. (Clarendon/Oxford University, $30.) With tact and wit, Mr.
Hall gives us the novelist who made both life and art into marvelous comic ironies.


Ms. McNeilly To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry B. McNeilly of Newburgh, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Caroline Branham McNeilly, to Charles Boyar Jr., the son of Mr.
Boyar and the late Eli Boyar of Cutchogue, L.I.
A June wedding in planned.
Ms.
McNeilly, 25 years old, is a senior account executive for Computer Library, a New York company that produces and sells information about computers.
She graduated from St.
Michael's College.
Her father is the president of the Micron Clean Uniform Company in Newburgh.


Ms. Unter Plans To Be Married
Dr. and Mrs.
Saul Unter of Upper Saddle River, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Stephanie Anne Unter to Glenn Kenneth Faegenburg, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Faegenburg of Roslyn Heights, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Unter, 25 years old, is an assistant beauty and fashion editor at Ladies' Home Journal in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University.
Her father is an orthodontist in Union, N.J.
Her mother, Rachele Unter, is a manager of Cafe Lalo, a coffee house in New York.


Opinions Considered: A Talk With Tom Wicker
TOM WICKER, whose "In the Nation" began appearing in this newspaper in 1966, wrote his final column under that title last Sunday and took off for a well-earned rest -- a week or so -- before getting on with other writing projects including three books and various assignments for The Times.


Lights, Camera, Murder
MORTAL REMAINS IN MAGGODY
By Joan Hess. 294 pp. New York: Dutton. $18.95.


Sarah Weiss to Wed Scott Auerbach
Mr. and Mrs.
John Weiss of Wayland, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sarah Hagen Weiss, to Scott Michael Auerbach, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen R. Auerbach of New York.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Weiss is 25 years old, as is her fiance.
She graduated cum laude from Georgetown University and is a candidate for an M.B.A. at Babson College.
She is an account marketing representative for International Business Machines Corporation in Boston.
Her father is the director of services for I.B.M. in New England.
Her mother, Sarah R. Weiss, a freelance writer, teaches English as a second language for the Kilmartin Company in Boston, which supplies teachers to industry and organizations.
Mr.
Auerbach graduated summa cum laude from Georgetown, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
He is a Ph.D. candidate in chemistry at the University of California at Berkeley, where he is a National Science Foundation fellow.
His mother, Hilda Auerbach, is the treasurer of Corporate Facilities Management Inc. in New York, an interior architectural concern headed by his father.


Cathi Hanauer, Editor, to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Lonnie B. Hanauer of West Orange, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Cathi Faye Hanauer to Daniel Charles Jones, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles O. Jones of Madison, Wis.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hanauer, 29 years old, is a contributing editor at Seventeen magazine.
She graduated magna cum laude from Syracuse University.
Her father is a rheumatologist in Millburn, N.J.
Her mother, Bette Hanauer, is a preschool teacher at United Cerebral Palsy of North Jersey in East Orange.


In Those Days It Paid To Be Clever
A small and elegant exhibition has opened at the Philadelphia Museum of Art which focuses on a picture that resists simple description.
The work is from the turn of the 17th century by the Dutch master Hendrick Goltzius, and it represents a seated Venus, her right hand gently clasped to one of Cupid's wings, her left hand resting on the shoulder of a young Bacchus.
To her side stands a grizzled satyr offering a bunch of grapes.
The scene, set in a forest, is illuminated by the warm light of Cupid's torch.
The subject almost certainly derives from a maxim in a comedy by Terence, the ancient Roman dramatist: "without Ceres and Bacchus, Venus freezes" -- without food and wine, love grows cold.


At Last, Russia Wobbles Into the World of Real Money
FINALLY, after weeks of warnings and debates about the coming "liberalization" of prices, millions of Russians woke up last week to find that the price of bread and gasoline had tripled and that vodka cost four times what it used to.
Gone were the days of some of the world's best state-subsidized bargains, such as an air ticket between Moscow and Vladivostok that, until Jan. 2, cost the same as two reasonably plump chickens sold privately at the Central Market.
So, it's done, the first wobbly step across the threshold to a market economy.
And while people are not clapping themselves on the back -- it is far too early for that -- the reformers were relieved that the first jolt of shock therapy Russian-style had been administered without any violent reaction.


Alison Griscom To Wed in June
Mrs.
Howard G. Cushing Jr. of New York and Lloyd P. Griscom Jr. of Aspen, Colo., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alison Grace Griscom to Henry Tyler Wilson, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry H. Wilson Jr. of Richmond.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Griscom, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from Harvard University and is a financial officer at the United States Trust Company in New York.
She was a member of the New York Junior Assembly.


Making a Difference; It's Mea Culpa Time For Savings and Loans
Donald B. Shackelford has one of this town's most difficult lobbying jobs: reviving the United States League of Savings Institutions, the once-powerful trade group that ultimately became a victim of its own successes.
Mr.
Shackelford is chairman of the league, which was so good in the 1980's at keeping the Government from more tightly regulating the savings and loan industry that even it now acknowledges it contributed mightily to the costliest bailout in American history.


Kim Reisman, Student, Wed
Kim Reisman, a law student at Fordham University, and Jordan Dickstein, a vice president of Kidder, Peabody in New York, were married last evening at the Pierre.
Rabbi Joel S. Goor officiated.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of Paul Reisman of Upper Saddle River, N.J., and Mrs.
Walter Turken of New York.
Her father is president of Reisman Property Interest, a real-estate developer in Rochelle Park, N.J.
Her stepfather is the chief executive of the Jack Parker Corporation, a real-estate development and investment concern in New York.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  ARABS POSTPONE GOING TO TALKS
Arab countries postponed the departure of their negotiators for the second round of Washington peace talks with Israel, joining the Palestinians.
But American officials said they expected all to show up.  1


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about Algeria misstated the date for the runoff round of parliamentary elections there.
It is Jan. 16, not Jan. 15.


B. Altman's
To the Editor:
Your "A Metamorphosis for 880,000 Sq. Ft." on Nov. 17 about the fate of B. Altman's fails to cover an essential feature of the developers' proposals for this "grande dame of New York."


Sunday Dinner; In 3 Manhattan Hotels, Tranquil, Spacious Oases
Now that the tumultuous holidays are over, it is time to slow down, catch one's breath and contemplate the year to come.
If a restaurant is to be the setting for such regeneration, let it be a tranquil and relaxing one.
Here are three such settings.
Le Regence
Plaza Athenee, 37 East 64th Street, (212) 606-4647.
This opulent French restaurant has the genteel air and calming cadence of a luxury restaurant in Paris.
This is no surprise since the hotel is the American branch of the esteemed Paris hotel of the same name.
The setting is regal, a soft and stately den done in turquoise and white, with velvet banquettes, soft leather armchairs, ornate mirrors and benign lighting.
Service is discreet and knowledgeable.


Ex-New York Official Told to Pay $10 Million in Bribe Case
A former New York City official who pleaded guilty to taking $1.5 million in bribes from landlords for arranging leases has been ordered to pay the city $10.1 million for his crimes.
A Manhattan State Supreme Court jury ruled on Monday that Alex Liberman, a former New York City director of leasing, was liable for violating the Federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act and ordered him to pay the city $3.75 million.
Under the RICO statute, which has been used increasingly to prosecute white-collar criminals, the jury's award will be tripled to $10.1 million, city officials said.


Birds Contribute Color to a Lively Yard
PERHAPS it is their sweet sound.
Or their bright colors or just their presence.
But feeding birds is always a plus.
One of the best ways to be sure they will come to the yard is to supply their favorite foods, especially if the winter is harsh.
This custom is also a way to learn what species are about.
To reinforce this process, keep a bird guide near the window to identify that chance rare one that may come around.
Also, keep binoculars in a convenient place for a quick grab.
These magnifiers are handy because sometimes it is difficult to detect that eye line or wing patch.
Having said all this, there still are a few pointers to keep in mind.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Oct. 91
Oct. 90
Change
Starts
1,089
1,026
-5.8%
Completions
1,036
1,275
-18.7%
Sales
513
465
-9.4%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.51
8.66
9.93
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.18
6.26
7.91
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.45
8.59
9.76
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.03
6.11
7.80
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.43
8.60
9.77
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.01
6.16
7.90
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.58
8.83
10.13
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.84
6.87
8.32
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.17
4.35
6.95
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.43
8.78
9.69
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Stabilize the Banks and Reverse the Recession; Not by Neglect Alone
To the Editor:
It is surely accurate to say that Presidential neglect contributes greatly to our domestic economic plight.
However, neglect conveys a flavor of just not getting around to something.
It would be more appropriate to remain mindful of the active role that Reagan-Bush planning and policies have played in bringing us to where we are.


It's Finally Made Official: Elliott Joins Junior Johnson's Team
In one of the corporate hospitality suites at the Nascar Winston Cup awards dinner last month in New York, a banner had a blank space that said a lot.
The banner depicted the No. 11 Junior Johnson Ford entry.
It was complete with all its Budweiser logos.
Only the spot over the left window where the driver's name usually goes was empty.


Bodyscapes
Here in the surreal setting of Hawaii Volcanoes National Park are the season's new white bathing suits.
Whether they are sleek maillots, sheaths or two-pieces, all have subtle elements of detailing reminiscent of lingerie or couture dressmaking.
A brassiere is quilted, a bikini is belted.
Underwiring or shirring defines the bosom, and luxurious materials like lame and crepe are laced with Lycra to make them practical.


J. C. Gold Wed To Ms. Rudman
Margo Ellen Rudman, the director of marketing for business development at Showtime Networks, a cable television programming company in New York, was married yesterday evening to Dr.
Jeffrey Charles Gold, the medical director of Robert A. Becker Inc., a pharmaceutical advertising agency in New York, and the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Jonathan Woll officiated at the Mark Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Rudman-Gold graduated from Tufts University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Rudman of Fair Lawn, N.J.
Her father, who is retired, was a department manager at Bloomingdale's in Hackensack, N.J.


How the Klan Captured Indiana
THE DRAGON AND THE CROSS
The Rise and Fall of the Ku Klux Klan in Middle America.
By Richard K. Tucker.
Illustrated. 224 pp.
Hamden, Conn.: Archon Books. $27.50.


Boy Critically Injured By Hit-and-Run Driver
A 9-year-old boy was critically injured yesterday when he was struck by a hit-and-run driver as he crossed a Brooklyn street, the police said.
The boy, who was not identified, was crossing Foster Avenue at East 21st Street in Flatbush about 12:30 P.M., when the car hit him and then sped away, a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, said.


Stabilize the Banks and Reverse the Recession
To the Editor:
"The Economy: Go Fast, and Slow" (editorial, Dec. 19) distinguishes between short-term and long-term economic problems, but neglects the banking crisis, which affects both.


Tamils Are Target of Riots in Southern India
The school principal stood in the ruins of the library, a blackened shell of a room, after riots in this southern Indian city left 16 people dead and hundreds of buildings destroyed recently.
"My life's work has been destroyed," the principal, K. P. Gopal Krishna, said as he walked through the wrecked building, glass crunching underfoot, walls scarred with smoke and prized books reduced to small ash heaps.
Computers were stolen, and the national school's new science laboratory was smashed.


Corrections
Two charts last Sunday, with the Mutual Funds column and with the accompanying brief article, were reversed.
The chart listing the top 10 individual funds of 1991 should have appeared with the column; the one describing the penalty, in return on investment, for failure to reinvest fund distributions, went with the smaller article.


Corrections
Two charts last Sunday, with the Mutual Funds column and with the accompanying brief article, were reversed.
The chart listing the top 10 individual funds of 1991 should have appeared with the column; the one describing the penalty, in return on investment, for failure to reinvest fund distributions, went with the smaller article.


Catching a Mediterranean Flavor With Salt Cod
SALT COD (also known as baccala in Italy) is a humble food that has become something of a luxury.
Dried in the sun and salted, it has for centuries been a basic dish in Europe, particularly around the Mediterranean.
It is the main ingredient in the famous French dish called brandade, in which salt cod is whipped into a puree with potatoes, garlic and olive oil.
It is also extremely popular in Italy, where it is traditionally eaten at Christmastime and New Year's.
In the United States, salt cod can be found in Spanish, Portuguese, Greek and Italian markets, in specialty stores and in some of the larger supermarkets.
Choose plump, soft pieces with an ivory-colored flesh and, if possible, avoid stringy tail ends, which may never lose their leathery quality even when cooked.


Miss Hold Wed To T. S. Leggett
Phyllis Handley Hold, the daughter of Annette-Gene Hold of Garrison, N.Y., and the late Lucien A. Hold Jr., was married yesterday to Timothy Snowden Leggett, a son of Mary Lee Leggett of New York and John W. Leggett of Napa, Calif.
The Rev.
Frank Geer, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Highlands Country Club in Garrison.
Mrs.
Leggett, 39 years old, is the renal transplant coordinator at the St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York.
She graduated from Fairfield University and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her mother retired as a promotions copywriter for Reader's Digest in Pleasantville, N.Y.
Her father was the president of the Cold Spring (N.Y.) Lumber Company.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Amid Recession, a Recovery for Shelton
TWO years ago, the vacancy rate for Shelton's six million square feet of office and industrial buildings was 37 percent, the highest in Fairfield County.
This was a result of a building spree that began in the late 70's, when the city courted developers in an effort to shed its smokestack image and create a more viable economy.
Hundreds of thousands of square feet of new commercial space came on the market in time for the 1987 crash.


REACHING FOR THE GOOD LIFE IN VIETNAM
Lam Van lives the Vietnamese good life selling shiny new Dreams.
Honda Dreams -- 8.5-horsepower, $2,000 motorbikes manufactured in Thailand -- are the most coveted status symbol on the streets of Saigon, the bustling, hustling Vietnamese metropolis that almost no one calls by its still-official name, Ho Chi Minh City.
"Everyone calls it Saigon," says Van, who owns a small motorbike shop.
"We never stopped calling it Saigon." Business has been so good that the 31-year-old entrepreneur can afford to smoke black-market English-made John Player cigarettes, wear a gold Longines watch and join his friends most nights at the city's neon-flooded Superstar disco, where he rocks to bootleg recordings from Guns 'n' Roses and Madonna, his "No. 1 favorite" recording star.


Holding Back To Get Ahead
IN the 1950's, when the children of the baby boom were in elementary school, being held back for a year was an indelible mark of failure, while being the youngest in class was sometimes considered a sign of brilliance.
Now that the boomers themselves are parents, everything has changed.
Recent studies show that since the mid-1980's a rapidly increasing number of parents are choosing to send their children through an extra year of preschool so that they enter kindergarten as 6-year-olds, a year after the normal start time in most states.


MIA-POW Flag to Remain
The National Football League, bowing to pressure from veterans' groups and others, won't take down the MIA-POW flag hanging from the roof inside the Metrodome.
A league spokesman said Friday that the flag amounts to a political statement, which could prompt other groups to demand equal treatment.
"We get endless requests, whether it's the American Cancer Society or someone else," said Jim Steeg, director of special events for the N.F.L.
"We don't want to egg on more requests."


Exchange Teachers Are Getting a Taste of Life in America
FOR Aurora Gonzalez, a native of Spain who is spending the academic year at Valhalla High School, shopping at the Galleria Mall in White Plains, trying out Indian food and meeting a wide variety of new people from different backgrounds is an intoxicating experience.
Her reaction to living in America is typical, one would think, for an exchange student.
But Miss Gonzalez is not a student.
She is a foreign exchange teacher, working as an intern in Valhalla's Spanish-language classes, to offer students exposure to a native speaker who can add a valuable cultural dimension to the curriculum.


Elizabeth Kunstadter Is Married
Elizabeth Jane Kunstadter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Kunstadter of New York and London, was married yesterday to Dr.
Geza von Habsburg, a son of the late Joseph Francis, Archduke of Austria, and the late Anna Monica, Princess of Saxony and Archduchess of Austria.
The Rev.
Hugh Hildesley, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Mrs. von Habsburg, 35 years old, is the president of Estate Advisory Services, an art appraisal firm in New York.
She graduated from Stanford University and received a master's degree in international relations from Columbia University.
Her parents run the Albert Kunstadter Family Foundation, a philanthrophy in New York.


Joy Ciarcia Wed To D. R. Levy
Joy Carole Ciarcia, a production associate for the ABC News program "20/20," was married yesterday to Douglas Robert Levy, an account executive at Girgenti, Hughes, Butler &amp; McDowell Inc., a New York pharmaceuticals advertising agency.
The Rev.
Albert F. Ciarcia, the bride's father, officiated at the Unitarian Universalist Church of Greater Bridgeport in Stratford, Conn.
Mrs.
Ciarcia-Levy, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from St.
Lawrence University and has a master's degree in media studies from the New School for Social Research.
Her father retired as the minister of the Unitarian Universalist Church of Greater Bridgeport.
Her mother, Jane Raymond Ciarcia, is a legal assistant with the Waterbury, Conn., law firm of Moynahan, Ruskin, Mascolo, Mariani &amp; Minella.


All-Day Delicacies: Scones of Scotland
IN Scotland the scone isn't just a quick tea bread, it's a national institution, and as such a legitimate target for home-grown humor.
A cartoon strip this August in the national newspaper The Scotsman, for instance, depicts panic in the Highlands as the local people learn that there will be no more money available for museums devoted to the history of the scone as foodstuff and metaphor through the ages.
But the fact is that Scottish foods have a celebrated place in the country's history and literature.
A whole school of 19th-century Scottish fiction is named for the kailyard -- Scottish for cabbage patch -- and scones have a much longer, more distinguished pedigree.
Boswell ate scones as he toured the Hebrides with Dr.
Johnson (he thought them very good, but couldn't understand how the Highlanders could eat them with cheese for breakfast).
In "Kidnapped," David Balfour and Alan Breck Stewart, fleeing the Redcoats, "lay upon the bare top of a rock like scones upon a girdle" (girdle is Scottish for griddle).
As for the poet Robert Burns, "souple scones" were "the wale of food" -- wale meaning simply "the best."


Looking Askance


FRESH FACE
Leslie H. Gelb's remedy for America's problems seems to be replacing the "experts of the past" (the ones who got us into our current predicament) with a "new breed" of experts ("Fresh Face," Dec. 8).
Haven't we had our fill of these global guidance counselors?
And I can't wait for the wrenching changes we shall surely suffer when the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace retools.
Winston Lord, a former Kissinger aide, says, "Our starting point is that we know that we do not know." And what does this expert propose to do with his self-proclaimed ignorance.
What else but "to point the way to . . . new ideas and a new generation." LEE ABBOTT
Stonington, Conn.


Digits Aglitter


Stabilize the Banks and Reverse the Recession; Forget Van Buren
To the Editor:
Milton Hindus (letter, Dec. 17) rightly restores to our reading list the autobiography of Martin Van Buren, a wise and literate man; and, we should add, radically misguided.


Election Staffs Resemble Candidates
It is said that by some strange quirk of biology, dog owners and their pets come to resemble each other.
The same, it seems, can be said of candidates and the members of their campaign staffs.
Six weeks before the New Hampshire primary, each of the major candidates for President appears to have put together a staff that imitates, for good or for ill, his own strengths and weaknesses.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, for instance, has a reputation for being well-organized and disciplined; so, too, do his staff members.


Sheraton Puts In Coffee Makers
I.T.T.
Sheraton has announced that coffee makers will become a standard item in all guest rooms of its 300 hotels in North America.
The decision was made after coffee makers were tested at the Sheraton Park Central Hotel and Towers in Dallas and the Sheraton Cavalier Hotel in Calgary, Alberta.


Young At Heart
SEVERAL outstanding educational programs were introduced in the final months of 1991, and with luck they signal a trend rather than a few isolated success stories.
It seems that many of the young software developers who sharpened their skills on business software in the 1980's have now become parents and are applying their talents to educational software.


PITCAIRN ISLAND
Dea Birkett's account of her visit to Pitcairn Island was of particular interest to me ("Fletcher Christian's Children," Dec. 8).
I was one of eight passengers on the German cargo ship New Zealand when it made an unscheduled stop there on the morning of March 11, 1991.
Half of the island's population -- some 25 people, ranging in age from 12 to 70 -- turned out, in gloom and rain, aboard a 40-foot motorboat.


Elway's Drive II Kicks Out Oilers
Somewhere deep in his mind, John Elway must play these moments again and again, perhaps as much for pleasure as preparation.
One day, he will need to rewind and repeat them.
Five years after his most glorious moment with the Denver Broncos -- a 98-yard touchdown drive against the Cleveland Browns -- Elway engaged in heroics once more.
This time, it brought the Broncos from behind to a 26-24 victory today over the stunned Houston Oilers and into the American Football Conference championship game.


What Works
DESPITE THE continued grumbling about the nation's schools and the lack of money to fix them, eight years of school reform haven't been for naught.
The national obsession to retool schools has spawned ideas that work -- and work well.
At least seven such ideas have sprouted into successful full-fledged programs in classrooms nationwide.


Usual Suspects; Blaming Japan Has Its Risks; So Does Bush's Visit to Tokyo
EVEN by the rigorous standards of an American election year, Tokyo is a long way to go to try to win votes back home.
But in his three-day visit this week to Japan, President Bush will be doing precisely that, prodding the Japanese to open their markets and buy more American goods to help, he says, "create jobs and restore prosperity" in the United States.
Mr.
Bush and his advisers recognize that with the end of the cold war and the collapse of the Soviet Union, the international threat that most worries voters is no longer nuclear warfare but something far more subtle -- an erosion of living standards as American industries lag in the global competition with foreign rivals, especially Japan.
And those concerns have been magnified by recent announcements from pillars of corporate America, like General Motors and I.B.M., that they are cutting thousands of workers and permanently shrinking.


Political Talk
More Than a Backdrop
As a 27-year-old Democratic district leader in October 1977, Fernando Ferrer said he was "elated" when Jimmy Carter's motorcade pulled up to the rubble of Charlotte Street in the South Bronx, turning it into a famous symbol of urban America in need of help.


McDaniel Benefits From a Little Advice
After watching Xavier McDaniel miss three or four easy shots recently, Mark Jackson gave his Knick teammate some advice.
"Mark said, 'You're thinking about your shooting,' " McDaniel recalled. ' "Don't think, just shoot. You're a scorer.' "


Dr. Piwoz Plans A May Wedding
Dr. and Mrs.
Seymour Piwoz of Elkins Park, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Julia Ann Piwoz, to Dr.
Andrew Frank Rubenstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Rubenstein of Tappan, N.Y.
A May wedding is planned.
Dr.
Piwoz, 26 years old, graduated from Haverford College and received an M.D. from Hahnemann University.
She is a pediatrics resident at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
Her father is a radiologist in private practice in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Sandra Piwoz, is a medical management consultant in Elkins Park.


Items to Augment a Basic Tool Kit
MANY home repair tasks can be accomplished with only a basic kit of tools: tape measure, claw hammer, crosscut saw, hack saw, regular and Phillips-head screwdrivers, pliers, adjustable wrench and electric drill.
But owning some other tools can broaden the range of jobs one can do and make some familiar chores easier.
Following is a list of tools to augment a basic kit.
To save money, buy tools only as needed.


Islanders Lose to Sabres, 5-2


U.S. Exit From Manila: Making of a Hasty Retreat
Seven months ago, the Bush Administration was on the brink of a deal with the Philippine Government to extend by seven years its lease on two huge military bases in the Philippines.
Today, the United States military is packing up ships, supplies and ammunition, and preparing to leave the Philippines by the end of the year, closing out an American military presence in the country that has lasted nearly a century.


Dow Helps Dollar Rally
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.65
125.92
134.85
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5435
1.5188
1.5050
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1461
1.1605
1.1513
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.8490
1.8742
1.9350
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$350.50
$353.75
$386.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Correction
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Nov. 24 about the World Elephant Polo Association championships in Nepal misstated the dates of both the 1991 and 1992 events.
A reader's letter dated Dec. 16 points out that the 1991 championships took place in December 1991 and that the next championships will be in December 1992.


Who Would Move Money Where
When investors believe the economy will worsen, they are more likely to seek professional investment advice.
But affluent and ordinary investors look for guidance in different places, according to Russ Alan Prince and Richard K. Weingarten in a report called "Marketing Mutual Funds," to be published in February by Renaissance Inc. of Carmel, Ind.
In one survey, 298 investors with at least $1 million in liquid assets said they would tend to abandon mutual funds in favor of private money managers when times are bad, returning to funds as the outlook brightens.
But for another 3,442 investors surveyed at random, the opposite is true: a worsening economy would generally cause a movement into funds.
Because very affluent individuals make up only a small part of the investing public, continuing economic weakness may actually be good news for the fund industry, Mr.
Weingarten said.


Jane Sexton to Wed Adam Bernstein
Mary Jane Sexton of Syracuse has announced the engagement of her daughter Jane Elizabeth Sexton to Adam Todd Bernstein, the son of Susan Bernstein of Oceanside, L.I., and the late Dr.
Stuart Bernstein.
The prospective bride is also a daughter of the late John Sexton.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Sexton, 26 years old, is a registered nurse at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
She graduated cum laude from the State University of New York at Buffalo.


Belinda Richardson Weds John Cort
Belinda Helen Richardson, a daughter of Helen and Peter Richardson of Geelong, Australia, was married yesterday to John Lindsley Cort, a son of Doris and John Cort of New York.
The Rev.
Grant Young, an Anglican priest, officiated at All Saints Church in Geelong.
Mrs.
Cort, 27 years old, graduated from Deakin University in Geelong and was until recently a manager at Rowland's Commercial Catering Company in Melbourne, Australia.
Her father, who is retired, was the owner of H. F. Richardson &amp; Company, a real-estate brokerage in Geelong.


Designer Makes Flowers That Complete a Room
DIANE JAMES plucked a red poppy from a mass of flowers and artfully coaxed the stem, leaves and petals into a lifelike pose.
"You have to get some movement," she said, as she bent and twisted the flower in the living room of her 1894 carriage house in Darien.
Mrs.
James said she would never treat a real flower this way.
But silk flowers, which are produced in a rigid, blatantly artificial state, "need to be handled," she said.
"It's very time consuming. There!" And she held up the transformed imposter.


The Executive Computer; Daunting Hurdles to Using System 7 on the Mac
Many executives and veteran computer users have long followed a policy of staying away from any software package whose version number ends in zero.
Often through bitter experience, they have learned that software publishers frequently view their initial customers as an extended testing ground.
Rather than contending with computer crashes and lost data, these veterans believe it is safer to wait for version 1.1, or even 1.5, rather than rush out to buy the hottest new program.
This philosophy caused considerable anxiety last year among the many companies that use Macintoshes.
After Apple Computer Inc.'s new operating system, 7.0, was introduced in May, companies had to decide whether to take the plunge.
Would the expected benefits in productivity be worth the anguish of the transition?


CONNETICUT GUIDE
CHAMBER OPERA
"Tiny Operas," three short chamber operas adapted by Susan O. Bingham from stories by O. Henry, will be presented by the Chancel Opera Company of Connecticut today at 4 and 7:30 P.M. in Christ Church, 84 Broadway, New Haven.


Cultivating Their Own Gardens
On a Sunday morning not long ago, the woman who is probably the nation's most lauded resident of public housing went on a visit that took her two miles across St.
Louis and two decades back in time.
Her destination was a mid-rise cluster of apartment buildings on the city's south side, part of the 1.4 million units of public housing overseen by the Government, to virtually no one's satisfaction.
The woman threw her rental car into park and clicked her red high heels into the building's lobby, where she found an 11-year-old boy casually knocking holes in the plaster.
She seemed to take it personally.
"Why you tearin' that stuff up?" she barked.
The face of the offender leaped with alarm then landed in a look of awe.
"You the one with the President!" he said.


The Salvadorans Make Peace in a 'Negotiated Revolution'
AT the height of President Ronald Reagan's crusade against Communist subversion in Central America, he and his aides liked to say that the United States would never let the guerrillas in El Salvador "shoot their way into power." And in the end that the guerrillas have helped draw to their tiny country's 12-year-old civil war, they have not proved Mr.
Reagan wrong.
But while the settlement they announced with the Government of President Alfredo Cristiani in the first minutes of the new year did not give them actual power, leaders of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front have won at least paper rights to participate in the political process of their country's transformation.
Never, in the memories of diplomats who oversaw the last 25 rounds of negotiations between the two sides, has a such a conflict ended with agreement to such sweeping reform in advance of new elections.
"This is the closest that any process has ever come to a negotiated revolution,"said the United Nations' principal mediator, Alvaro de Soto.


BUSH TO PROPOSE INCOME TAX CREDIT FOR HEALTH COSTS
In his budget request to Congress later this month, President Bush intends to propose tax credits to help people buy health insurance, further cuts in military spending and major new restrictions on the payment of Government benefits to the affluent, Administration officials say.
Mr.
Bush's advisers say the tax credits will be the centerpiece of his election-year strategy to show that he has a substantial domestic policy and to fend off attacks by Democrats who contend he has no plan to aid the 34 million Americans who lack health insurance.


Why Americans Prefer to Hear Words They Don't Understand
Wagner's "Flying Dutchman," which returns to the Metropolitan Opera repertory on Thursday evening, is an opera with a distinguished Met history.
The house premiere, in 1889, was led by Anton Seidl, who was Wagner's own protege.
Theodor Reichmann, who sang the Dutchman, had taken part in the first "Parsifal," at Bayreuth.
Subsequent Met performances -- 126 in all -- featured such famous Wagnerites as Johanna Gadski, Friedrich Schorr, Kirsten Flagstad, Hans Hotter, George London, Astrid Varnay and Leonie Rysanek.
And yet "The Flying Dutchman" has a second performance legacy in the United States -- a truncated legacy that documents achievements that were never pursued, and suggests the costs inflicted by snobbish resistance to opera in English.
That all but one of the Met performances have been given in German, as "Der Fliegende Hollander," may seem unsurprising.
In fact, America's first "Flying Dutchman," in Philadelphia in 1876, was sung in Italian.
And the opera's most elaborate mountings during the Gilded Age, when Wagnerism was at its apex, were those of the touring American Opera Company, which gave everything in English.


Crime
"We've never been as tolerant as we claim," concedes one of the proud characters in PRIDE'S HARVEST (Morrow, $20), another of those big and fascinating mysteries that Jon Cleary sets in his native Australia.
Inspector Scobie Malone of the Sydney homicide division has no illusions about the tolerance of his countrymen; but he is taken aback, nonetheless, by the racial hostility he finds in the outback town of Collamundra, where the aborigines have lower status than the sheep and where someone has tossed the manager of a Japanese-owned cotton mill into his own gin works.
"Australia has never bred any aristocrats," says Mr.
Cleary, who designates them "a rare breed in this flat land of flat social levels." But the point seems lost on the local power elite, a band of conservative families with a political lock on the town.
Shunned himself as a big-city outsider, Scobie has the perspective to view the crime from the proper distance -- back two generations to its twisted roots.


Easing the Glut of Legislative Bills
WITH little more than a week to go before Republicans assume potentially veto-proof control of the State Legislature, lawmakers on opposite sides of the aisle seem to have agreed to disagree on nearly every major issue.
Leaders of both parties, however, have apparently found common ground on at least one vexing problem: the ever-increasing number of bills and resolutions that the Legislature buries itself under each year.


Tearful Dispute
If the Weeping Icon does as members of a dissident Greek Orthodox sect believe, last week might have been a good time for it.
The icon, a small painting of St.
Irene, was reported stolen at gunpoint from a Greek Orthodox cathedral in Queens two days before Christmas and was returned last weekend -- minus its jeweled frame, which the church said was worth $800,000.
But amid the uproar surrounding the icon, which is said to have shed tears as American troops headed for the Persian Gulf, a religious war of words broke out between dissident leaders and leaders of the traditional Greek Orthodox Church.
They suggested that the icon never even got misty, and hinted there was something fishy about the theft.
Bishop Vikentios of Avlon, the spiritual leader of St.
Irene Chrysovalantou Greek Orthodox Cathedral, threatened to sue, saying that the carping about the icon was born of jealousy.
"From the time the icon started to cry, they have been fighting with us," he said.


Ann Luppi Wed At Harvard
Ann Christine Luppi, a graduate student in English at George Mason University, and Peter Anders von Mehren, an associate at the Washington law firm of Wilmer, Cutler &amp; Pickering, were married yesterday in Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas J. S. Mikelson, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Harvard University Memorial Church.
Mrs. von Mehren, 33 years old, graduated cum laude from Radcliffe College and was until recently a magazine editor and the director of publications for Middle East Insight in Washington.
She is a daughter of Hobart Luppi of Hagerstown, Md., and Claudine Luppi of Fairfaix, Va.
Her father is a retired Foreign Service officer.


IN SHORT: FICTION
RACHEL'S SONG By Miguel Barnet. Curbstone Press, Paper, $9.95.


The Quiz
The global village being what it is, Americans have become familiar, if not exactly cozy, with neighbors and neighborhoods thousands of miles away.
Soweto and Managua, Chamorro and Bhutto, Mugabe and Mubarak -- these names, often mistaken for exotic spices just a few years ago, today elicit nods that say, "I know you, read about you, saw you on TV." Now you just have to place them, when they entered your life and your living room, and why.
After all, it's the neighborly thing to do.
(Answers on page 16)
1.
What are the former names of the following countries: Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Zimbabwe?
2. What do the following acronyms stand for: DMZ, A.N.C., O.A.S., F.M.L.N.?
3.
Match the following current and former leaders with their Central and South American countries:
Patricio Aylwin
Argentina
Oscar Arias Sanchez
Chile
Isabel Peron
Costa Rica
Anastasio Somoza Debayle
Chile
Alfredo Cristiani
El Salvador
Augusto Pinochet
Nicaragua
4.
From what South American countries do the following writers come?
Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Pablo Neruda, Jorge Luis Borges, Mario Vargas Llosa.
5.
Match the names of the places listed here with the countries in which they are situated:
Ifni Province
Nicaragua
Tabriz
Afghanistan
Phnom Penh
Vietnam
Jalalabad
India
My Lai
Cambodia
Khafji
South Africa
Tripoli
Iran
Managua
Morocco
Bhopal
Saudi Arabia
Soweto
Libya
6. Mohandas Gandhi was either Indira Gandhi's grandfather or uncle: True or false?
7.
What do Corazon Aquino, Benazir Bhutto and Violeta Barrios de Chamorro have in common?
8.
The following countries were colonies of which European countries?
Suri name, Zimbabwe, Angola.
9. Where is Entebbe and what happened there in 1976?
10.
What were the names of the islands that Britain fought over in 1982?
That the United States fought over in 1983?
11. Who is Lisa Halaby?
12. What are the Tontons Macoute?
13.
All but one of the following are players in the Middle East arena.
Who is the exception?
Hosni Mubarak, Hafez al-Assad, King Hassan II, Teddy Kollek, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Muammar el-Qaddafi?
14.
Match the following people and the African countries with which they are associated:
Idi Amin
Namibia
Mobutu Sese Seko
Uganda
Robert Mugabe
Zaire
Kenneth Kaunda
South Africa
Julius K. Nyerere
Zimbabwe
Archbishop Desmond Tutu
Zambia
Sam Nujoma
Tanzania


America 3 Crew Set Back Again
Bad luck again struck the America's Cup defense syndicate America 3 when one of its two boats, Jayhawk, suffered a broken mast for the second time in less than a year.


Iris Schoenberger, Student, Is Wed
Iris Lee Schoenberger, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur M. Schoenberger of East Hills, L.I., was married last night to Daniel Jonathan Greenwald, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward S. Greenwald of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Melvin N. Sirner officiated at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Ms.
Schoenberger, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Boston University and is studying for a master's degree in occupational therapy at Columbia University.
Her father is a vice president of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in New York.
Her mother, Barbara-Lu Schoenberger, is an agent at Lifestyles International Travel in Jericho, L.I.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE MOON CLOCK.
Written and illustrated by Matt Faulkner.
Scholastic. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Robin is home from school pretending to be sick when Kolshinsky, a genie of sorts from a swashbuckling time and place, appears from her toy chest and offers the cowardly girl a chance to be a hero.
The clever illustrations are persuasive.


Home Sweet Home Turns Ugly As the Lakers Lose Another
The Los Angeles Lakers, who responded to the retirement of Magic Johnson with a nine-game winning streak, are facing adversity again.
They lost their fourth consecutive home game Friday night, by 114-87 to the Indiana Pacers, and their 33 percent shooting performance was the 11th consecutive time they have been under 50 percent.


Streetscapes: Turn-of-the-Century Rowhouses; A Tale of Two Streets And Oversize Houses
IT is a sign of the times that the biggest construction story of 1992 may be a tale of de-construction -- the demolition of 12 floors atop the building at 108 East 96th Street.
In 1985, the city gave the developer permission for the 31-story building because it was largely outside a special park improvement district, but it withdrew permission during construction in 1986 after Genie Rice, president of Civitas, a planning organization, correctly noted that the permit was based on an erroneous interpretation of a zoning map.


Second-Guessing Game Doesn't Appeal to Sax
At an annual average income of $3.1 million, Steve Sax earns more than any general manager, but on the particular problem posed to him yesterday, he was reluctant to play general manager for the moment.
The problem: If he were the Yankees' general manager, what would he do about having Steve Sax at second base with Pat Kelly waiting to move there?


Oakland Journal; In Fire's Wake, Nature Leads Rebirth
On the scorched hillsides of Oakland, amid blackened rubble and ash, crocuses poke through the soil with vivid green shoots that seem to say all is not dead here.
The nascent flowers, along with stubborn crabgrass and dandelions, have brightened the gray moonscape left by last October's deadly fires and are harbingers of better days for the 3,000 homeowners who lost everything and are now in the earliest stages of rebuilding.


Schools Trying to Cope With 'Crack Babies'
JANE STEIN, a 29-year veteran of elementary school teaching, is seeing a different breed of pupils in her kindergarten class these days at the Joyce Kilmer School in Trenton.
"Their attention span is much shorter," she said.
"It's very difficult for them to sit still for a long period of time. I guess you'd call it itchiness. They plain can't pay attention."


Reading Teen-Agers Their Rights
THE debate raged among the 30 or so students in C. J. Foy's eighth-grade social studies class at Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
High School in Harlem.
At issue was a hypothetical police roundup of six teen-agers -- five with drug records -- and a search of them without permission.
The police found drugs in the pockets of the five with drug histories.
"The police were undoubtedly wrong?" Ms. Foy asked.


Cultural Impersonators
To the Editor:
A postscript to Henry Louis Gates Jr.'s intriguing essay on "cultural impersonators" (" 'Authenticity,' or the Lesson of Little Tree," Nov. 24).


IN THIS CORNER
Gov.
Lowell Weicker of Connecticut may be correct in his observation that the public prefers eating Doritos to voting ("In This Corner" by Michael Specter, Dec. 15).
However, he seems ignorant of the extent to which politicians like him help to perpetuate the preference.
Connecticut's Dorito bandido says that he "never made any damn pledge" to voters not to establish a personal income tax to solve the state's fiscal woes.
Pledge or not, his carefully worded comments and calculated omissions with regard to the tax were decisive in his victory over Bruce A. Morrison and John Rowland in the 1990 gubernatorial campaign.
Once again, voters have ended up with an elected official who does not resemble the candidate they thought they were voting for.


George H. Wiedeman; Psychiatrist Was 79
George H. Wiedeman, a psychiatrist and educator, died Dec. 27 at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Shifting Loyalty on the Job
To the Editor:
"Restoring Loyalty to the Workplace" (Forum, Dec. 15) overlooks a powerful new force shaping employee commitment.
Employees are demanding democratic processes in matters important to their personal well-being.
They no longer are willing to entrust their destiny to some distant, hopefully benevolent, leadership.


Stabilize the Banks and Reverse the Recession; Buy American
To the Editor:
Re "The Economy: Go Fast, and Slow" (editorial, Dec. 19): We look to the Federal Government as the sole force capable of reversing our deepening economic morass.
It is the sole organized force, but consumers can turn the economy around by simply buying American-made products.


Tacos, Salsas and More for the Family
SU CASA, a Mexican restaurant near Exit 55 of Interstate 95 in Branford, has had an 18-year run.
Efficient and welcoming service, cozy dining areas decorated with Mexican artworks, and decently cooked, predictable food, all explain why.
The menu isn't extensive but it touches all the familiar Tex-Mex bases.
For a newcomer to Mexican food there is a concise, helpful description beneath each listing, sometimes with a comment.
Macho Nachos are described, for example, as "tortilla chips topped with lots of sauce, sauteed mushrooms, grilled onions and melted cheese. Not for men only."


Terry Is Re-signed
Right-handed relief pitcher SCOTT TERRY, who set the table for most of LEE SMITH's record 47 saves for St.
Louis last summer, signed a one-year contract with the Cardinals.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed. (AP)


Corrections
An article yesterday about the University of Bridgeport's efforts to remain open referred incorrectly to the status of negotiations between the university and a group of banks over the conditions of a $2.2 million loan.
The university presented a plan to the banks to cut salaries and to raise $500,000 to supplement the loan.
A final agreement has not been reached.


Welcome: Foreign Businesses, and Jobs
AS the economy sags, a new psychological syndrome -- resentment of foreign companies -- has emerged.
On the other hand, foreign companies are welcomed because they provide jobs.
There is no evidence in Westchester of hostility toward foreign companies, said Gregory A. Russo, chairman of the board of directors of the County Chamber of Commerce in White Plains.
Moreover, Mr.
Russo said, eight foreign-owned companies that have made Westchester their home base in the United States were saluted last month at the county chamber's annual meeting.


Marc Paradis and Katherine Henley Are Wed
Katherine Chesnut Henley, an art student in Paris, and Marc Pierre Paradis, an English tutor there, were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
Bruce Forbes, an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
Bartholomew's Church.
Mrs.
Paradis, 28 years old, graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
She is the daughter of Claire Chesnut Henley of Fayetteville, N.C., and J. M. Henley Jr. of Brentwood, Tenn., and the stepdaughter of Margaret C. Henley of Brentwood.
Mr.
Paradis, 28, graduated from McGill University.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael P. Paradis of Ottawa.


Fractured By Reality
THE FACADE
M.N.O.P.Q.
By Libuse Monikova.
Translated by John E. Woods. 374 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Turning Pickup Trucks And Broken Hearts Into Pure Platinum
The Sunset Grill is one of the trendiest restaurants in Nashville -- in fact, it's one of the only trendy restaurants in Nashville.
With its pale blue walls, sprigs of fresh flowers in slim white vases and pasta dishes that go for less than $10, the Grill is actually a pretty down-home affair compared to restaurants in New York or Los Angeles; but then trendiness was never much of a commodity in Nashville.
On a recent evening, Tony Brown, a senior vice president at MCA's Nashville division, sits at the corner table in the Sunset Grill's bar area.
Arguably the most important record company executive in the country music industry, Mr.
Brown, like the restaurant, lacks a high-powered air: he wears a white shirt, dark vest, black jeans and cowboy boots, and has a neatly trimmed beard.
"I was watching MTV recently, and they were going through the top five records," he says.
"The veejay says, 'No. 5 is Metallica. No. 4 is Guns 'n' Roses. No. 3 is some rap act. No. 2 is some other rap act. And No. 1 is' " -- Mr.
Brown imitates the veejay's exaggerated Southern accent -- " 'Yee-haw! Garth Brooks!' "


Coffee in Japan
To the Editor: I am a big fan of Amanda Mayer Stinchecum; her travel writing on Japan is consistently knowledgeable and perceptive.
I was amazed, however, by her statement ("Japan's Other Ritual: The Coffee Ceremony," Nov. 17) that "Japan is one place where you can feel confident of finding a good cup of coffee -- freshly brewed, strong and fragrant -- in almost any town or village big enough to have a single coffee shop."
As a law professor with an interest in Japanese law, I have traveled four times to Japan, once for a full year.
I have found that the search for a decent cup of coffee in Japan is only slightly less exhausting than the search for the Holy Grail.
A common technique among Japanese coffee enthusiasts is to select coffee beans with great care, roast them painstakingly in the shop, brew the coffee fastidiously, and then boil it beyond recognition.
I have not, though, visited any of the shops highlighted in Ms.
Stinchecum's article; perhaps there is hope yet.
JONATHAN WEINBERG Ann Arbor, Mich.
Amanda Mayer Stinchecum responds:
Professor Weinberg's unfortunate experiences do not coincide with mine.
One clue to finding good coffee is to look for shops that call themselves "coffee specialty shops" or for coffee shops that serve a number of different types of beans and blends; many shops that sell beans also serve a carefully brewed cup of coffee.


Yugoslavia Truce Is Largely Holding
Despite reports of local clashes, a United Nations-brokered cease-fire in contested areas of Croatia appeared to gain momentum today.
No clashes were reported in Dubrovnik, Osijek or Vinkovci or in central Croatia -- areas of almost daily fighting since late in June, when Croatia and another Yugoslav republic, Slovenia, declared independence.


OPENING THE DOOR
I want to thank Robert M. Grossman (About Men: "Opening the Door," Dec. 8) for making a believer of one old cynic.
There is still hope -- hope for the human race -- if only one person behaves as he does.
ROY R. HAMILTON
Milford, N.J.


Ms. Meyer Wed To Leif Olsen
Deborah Suzanne Meyer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Meyer of White Plains, and Leif Olsen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Olsen of Spring Valley, N.Y., were married yesterday at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.
The Rev.
Gary P. Fertig performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Olsen, 24 years old, is a computer systems manager with the law firm of Sidley &amp; Austin in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father is an architect with his own company in White Plains.
Her mother manages the office of a dentist in White Plains.


Marla Dowell Weds John Perkins
Marla Lorraine Dowell and John Dillard Perkins, Ph.D. candidates in physics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, were married yesterday at Nassau Presbyterian Church in Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
O.
Elaine Hinnant officiated.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan with high distinction and is a daughter of Eunice H. Wilkinson of Princeton and Earl H. Dowell of Durham, N.C.
Her father is dean of the engineering school at Duke University in Durham.
Her mother is the screening coordinator of children's crisis intervention services at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in Piscataway.
She is a stepdaughter of David T. Wilkinson, a professor of physics at Princeton University, and Lynn C. Dowell, a lecturer in German at Duke.


Heidi C. Chen Is Married
Heidi Constance Chen, a daughter of Dr.
Tio and Mrs.
Ching Chen of Metuchen, N.J., was married yesterday to Brett Peter Lauring, a son of Dr.
Lewis and Mrs.
Beverly Lauring of St.
Petersburg, Fla.
Rabbi Martin W. Levy officiated at the Pratt Mansions in New York.
Ms.
Chen, 25 years old, is keeping her name.
She is in her last year of law school at Cornell University.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University, as did her husband.
Her father is president of Sogo Technology, an engineering consulting and real-estate development concern in Metuchen.


A Family Circle Campaign With Unexpected Images
TO encourage marketers to buy advertising pages, the Seven Sisters women's service magazines have portrayed their readers as celebrities or jugglers.
But until now, readers were never presented bare-chested, with tattoos and spiked hair.
Beginning this week, those unconventional images will be the focus of a tongue-in-cheek trade advertising campaign for Family Circle created by Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, a brash agency known for unorthodox work for clients like No Excuses jeans and Kenneth Cole shoes.


S. M. Plotnick, 76; Taught at and Ran Westchester School
S.
Maurice Plotnick, an educator who headed the Westchester Day School in Mamaroneck, N.Y., died Dec. 28 at White Plains Hospital.
He was 76 years old.
Mr. Plotnick died of prostate cancer, his family said.


New Interest in Missing Servicemen May Imperil Move Toward Hanoi Ties
Expectations that the United States and Vietnam would soon establish diplomatic relations, more than 15 years after the end of the Indochina War, may be set back by a resurgence of interest in one piece of unfinished business that will not go away: the fate of missing Americans.
The revival of the issue has been spurred by a series of statements over the last six months -- from apparently bogus reports of sightings of live Americans to unsubstantiated information that Soviet officials interrogated Americans in Indochina after the time Vietnam said it had freed them.


Review/Television; Treating Education Ills As Courtroom Drama
Format gets in the way of content on "Learning in America: Education on Trial," the three-part series that begins tonight at 10 on Channels 13 and 49.
Each hour is set in a courtroom and features real lawyers and a real judge.
Viewers are to serve as jurors, via a toll-free number, and their verdict will be revealed in the next morning's USA Today.
In tonight's program, "Do We Need a National Report Card?," the witnesses -- Dr.
Saul Cooperman, who used to be the New Jersey Education Commissioner; Gov.
Roy Romer of Colorado; David Smith, a teacher in an East Harlem secondary school, and Ann Lynch, a former president of the National Parent Teacher Association -- are examined and cross-examined in what turns out to be a fitfully informative hour.


Plans for Repairing 6 Battered Industries
From autos and real estate to retailing and banking, some leading American industries were battered last year.
Now top managers are seeking to repair the damage.
To be sure, some areas of the economy, like financial services and the pharmaceutical industry, fared well.
But many businesses must deal with a continued crisis in consumer confidence, while contending with too much capacity and corporate management styles more suited to the complacent marketplace of the past than to today's competitive maelstrom.


Market Place; At Dollar General, What Recession?
The recession has not brought hard times to all retailers.
The Dollar General Corporation, which sells inexpensive necessities like toothpaste, bleach and paper towels to low-income consumers, is growing at a pace that is the envy of merchants with more affluent customers.
Last week, it reported "the best Christmas selling season in the history of the company," said Cal Turner Jr., the chairman and grandson of the Tennessee tobacco farmer who founded the company 52 years ago.
Sales at stores open more than a year are up 10 percent through December.
Last month, sales roared ahead 25.2 percent.


The Quandary in Japan; Bush Will Be Given Concessions on Trade, But Not the Broad Changes the U.S. Wants
For weeks, Japanese newspapers have been filled with reports of trade concessions Japan will offer President Bush on his visit this week, most of them aimed at increasing Japanese imports of American autos.
But for all the expected promises, the measures are likely to create a troubling quandary for American officials: many of the steps have nothing to do with opening the Japanese market or freeing trade, the professed aim of the President's trade policies.
Instead, they add up to Government orders simply to buy more American products to head off worsening trade tensions.


J. M. Hess Wed To Beth Posner
Beth Sheba Posner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert T. Posner of East Windsor, N.J., was married yesterday to Jonathan Morris Hess, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Hess of Brooklyn.
The bride's uncle, Rabbi David M. Posner, officiated at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Ms.
Posner, 24 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and is pursuing a doctorate in comparative literature and literary theory from the University of Pennsylvania, as is the bridegroom.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Weltz &amp; Posner in New York.
Her mother, Jacklyn H. Posner, is a vice president at Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York.


Seattle Journal; City Fights to Keep Its Losing Team
For the first time in its inglorious history, the Seattle Mariners baseball team has a problem that has nothing to do with its performance on the field.
The club posted its first winning record last year after fielding an unmatched series of losers for 14 years in a row.
In the process, it shattered all home attendance records, attracting more than two million fans -- close to what the pennant-winning Atlanta Braves drew.


Topics of The Times; Frank Politicking
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the House Ways and Means chairman, is already off and running for re-election in an Illinois district dramatically altered by reapportionment.
Last month, he sent his would-be constituents a "Dear Friend" letter discussing his sponsorship of tax fairness and health care reform.
What's troubling is that under present rules, taxpayers pay for this electioneering.
Mr.
Rostenkowski used his free mailing privilege, known as franking, to flood the redrawn district with news about Congress and, of course, favorable news about himself.
His challenger in the Democratic primary, Dick Simpson, has good reason to complain about abuse of the frank.
But Mr.
Rostenkowski was only taking full advantage of current rules allowing members to send taxpayer-financed mail into their new district once a redistricting plan is final.


Review/Opera; From Shanghai, a Tale Of Love and a Dream
When the Beijing Opera appeared at the Metropolitan Opera House more than a decade ago, uninitiated Westerners were struck by the teeming theatricality of the productions.
Stately stylized gesture often gave way to bolder modes of expression, including outright acrobatics.
With continued exposure to the varieties of Chinese opera, thanks mainly to annual Viva Chinatown celebrations of the Chinese-American Arts Council, New Yorkers have come to see more of the intimate and subtle side of this ancient artistic tradition.
"The Dream," presented by the Hua Wenyi Kun Opera Troupe of Shanghai on Friday evening in the Viva Chinatown program at Alice Tully Hall, stood at the furthest remove from the grandiose Beijing productions.
This exquisite miniature, little more than a half-hour long, featured a four-member cast and a four-member orchestra, with only a dressing table and chair as props, though the costumes were typically ornate and gorgeous.


Guns 'N Skis, Enter the N.R.A.
The National Rifle Association would seem to be a perfect sponsor for the financially strapped United States Olympic biathlon team.
After all, the sport requires rifle-shooting ability in addition to skill at cross-country skiing.
"But the people who are in biathlon, and follow it, are not N.R.A. types," said HOWARD BUXTON, the president of the United States Biathlon Association.
"In fact, they're probably opposed to many of the N.R.A. ideas."


Review/Television; A Bright if Problematic Future Fouled by Tragedy
On June 12, 1985, Edmund Perry, a 17-year-old black student, was killed in Harlem by a white plainclothes police officer.
New York City confronted still another tragedy with racial undertones.
What made this one different was that Mr.
Perry was no ordinary student.
He had just graduated from Phillips Exeter Academy, one of the nation's most prestigious prep schools, and was planning to attend Stanford University on a full scholarship after working for the summer on Wall Street.
Striking a national nerve, the incident could not be swept quickly out of sight.
The case was subsequently recounted in "Best Intentions," a book by Robert Sam Anson, which has now been adapted by Richard Wesley for a television movie -- tonight at 9 on NBC -- with the lumbering title of "Murder Without Motive: The Edmund Perry Story." Directed by Kevin Hooks with a cool authority that is all the more unnerving for its matter-of-fact tone, the film explores issues of race and class, ambition and opportunity.
There are no comforting bromides.


Longer Year Is Advocated For Schools
Education Commissioner John Ellis is laying plans to add a month or more to the school year in New Jersey, a change that would sharply increase the costs of the nation's most expensive school system.
"We have to make a commitment to extend the school year and that will drive up the costs," Mr.
Ellis said in an interview in which he reflected on an 18-month tenure that he described as "turbulent" and that has been marked by continuing rumors of an imminent resignation -- rumors that both he and Gov.
Jim Florio, who appointed him, have denied.


Dance in Review
Beverly Blossom and Douglas Nielsen
Bessie Schonberg Theater
It is hard to imagine a more inspired pairing of kindred souls than the matching of Beverly Blossom and Douglas Nielsen on a program on Friday night.
They are opposites in looks and styles.
Ms.
Blossom is small, dowdily dressed in shapeless black and shifts position in small increments of steps, looking sometimes as if she is being blown by a fierce wind.
She is an extraordinarily acute performer, whose theater-dance solos are at once profoundly comic and tragic.
Mr.
Nielsen is a tall sprucely turned-out performer who moves in big gulping steps and flummoxing tumbles.
His work, less seasoned than that of Ms.
Blossom, is more pure physical comedy.
What unites the two is an irresistible look of madness.


If It's Monday, N.F.L. Coaches Must Be Interviewing for Jobs
The Green Bay Packers, who were unable to lure Bill Parcells from the television studio to the sidelines, are still looking for a coach after dismissing Lindy Infante two weeks ago.
Mike Holmgren, San Francisco's offensive coordinator, has interviewed for the job and is considered a top candidates, along with Chuck Knox, the former Seattle coach.


Sampson Opts Out of N.B.A.
Ralph Sampson said Saturday night that he would immediately leave the Washington Bullets of the National Basketball Association and join a professional team in Spain.
The 7-foot-4-inch Sampson, who joined the Bullets on Nov. 19 after getting a buyout from his lengthy contract with the Sacramento Kings, appeared in only 10 games with Washington and was used sparingly.
He did not play in any of the Bullets' last six games and announced his decision to leave the team after spending the entire game on the bench in Washington's 113-99 loss to the Knicks.
The 31-year-old center will go on waivers on Tuesday, although he said his days with the Bullets are over.
"I love the N.B.A., so if anyone wants me they can feel free to give me a call," Sampson said.
Sampson said he was unsure of the name of the team he would join in Spain.


Soviet Emigre Fatally Shot Defending Wife in Attack
A Soviet Jewish emigre coming home from a birthday party was shot and killed early yesterday on a Brooklyn street corner as he rushed to defend his wife, who had been punched by one of three muggers, the police said.
By chance, the man's 19-year-old son was a block away, driving a young man and a teen-age girl home, and saw the tragedy unfolding, said the girl in the car.
The son smashed his car into the robbers', forcing them to flee on foot, said Sgt.
Steven Sheehan of the Brooklyn South Homicide Squad.


BATTERED INDUSTRIES Picking Up the Pieces in Six Struggling Business Sectors; Travel: Empty Seats, Empty Beds, Empty Pockets
For a student, a grade of 65 percent is nothing to write home about.
But for the airline and hotel industries, filling 65 percent of the seats or rooms is the difference between profit and loss.
For these hard-pressed industries, simply breaking even this year would seem like a moral victory.
Beset by recession and the fallout from the Persian Gulf war, airlines on average filled 63 percent of their seats in the first 10 months of 1991, according to the Air Transport Association.
Hotels fared no better, with occupancy averaging 62.3 percent through November of 1991, according to Smith Travel Research.
Although both are fairly close to break-even rates, analysts say the industries will continue to lose money unless the economy improves -- a big if.


On the Beach On Super Sunday
The last -- and only -- time a Super Bowl was held in the North, visitors to the Silverdome in Pontiac, Mich., complained about the weather outside.
That was in 1981.
Some fans, remembering how they slogged through the snow to get there (a massive traffic jam ensued when Vice President GEORGE BUSH decided at the last minute to attend), have decided to head south when the Super Bowl is held Jan. 26 in untropical Minneapolis.
But fans in Cancun, the resort island in Gulf of Mexico, will be able to have their beach and football, too.


In Japan's View, U.S. Car Companies Should Be Blaming Only Themselves
When President Bush and the chairmen of General Motors, Ford and Chrysler arrive Tuesday to cite the dismal sales of American cars here as a symbol of what is wrong with Japan, they may meet a rude surprise: Tokyo is preparing to cite the same example to make its case about the shortsightedness of American business.
For years, the Big Three auto makers have been the most conspicuous case of what happens to companies that try to sell in Japan exactly the same products they sell in America, with few concessions to Japanese tastes, Japanese habits, or even the width of Japanese roads.


Once Again, Bad News Nets
Just as the Nets began to generate some momentum, they stumbled at home Friday night against the Washington Bullets and collapsed on the road Saturday night in Chicago against the Bulls.
A winning streak of four games suddenly seemed like ancient history and the coming week, because of one misstep by Derrick Coleman, became more of a daunting future.
Coleman turned his troublesome left ankle late in the first quarter of a 140-96 pounding by the Bulls at Chicago Stadium.
After taking a shot, he landed on Stacey King's foot and hobbled off to the locker room to have the ankle iced.
Results of X-rays taken late yesterday afternoon upon Coleman's return to New Jersey were pending, but Coleman's status for tonight's game against the Los Angeles Clippers at Byrne Meadowlands Arena is at best questionable.


Democrats Call Bush's Health Proposal Inadequate
Two Democratic candidates for President today criticized health-care proposals being developed by the Bush Administration, saying they would not do enough to control health costs or to protect the millions of Americans who lack health insurance.
One of the Democrats, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, asserted that the Administration did not have "the guts to go after the wasteful health-insurance system we've got, the wasteful health-care system we've got."


CHRONICLE
WILLIAM F. BUCKLEY will read aloud from one of his novels at a small gathering tomorrow evening in the home of MARION JAVITS to benefit the reading program of PEN, the organization of writers and editors.
The purpose of the program, said TAMARA MOSKOWITZ, PEN's director of development, is to send authors into libraries, schools and community centers to encourage people to read more adventurously.
Mr.
Buckley viewed the prospect of reading a biographical section of one of his nine novels -- he refused to say which one -- as something of an adventure in itself.


Spa Owner to Pay Blacks Over Hiring Bias
The owner of Holiday Spa health clubs in five Eastern cities is creating a $1.4 million program to compensate blacks rejected for jobs because of their race, the company and the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission have announced.
The agreement between the commission and United States Health Inc. of Towson, Md., announced on Thursday, followed a year of investigation and about another year of negotiations, Frank Fritts, a supervisor in the commission's systemic investigations division, said.
The chain is owned by the Bally Manufacturing Corporation of Chicago.


World Economies


Out of Sight, Fire Burns Hidden World in Kansas
No one has been able to get close enough to even see it yet, but for more than a week now a stubborn fire has burned deep within one of the converted limestone mines near here that make up a subterranean world right out of a Batman movie.
It is a world of paved and lighted roads, a college library, a computer center and train tracks.
It serves as the venue for black-tie dinner dances and a 10-kilometer race.
And with its even temperature and low humidity, it offers almost perfect storage conditions for hundreds of acres of canned food, toys, stamps and other goods.


Question Box
Yount Nears Milestone
Q.
How close is Robin Yount to reaching 3,000 hits in his major league career?
A.
Closer than any other active player, and close enough to count on baseball issuing a "Robin Yount Countdown" shortly before the outfielder's 37th birthday next Sept. 16.
The Milwaukee Brewers' star will enter the 1992 season with 2,878 hits for his 18-year career, which means he needs just 122 to join a group of 16 players that embraced Rod Carew as its most recent member in 1985.


Yugoslav Cease-Fire Holds
Except for minor shooting incidents, Croatian and Yugoslav Army forces were reported today to be respecting the cease-fire in all the embattled Croatian regions, improving chances that the United Nations Security Council will send a peacekeeping force to Yugoslavia.
Federal army and Croatian officials reported that Saturday night was the most peaceful in months along the 350-mile battlefront, and no serious violations were noted today.


Getting Out of the Nuclear Arms Business
To the Editor:
It is extraordinary to me that the production of nuclear weapons by the United States and by other countries are always discussed separately, as if they had nothing to do with each other.
United States policy is as simple as it is contradictory: we do not want anyone else to produce nuclear weapons, but we want to continue even after the cold war is over.


BATTERED INDUSTRIES Picking Up the Pieces in Six Struggling Business Sectors; Retailing: Sick Merchants, Capitalist 'Cure'
How bad is it in the world of retailing?
One merchant, Child World, recently sent out a press release boasting that it actually made a payment on time to suppliers.
The "second in two weeks," the company noted.
Despite Child World's notice that it is still breathing, the dismal holiday shopping season is expected to be a prelude to a round of retailing bankruptcies.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 5,1992: MONDAY Carolina Fght Corp Central Vt Pub Svc Siera Pac Res TUESDAY  Rite Aid Corp WEDNESDAY  CBI Inds Inc C R Bard Inc Southwest Pub Svc Walgreen Co Weyerhauser Co THURSDAY  Adams Express Co Ford Mtr Co GTE Corp NWNL Cos Rubbermaid Inc Sun Inc Tultex Corp Washington Post FRIDAY  Flowers Inds Mercury Fin Co Travelers Corp Unum Corp


BATTERED INDUSTRIES Picking Up the Pieces in Six Struggling Business Sectors; Real Estate: The Developers Are Still Sifting Market's Rubble
Few industries in recent years have collapsed as completely and rapidly as commerical real estate.
Property values are down across the board, vacancies are at all-time highs and with the national economy caught in the grips of recession, the prospect that the demand for space will grow much this year is only a pipe dream.
The commercial real estate industry is trapped in a depression marked by a virtual absence of lenders willing to take any risk.
Even the usually optimistic developers and property market analysts are now admitting that things are likely to worsen over the next 18 months, especially for the staggeringly overbuilt office market.


U.N. CHIEF TO SEEK TEAM OF MONITORS TO AID YUGOSLAVIA
In an effort to encourage Yugoslavia's warring factions to respect their fragile cease-fire, the new United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Ghali, will ask the Security Council on Monday to send about 50 military observers there as quickly as possible.
But Mr.
Ghali will not ask the Council to send a proposed 10,000-member peacekeeping force to Yugoslavia until he has clearer evidence that the truce that went into effect Friday continues in force and until the civilian leaders of Serbian-occupied regions of Croatia agree to cooperate with a peacekeeping operation, diplomats and other officials say.
Approval Is Expected
The officials say the proposal, which the Security Council is expected to approve early this week, is intended to press all sides in the Yugoslav conflict to exercise restraint.


Battle on Jerusalem's Future Has Roots 3,000 Years in Past
Avi Maoz says he has a dream.
Fatmeh Ahmad Karain asks why his vision should come at her expense.
Their differences form the core of a nasty court fight that is being waged over conflicting property claims in a part of East Jerusalem called Silwan, which spreads across hills lying just below the imposing walls of the Old City.


Chemical Banking Realigns Agencies
The new Chemical Banking Corporation, formed last week by the merger of Chemical and the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation, has completed a realignment of its advertising accounts, said Charles Salmans, senior vice president of corporate advertising.
As was expected, the retail-bank account has been consolidated at McCann-Erickson New York, which previously handled Manufacturers Hanover's consumer advertising.
A new campaign is expected in June.


Man Dies in Attempt To Rob a Merchant
A 71-year-old jewelry store owner in Chinatown shot and killed a 40-year-old man who tried to rob him yesterday morning, the police said.
The dead man, tentatively identified as Robert Collado of 289 21st Street in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, was shot three times in the torso about 11:13 A.M. by the store owner, Herman Muser, at the Canal Material House, at 94 Canal Street, the police said.


Jesse C. Goodwin, 76, A Packaging Executive
Jesse C. Goodwin, co-founder of Mother's Food Products, which packaged kosher foods, died on Dec. 30 at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
He was 76 years old and lived in Verona, N.J.
He died of heart failure caused by a variety of pulmonary conditions, his son Richard said.


Those Great Shirts Are Going Global
MIKE CONNOR, the newest commissioner in sports, is not about to capture a lucrative television contract.
But maybe he can interest Japanese and Europeans in some nifty bowling shirts?
Connor has just started his duties as the head of the Professional Bowlers Association, a post that had been JOSEPH ANTENORA's since 1970.
Connor, like his counterparts in other sports, is looking toward globalization and marketing as a way to increase flattening income.


UMass Fine-Tunes a Prime-Time Upset
Last February, Coach John Calipari of the University of Massachusetts scheduled a game at midnight to get a national television date from ESPN.
It was one way to get his up-and-coming Minutemen some exposure.
This season, thinking the same way, he went even further out on a limb, scheduling Oklahoma for a Jan. 4 game at Springfield, Mass.
"We have to fight like heck to get on TV," Calipari said, explaining that to sign Oklahoma, he had to agree to play in Norman, Okla., two years from now.


Season on the Links: More Prosperity Is Just Around the Next Dogleg
After a season that gave us the most dramatic Ryder Cup ever played and the thrilling power of John Daly, 1992 will have to go some way to keep from being regarded as an anticlimactic year in golf.
Of course, the same could have been said last January about 1991, the year that followed the social upheaval of Shoal Creek.
In fact, 1992 promises a great deal, including Daly's first encounter with the wide fairways and short par 5's of Augusta National, Phil Mickelson's professional debut, and the classic venues of Pebble Beach and Muirfield, where the United States and British Opens will be played.


Cecile Naumburg, 94, Philanthropist, Is Dead
Cecile L. Naumburg, a philanthropist and former board member of Carnegie Hall and other cultural organizations, died on Friday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
Mrs.
Naumburg was 94 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Her death was caused by respiratory failure, her family said.


Sports of The Times; Detroit Fans Cheer for the Quarterback Without the Union Label
THE last guy anyone in Detroit would have considered a football hero became an unabashed, unmitigated, unquestioned hero yesterday.
In this town that wears the union label so proudly, he was considered a strikebreaker.
In this town that has boasted such quarterback stars as Bobby Layne and Earl Morrall and Tobin Rote, the guy who came to camp this summer as the team's No. 3 quarterback, who has played in things like the Potato Bowl while attending a community college, who wasn't even drafted by the National Football League after his senior year in college, this guy is today's hero here.
And in this grizzled, battered town, this blue-collar, lunch-bucket town, the guy with the dark, tousled hair and the gentle eyes and the unprepossessing build of, say, a high school chemistry whiz, this guy was cheered wildly by the 78,290 football fans in the Silverdome.


3 Are Attacked By Large Gang In Manhattan
A gang of about 50 to 60 teen-agers swarmed around three young men walking in lower Manhattan yesterday evening, stealing their jackets and slashing one of them who resisted, the police said.
Twenty-three teen-agers -- 8 of them juveniles and 15 of them 16 to 19 years old -- were arrested a few minutes after the group attacked the three young men about 5:30 P.M. at Trinity Place and Rector Street, near Trinity Church, a police spokesman, Sgt.
Edward J. Burns, said.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet
New York State Theater
The dancers of the New York City Ballet looked surprisingly fresh and committed in "The Nutcracker" on Saturday night, given the fact that they had been performing the ballet for over a month.
Perhaps it was because the end was near, in a last weekend of "Nutcracker" performances for the year.


Votes Are Said to Favor An Independent Revco
A plan proposed by some creditors of Revco D.S.
Inc. to maintain the drugstore chain as an independent entity won the widest support in a vote by creditors that concluded Friday, according to preliminary results announced by Revco.
The plan competed against two other proposals, both of which would have merged the company with other drugstore companies.
One merger plan called for Revco's acquisition by the Jack Eckerd Corporation; the other proposed a merger with the Rite Aid Corporation.


Topics of The Times; Naivete's Not the Problem
Older Americans are being bilked of their life savings, as documented in a recent report in The Times.
The victims, most of them widows, tell, for example, of trusting "a nice young man" who ingratiated himself and then disappeared with most of their bank account.
Even sadder were the tales of family thievery.
Driven by drugs and the recession, children in soaring numbers prey on elderly parents.
The solution seems obvious: Wise up the gullible old folks.
But older adults are no more naive than younger ones.
What they lack is not savvy but support, the friendship and confidence they need to sound the alarm.
One bilked widow in Asbury Park, N.J., told authorities that she was so lonely "she'd pay the devil to visit her."


Behind the Iron Hand at Tenneco
In his first months at Tenneco, Michael H. Walsh has practically run a seminar on how to act swiftly to alter the course of an industrial giant in distress.
Even so, it will take a few years before anyone can applaud Mr.
Walsh for administering at Tenneco Inc. his successful industrial shock therapy, which he most recently demonstrated at the Union Pacific Railroad.


Your Personal High-Tech Coach
If you were a ski-jumper trying to get an extra few feet of lift, you could be tested and videotaped by the United States Olympic Committee.
Olympians have access to the latest psychological and physiological testing by a battery of experts.
But what if you're a weekend tennis player and your serve fails you on match point?


Breaking Welfare Dependency for Young Mothers
WHEN Padora Vincent gave birth as a teen-ager three years ago, she personified a growing national problem.
Today, she may exemplify one possible solution.
The Census Bureau reported last month that more and more new mothers, teen-agers in particular, are unwed.
Among blacks, 9 of 10 teen-agers who had babies in 1990 were unmarried -- the highest rate of any major ethnic or racial group.
Regardless of whether the social stigma of premarital pregnancy has declined, teen-age motherhood typically bodes badly for the children.
Many grow up poor.
Some get another chance later in life.
Their mothers often don't.


QUOTATION OF THE DAY
"I lived for many years cherishing the revolution. I loved it and worked for it and sacrificed for it, but the Cuban people have no rights anymore, and nothing to eat or enjoy as diversions. Before too long, Cuba is going to be thrown back to the conditions it was in when Christopher Columbus discovered America." -- MARIA DE LA CARIDAD CARRAZANA, who fled to Florida by helicopter last week.  [ B8:1 ]


Athletes and Textbooks: A New Chapter Awaits
The most far-reaching new academic requirements for college athletes in almost 10 years will go before a vote of National Collegiate Athletic Association schools this week.
Opponents are bracing for what is likely to be a futile fight.
"I told the Presidents Commission to expect even more heated debate at the 1992 convention than what they experienced in 1990 or '91," the N.C.A.A.'s executive director, Richard Schultz, said.


Miss Rothberg Weds
Debra Joan Rothberg, a daughter of Mrs.
Ira D. Rothberg of Westbury, L.I., and the late Prof.
Rothberg, was married yesterday to Barry Steven Grodenchik, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Grodenchik of Flushing, Queens.
Rabbi Robert Benjamin officiated at Temple Emanuel in New Hyde Park, L.I.
Mrs.
Grodenchik, 29 years old, is an assistant professor of developmental mathematics at Nassau Community College.
She graduated from Pace University and received a master's degree in mathematics from Adelphi University.
Mr.
Grodenchik, 31, is the chief administrative officer of the Office of the Queens Borough President.
He is a graduate of the State University of New York at Binghamton.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about two fatal shootings in Bridgeport, Conn., described the incident incorrectly in some copies.
The police initially thought the two men had shot each other; investigators later said that both had been killed in a robbery.


Real Estate Firm to Name President
At a time when many real estate developers are cutting back, the Edward S. Gordon Company, a leading New York brokerage and real estate services company, is aggressively expanding its operations.
The company is expected to announce this week the appointment of Stephen B. Siegel, a former chairman of Cushman &amp; Wakefield Inc., as its new president.
The appointment is likely to be seen as a coup for Edward Gordon, who will remain chairman of the firm he founded in 1972.
Mr.
Siegel, who rose to become president, chief executive and chairman of Cushman &amp;


As Fighting in Somalia Rages On, African Neighbor Seeks a Truce
In an unusual regional diplomatic initiative for Africa, the Eritreans are attempting to bring an end to the fighting in Somalia.
And some Western officials believe the move may have a better chance for success than more publicized international efforts.
Traditionally, African governments have been unwilling to try to solve civil wars in neighboring countries on the ground that such efforts constitute undue intervention.


At the Fish Library, a Chronicle of Death and Taxes
When Alice Curtis Desmond died in 1990 leaving an $18 million estate and no heirs, the trustees of the library she founded and liberally supported in the decade before her death anticipated a settled future.
So did her lawyer and her nurse.
But when the will was read, the trustees and many of the 6,500 residents in this bucolic Hudson River estate town were dismayed to learn that the millions the 93-year-old banking heiress had left to the library would be all but eaten up in paying taxes on the $2 million apiece she left to the nurse and lawyer.


Brooklyn Pizzeria Dispute Leads To Violence and Fatal Shooting
A dispute in a Brooklyn pizzeria turned deadly Saturday night when three assailants attacked a pizza maker, blinded him by throwing flour in his face, then shot him in the head as he wobbled backward into the shop's kitchen, the police said.
During the attack, the worker, Redzep Ulaj, 30 years old, defended himself by swinging a wooden pizza paddle at one of the men, who came into the shop, Original Pizza at 2351 Ralph Avenue in Mill Basin, at 11:30 P.M., the police said.


Escape From Cuba: An Affair For Family and Friends, Too
Ten days ago, at a ceremony in Havana, German Pompa Gonzalez was awarded a medal for "exemplary service" to the Cuban Revolution for his performance as a helicopter pilot.
This morning, he sat in the living room of his sister-in-law's modest house in a Miami suburb, a wanted man back in his homeland but a hero to thousands of Cuban exiles here.
Mr.
Pompa's journey to freedom began on Friday at dawn, when he awoke, dressed quietly in the uniform of Cuba's national airline so as not to wake fellow crew members still asleep in a staff dormitory and boarded the Russian-made MI-8 helicopter in which he normally ferried tourists around Cuba.


Mary Blair, 75, Dies; Prominent in Society
Mary Josephine Blair, a prominent figure in New York society for many years, died on Dec. 29 at her home in Hobe Sound, Fla.
She was 75 years old.
She died of cancer, said her daughter, Mary McFadden, the fashion designer.


Muhammad Kenyatta, 47, Dies; Professor and Civil Rights Leader
Muhammad I. Kenyatta, a legal scholar and civil rights crusader who sued the Federal Government in 1969 for harassing him under an F.B.I. counterintelligence program, died in Buffalo on Friday.
He was 47 years old.
Mr.
Kenyatta, a visiting professor at the University at Buffalo School of Law since 1988, had long been in ill health, said university officials, who added that the professor had suffered complications from diabetes and was hospitalized at the time of his death.


Rules Forcing Towns to Pick Big New Dumps or Big Costs
New Federal and state rules are forcing the closing of hundreds of old community garbage dumps and prompting the development of many fewer, but much larger landfills that only the biggest cities and the largest garbage companies can afford to build and operate.
And residents of thousands of small communities, like this one south of Montgomery, will be forced to choose the revenue and heavy truck traffic of a new nearby landfill or the huge increase in costs of transporting their garbage far away.
What is definite, though, is that the new regulations are proving to be a bonanza to the nation's largest garbage companies.


Taiwan Voted forStatus Quo, not One China; A Stinging Defeat
To the Editor:
Contrary to your Dec. 24 editorial on the Dec. 21 Taiwan election, the ruling Kuomintang Party "victory" was not "a vote for one China." How could it be?
The Kuomintang-dominated Government banned the opposition party's platform of an independent "Republic of Taiwan" even from election posters.
The Government arrested a score of pro-independence leaders on election eve.


BATTERED INDUSTRIES Picking Up the Pieces in Six Struggling Business Sectors; Insurance: Calming Policyholders and Satisfying Shareholders
Barring some extraordinary event, like another run by policyholders, most analysts and industry executives do not expect a giant insurance company to fail this year.
But neither do they expect much improvement in returns to shareholders, which have contracted considerably in the face of sharp competition.
"The central problem in this industry remains the same: how to earn effective profits," said Larry A. Brossman, the head of insurance rating at Duff &amp; Phelps Inc.
"Companies that used to earn 12 to 15 percent on their equity now earn less than 10 percent."


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Auto Sales . . .
Dec.
Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Consumer Credit . . .
Nov.
Thursday  Producer Price Index . . .
Dec.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  Unemployment . . .
Dec.


Cable's Big Ally on Capitol Hill: Hollywood
Having struck out twice in the last two years, Congress will begin a third effort later this month to pass legislation that would allow most cities to regulate prices for basic cable television services.
Similar cable bills have foundered largely because of opposition from the cable industry's formidable lobbying group and from Republicans who oppose rate regulation.
But this time, despite broad support among lawmakers who see the measure as an ideal consumer issue, it is in danger of being derailed by opposition from a new quarter: Hollywood movie studios and their renowned lobbyist, Jack Valenti.


No Time to Read? Well, Just Listen
It is the next century.
New Age Person walks up to a latter-day newsstand, asks for her favorite magazine and is handed a tape.
She pops it into her Walkman, adjusts her earphones and settles in for a good new-fashioned browse.
Well, maybe.
But that day is hardly around the corner.
In fact, the magazine industry is just beginning to look into the possibilities of audio cassettes as marketable spinoffs of existing magazines.


New Zealand's Latest Yacht Makes Fine First Impression
New Zealand's newest America's Cup yacht looks as if it could be a front-runner this winter in challengers' efforts to win the America's Cup, based on first impressions.
New Zealand's boat, the team's fourth and final yacht to be built for the 1992 cup trials, beat seven other America's Cup contenders here Saturday in an informal fleet race in the ocean off Point Loma.
The official challengers' trials, which begin Jan. 25, are match races.


Taiwan Voted for Status Quo, not One China; A Stinging Defeat
To the Editor:
Contrary to your Dec. 24 editorial on the Dec. 21 Taiwan election, the ruling Kuomintang Party "victory" was not "a vote for one China." How could it be?
The Kuomintang-dominated Government banned the opposition party's platform of an independent "Republic of Taiwan" even from election posters.
The Government arrested a score of pro-independence leaders on election eve.


CHRONICLE
For THOMAS P. WALSH, becoming director of public safety for the newly organized Times Square Business Improvement District, is a homecoming of sorts.
A former New York City police officer who rose to become the department's highest-ranking officer for the southern half of Manhattan, he began his career 35 years ago on foot patrol on West 44th Street.
Now he is back in the neighborhood, in charge of recruiting, training and supervising 40 public safety officers for the district, which went into operation last week.
"My first post was in 1957 on 44th Street between Broadway and Ninth Avenue," said Mr.
Walsh, who retired in October as patrol borough commander for Manhattan South.
" 'Little Abner' was playing then, so was Ethel Merman in 'Happy Hunting.' The biggest problems had to do with sex and prostitution and that has improved immeasurably.


Sect's Racketeering Trial Is Set to Open
At the peak of his power, the man who calls himself the Son of God presided over a multimillion-dollar business and real estate empire, the Temple of Love Inc., and was courted by politicians.
But when Yahweh ben Yahweh goes on trial in Federal court here this week, jurors will hear former members of his group and more than 100 other witnesses argue that his reign was one of murder, arson, extortion and sexual exploitation.
Along with 15 followers, Yahweh ben Yahweh, a 56-year-old preacher who asserts that blacks are the true Israelites and that all whites are devils, is charged with masterminding the killings of 14 people in the Miami area in the 1980's.
His Nation of Yahweh, one of the names used by the group and which once claimed to have more than 20,000 members in 45 cities, is now on trial itself as a "continuing criminal racketeering enterprise" masquerading as a religion, according to the United States Government.


Paying to Train Volunteers To Work With the Neediest
The 2,000 to 3,000 new volunteers who come to the Community Service Society of New York every year often arrive with very definite plans about the kind of people they want to help.
Many have been inspired by news stories and documentaries, by Oprah, Geraldo and Donahue and by made-for-television movies.
"The Burning Bed," for example, which starred Farrah Fawcett as a battered wife, prompted many people to volunteer to work with abused women, said Maureen Curley, who runs the society's Retired Senior Volunteer Program.


Muslim Guards: Security Unit Maintaining Pride
Silent and stonefaced, they stand in their crisp suits and bow ties in some of the nation's toughest neighborhoods and assemblages, their hands folded neatly, their eyes scanning for the slightest sign of disruption.
More often than not, they work without pay.
They carry no arms.
Still, the guards from the Nation of Islam, who have been called to clean up crack-infested streets and protect black politicians and celebrities, wield a weapon that often eludes the police in black neighborhoods: respect.


Rain or Shine, It's Hail to the Redskins
The Redskins have reached the National Conference championship game because they are a better-balanced team than the Atlanta Falcons.
For the same reasons, the Redskins should beat the Lions here next Sunday to win the conference title and head for Super Bowl XXVI two weeks later.
Teams with gimmicks often win big games, but sooner or later they also lose them.
And in the National Football League playoffs, one loss sends you home.


Rise in Long-Term Rates Expected
The winter is usually a bad time for the bond market, with interest rates tending to rise, and some analysts expect this year to be no exception, even with the weak economy and low inflation.
"January and February has always been a tough time for the bond market," said James Kochan, fixed-income strategist for R. W. Baird &amp; Company in Milwaukee.
"I think between now and the quarterly refunding auctions in February, there will be a bit of a back-up in long-term interest rates, even though the fundamentals look very good."


BRIEFS
Debt *
Cigna Corp., Philadelphia, is offering $100 million in 8 1/4 percent notes due in 2007 at a price of 100 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are expected to be rated A-1 by Moody's and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Union Camp Corp., Wayne, N.J., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $150 million in debt securities.
Preferred  *
Santander Overseas Bank Inc.'s preferred stock has an A+ rating from S.&amp; P., which confirmed the rating in response to inquiries.


Miss Maggio Has Wedding
Monique Maggio, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bart E. Maggio of Passaic Park, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Peter Koribanics, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Koribanics of Clifton, N.J.
Msgr.
Joseph Gallo officiated at the New York Athletic Club.
Mrs.
Koribanics, 26 years old, graduated from Rider College and is a saleswoman at Saks &amp; Company in New York.
Her father is an osteopath in Elmwood Park and Saddle Brook, N.J., and the president of the American Association of Osteopathic Surgeons.
Her mother, Beverly Maggio, is a futures trader on the New York Stock Exchange.


BUSH WARNS SEOUL ON PACE OF PACTS WITH NORTH KOREA
Following several remarkable agreements intended to end four decades of war and hostility between the two Koreas, President Bush arrived here Sunday and quietly warned the South Korean leadership against moving too fast in dealings with the Communist North before hard evidence emerges that it is ending reported efforts to produce nuclear weapons.
At a private dinner Sunday night with South Korea's President, Roh Tae Woo, Mr.
Bush made it clear that he believed the cold war was far from over in northeast Asia, and seemed implicitly critical of Mr.
Roh for rushing into agreements with North Korea, according to Hyun Hong Choo, the South Korean Ambassador to Washington, who attended the dinner.
The accords, which the two nations signed on Dec. 31, include a nonaggression pact and a mutual vow to ban nuclear weapons from Korean territory.
Vague Terms on Inspections
But the agreements are vague about inspection of nuclear sites, something the North Korean Government of President Kim Il Sung has held off while he appears to be nearing the capability to build a crude nuclear weapon.


Leslie Mara Yenkin Weds in Ohio
Leslie Mara Yenkin, a designer of educational software for the Mobius Corporation in Alexandria, Va., was married yesterday to Jonathan Mayer Petuchowski, the director of financial assets for the Resolution Trust Corporation Oversight Board in Washington.
Rabbi Aaron M. Petuchowski, the bridegroom's brother, officiated at the home of Mrs.
Abe I. Yenkin, the bride's grandmother, in Columbus, Ohio.
Ms.
Yenkin, who is keeping her name, is 32 years old.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and has a master's degree in education from the University of Maryland.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard K. Yenkin of Columbus.
Her father is chairman of the Yenkin-Majestic Paint Corporation, a paint and resin products company in Columbus.
Her mother, Miriam Yenkin, is a national vice chairman of United Jewish Appeal and a vice president of the Council of Jewish Federations.


Fuming Assembly Returns To Simmering Tax Battle
When the Legislature reconvenes Monday morning, Democratic Assemblymen plan to be in the State House and Republicans plan to be across the street.
Whether they join their colleagues under the dome depends on whether enough Democrats show up.
More is at stake in the final eight days of the Democratically controlled 204th Legislature than the contentious and bitterly partisan issue of taxes -- redrawing the state's Congressional map, for one.
But the lengthy list of bills has essentially been put on hold until the Democrats prove they can overcome the hurdles the Republicans erected last month by not showing up.


INSIDE
Yanks Accord on Tartabull
Danny Tartabull, the most attractive free agent available, reached a 5-year accord worth $27 million with the Yanks.
SportsMonday, Page C1.
Back to Albany, Unhappily
The State Legislature returns for a session that many predict will be the toughest in years, citing an explosive mix of political elements.
Page B1.


New York Needs Three Heroes, Not One
Mayor David Dinkins, Gov.
Mario Cuomo and Felix Rohatyn, chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, are likely to strike a deal soon that will shape the health of New York City's economy and the fiscal viability of its government.
Its elements may be outlined by Jan. 16, when the Mayor submits his four-year financial plan to the State Financial Control Board.
This plan should be examined to determine whether it addresses the city's underlying problems or merely papers over them.
The crux of the problem is that in the 1980's the government grew too large to be sustained by the economic base that remained after the Wall Street crash of October 1987 and the 1991 recession.
The first fiscal adjustment to this harsh problem was the budget adopted last June.
To close a $2.3 billion gap projected for the current fiscal year, the city adopted a "tax and slash" program.


Israelis Expecting Arabs to Attend Talks
Israeli negotiators headed tonight for another round of Middle East peace talks as senior officials here predicted that Arab delegations would also journey to Washington before long despite having delayed their travels to protest Israel's planned expulsion of 12 Palestinians from its occupied territories.
"They will come," said Health Minister Ehud Olmert, who is close to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir.
"Don't worry."


Marty James, 38, Dies; A Counselor on AIDS
Marty James, a counselor who said on national television that he helped people with AIDS commit suicide, took his own life after battling the disease, a friend said.
He was 38 years old.
Mr.
James died on Dec. 25 at his West Hollywood home after taking sleeping pills, his companion, Steven Kanengiser, said over the weekend.
"The pain became unmanageable," Mr.
Kanengiser said.


Industry's Turmoil Is Shaking Out Other Fields
SINCE newspaper advertising began a steep decline about 18 months ago, many peripheral businesses and organizations that are nourished by the newspaper industry have gone on short rations.
For instance, as budgets have been tightened, newspapers have been cutting back sharply on sending employees to weeklong bouts of training.
In December, The Philadelphia Inquirer eliminated all conventions, seminars, group meetings and outside training, except those related to the opening of a new printing plant.


Honor to R.A.F. Leader Wakes Dresden's Ghosts
For two generations of Europeans, Dresden is a metaphor for mass destruction.
The city's name is rarely uttered without at least a trace of sorrow over the tens of thousands who perished here in the British and American firebomb attacks of Feb. 13-14, 1945.
Germany has since become a member of the Western alliance, and memories of Dresden's destruction have been steadily fading.
Suddenly, however, they are vivid again.


Taiwan Voted for Status Quo, not One China; A Stinging Defeat
To the Editor:
Contrary to your Dec. 24 editorial on the Dec. 21 Taiwan election, the ruling Kuomintang Party "victory" was not "a vote for one China." How could it be?
The Kuomintang-dominated Government banned the opposition party's platform of an independent "Republic of Taiwan" even from election posters.
The Government arrested a score of pro-independence leaders on election eve.


Neutrogena Drops Dailey &amp; Associates
The Neutrogena Corporation, Los Angeles, has ended its affiliation with Dailey &amp; Associates, Los Angeles, after two years of experimenting with stepped-up television advertising.
An advertising executive who spoke on condition of anonymity said the marketer of toiletries planned to add two agencies to its roster, while Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws, Los Angeles, remains its agency of record.
Carlson &amp; Partners, New York, the agency for Polo/Ralph Lauren fragrances, will receive a portion of the account, the executive added, with Atlas Citron Haligman &amp; Bedecarre, San Francisco, being awarded some of the company's advertising on a project basis.


John Elliott, 95, a Correspondent Who Foresaw the Threat of Hitler
John Elliott, a foreign correspondent whose prophetic criticisms of Hitler led him to join the Allied effort and become a postwar occupation official in Germany, died on Saturday at the Fernwood House nursing home in Washington.
He was 95 years old.
He died of natural causes, but a specific diagnosis was not given, a nephew said.


Another '80 Record Of Casey in London
To the Editor:
Re Jonathan Chadwick's letter "When Casey Could Have Met Iranians in '80" (Dec. 5):


Sports of The Times; Bills Pledge: No Elway Drive III
NEVER look ahead until the game is over.
That's a National Football League commandment obeyed by coaches and players, at least publicly.
But near the end of their 37-14 rout of the Kansas City Chiefs yesterday, some of the Buffalo Bills were already thinking ahead to their American Conference championship confrontation here next Sunday with John Elway and the Denver Broncos.
"I knew Kansas City's offense wasn't geared to score quickly like Denver's is," Steve Tasker, the Pro Bowl special-teams tackler, was saying now at his locker.
"You saw Denver bounce back. You got to play 60 minutes against them. Elway had Drive II on Saturday. But we want to prevent Drive III next week."


Forecast for Norwood: Increasing Confidence
The question was subtle.
How significant, Scott Norwood was asked, was it to make that 47-yard field goal?
"It's always significant," the Buffalo Bills' kicker said.
"It's always good to make a field goal, to keep things positive."


The Difference a Few Blocks Can Make
At the Kingston Avenue subway station in Brooklyn this summer, a young black man stole David Ehrentreau's wide-brimmed black hat off his head.
Mr.
Ehrentreau, a Lubavitcher Jew, chased the man, but stopped when he crossed Eastern Parkway, the border separating the mostly Jewish Crown Heights from the mostly black and Hispanic Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Eventually, Mr.
Ehrentreau got back his hat after two other black men, who had pursued the thief, returned it to a local synagogue.
"It was a happy ending," his wife, Deborah Ehrentreau, said recently.
"But you don't want to go where you're not wanted. I wouldn't cross Eastern Parkway unless I had to."


Devils Do Swimmingly In the Cross-River Rivalry
After the Devils' triumph over the Rangers here on Saturday night, Coach Tom McVie of the Devils called the cross-river rivalry between the two teams "a war between New York and New Jersey."
"We have the war in Alberta," McVie said, referring to the rivalry between the Edmonton Oilers and the Calgary Flames.
"We have the war in Quebec," he said of the Montreal Canadiens and the Quebec Nordiques.
"Now, we have a war between New York and New Jersey."


State Democrats Consider Running Cuomo as Their 'Favorite Son'
Downstate Democratic leaders met yesterday and agreed to pursue the possibility of naming Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo a "favorite son" candidate in New York's Presidential primary on April 7.
But the state's party leader emphasized that a move for favorite son status in the primary was not the same as a draft-Cuomo movement for the Presidency.
John A. Marino, New York's Democratic Party Chairman, said the gathering, which was held at the party's state headquarters in midtown Manhattan, was called by Dominic J. Baranello, the Suffolk County Democratic leader and former state party chairman, and attended by some two dozen Democrats representing 13 counties from southern New York.


Quayle Tells of Effort to Be Vice President
Dan Quayle, as a little-known Senator from Indiana, reportedly conducted a quiet campaign in 1988 to persuade George Bush to make him the Republican Vice Presidential candidate.
"You don't run for Vice President," Mr.
Quayle is quoted as saying in The Washington Post today.
"But let me say that there're ways you can be put on the available chart."


Anger Mixed With Sorrow for Organist Suspected in Church Burglaries
Parishioners and clergymen at two churches in Woodbury, L.I., which have been robbed in the last year, expressed both sorrow and anger yesterday to learn that the suspect was a former church organist.
Violation of a Church
"We pray for that person because we don't know what caused him to go into a religious house of worship, damage it and steal sacred vessels," Msgr.
Anthony J. Savastano told some 200 worshipers at the Holy Name of Jesus Church at 675 Woodbury Road.


Foreign Affairs; Kennedy and Vietnam
On Oct. 11, 1963, President Kennedy issued top-secret National Security Action Memorandum 263.
In it he called for stepped-up training for South Vietnamese forces so they could take over the duties of U.S. forces, thus permitting the bulk of Americans to withdraw by 1965.
Based mainly on that document, Oliver Stone's "J.F.K." movie asks us to believe one of the great historical "ifs" of the century: that if the young President had survived through a second term, the U.S. would have been spared the ordeal of full-scale war in Vietnam.


Greenspan's Film 'Voice' Is Silenced
BUD GREENSPAN is grieving these days.
The writer, producer and director of the Olympic Games documentary films in a sense lost his voice on Dec. 28, when his brother, DAVID, died of lung cancer.
Most viewers of the Olympics films were not aware that DAVID PERRY, the narrator whose deep voice so effectively gave an Olympian feel to the films, was actually Greenspan's brother.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY SOVIET EMIGRE FATALLY SHOT
A Soviet Jewish emigre was shot and killed on a Brooklyn street corner as he rushed to defend his wife who had been punched by one of three muggers, the police said.
By chance, the man's 19-year-old son was about a block away, driving two friends home, and saw the attack.
He sent his car smashing into the robbers' car, forcing them to flee on foot.
B3.
DEADLY ATTACK IN BROOKLYN PIZZERIA
Three assailants attacked a pizza maker in a Brooklyn pizzeria, blinded him by throwing flour in his face, then shot him in the head as he wobbled backward into the kitchen, the police said.
The worker frantically tried to defend himself by swinging a wooden pizza paddle at one of the three men, who came into the restaurant in Mill Basin late Saturday night.
B3.
SILENT AND STONEFACED SYMBOLS
The guards from the Nation of Islam, who are called to clear crack-infested streets and protect black celebrities, wield a weapon that eludes the police in black neighborhoods: respect.
A cadre of Muslim guards -- some of whom may be Nation members -- were among those hired to monitor the celebrity basketball game at City College.
Last week, a spokesman denied the Nation itself was involved.
Had it been, he said, repeating a common refrain, the deaths might have been averted.
B3.
UNWED MOTHERS AND A SECOND CHANCE
More and more new mothers, teen-agers in particular, are unwed.
Regardless of whether the social stigma of premarital pregnancy has declined, teen-age motherhood typically bodes badly for the children.
Many grow up poor.
Some get another chance later in life.
Their mothers often don't.
A new experimental program, designed by the nonprofit Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, is trying to break the cycle.
Metro Matters, B3. 23 teen-agers charged in robbery.
Page B5.
REGION  THE DEMOCRATS TRY AGAIN
The New Jersey Legislature reconvenes today for its final eight days with more at stake than the contentious and bitterly partisan issue of taxes -- including the redesign of New Jersey's political map to adjust for the loss of one of its 14 congressional seats because of a drop in population.
But the lengthy list of bills has essentially been put on hold until the Democrats prove they can overcome the hurdles the Republicans erected last month by not showing up.
B4.
WONDERING HOW TO FORGIVE
Parishioners and clergymen at two churches in Woodbury, L.I., that had been robbed in the last year expressed both sorrow and anger upon learning that the suspect was a former church organist.
Oather James Blocker, a 45-year-old organist who lives in Manhattan, has confessed to burglarizing 500 churches and synagogues across the metropolitan region and as far away as Massachusetts over the last decade.
B4.
HEIRESS, LIBRARY, NURSE AND LAWYER
When Alice Curtis Desmond died in 1990 leaving an $18 million estate and no heirs, the trustees of the library she founded and liberally supported in the decade before her death anticipated a settled future.
But when the will was read, the trustees and many residents of Garrison, N.Y., were dismayed to learn that the millions the heiress had left to the library would be all but eaten up in taxes on the $2 million apiece she left to her nurse and lawyer.
This conflict of death and taxes inexorably led to court.
Garrison Journal, B4.
STATE TRIES TO RECOUP COST OF DEFENSE
A Connecticut man convicted of killing his wife and disposing of her body in a wood chipper is challenging the constitutionality of a lawsuit filed by the State Public Defender's office that seeks to force him to repay the cost of his defense.
B4.
PLANNING TO MAKE PLANS FOR CUOMO
Downstate Democratic leaders agreed to pursue the possibility of naming Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo a "favorite son" candidate in New York's Presidential primary on April 7.
But the state's Democratic Party Chairman, John A. Marino, said a favorite son campaign in the primary is not the same as a draft-Cuomo movement for the Presidency.
B6.
The Traffic Map B6  Neediest Cases B9  Chronicle B9


Frightening Consumers, Carelessly
For a brief time last summer, every taxpayer in Norwich, Vt., was listed as a deadbeat, the result of an incredible error inserted in their credit histories by TRW Inc., one of three companies that dominate the credit-reporting industry in America.
The error: A novice data collector mistook a list of taxpayers for a list of
tax delinquents.
TRW says it expunged the mistakes and altered procedures to keep them from recurring.
But that did little for the trauma of Norwich residents who found themselves potentially creditless, with credit cards, mortgage applications and even Norwich's good name in doubt.


Knicks Block Out The Suns in Overtime
It was dramatic and it was exciting.
And for the Knicks, it was a victory that displayed character and confidence, two qualities they have shown with regularity all season.
Rallying from 8 points down midway through the fourth quarter, the Knicks (20-9) defeated the Phoenix Suns in overtime, 108-104, before 17,850 last night at Madison Square Garden.


Books of The Times; Memories of Mother and the Time She Ran Away
Fugitive Spring A Memoir By Deborah Digges 221 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $20.


Convicted Murderer Fights Suit to Force Him to Pay Defense Costs
A Connecticut man convicted of killing his wife and disposing of her body in a wood chipper is challenging the constitutionality of a lawsuit filed by the State Public Defender's office that seeks to force him to repay the cost of his defense.
The Public Defender Services Commission, which unsuccessfully defended Richard B. Crafts, 54 years old, against the murder charge in 1990, filed the lawsuit in September of that year.


General Cinema's Big Bet On Harcourt Brace's Revival
Richard A. Smith, the chairman of the General Cinema Corporation, once asked students at the Harvard Business School to estimate how much his company should pay for a motel chain.
So the students turned in sophisticated financial analyses.
But price was not the real issue.
Mr.
Smith told the surprised class that General Cinema should not buy the chain.
The problem, he said, was that motel chains pick the best locations first.
Most new locations would never be as profitable and future growth would be limited.


In This Exhibition, Athletes Are the Trophies
Sport and art have a long tradition beyond the reporter's eye and the photographer's lens.
In fact, WINSLOW HOMER painted a croquet match, HENRI ROUSSEAU depicted rugby players and ANDY WARHOL took a look at KAREEM ABDUL-JABBAR and CHRIS EVERT.
Now, United States museums are yielding up their cache of fine sports art, from ceramics to water colors to sculptures, for an exhibit at I.B.M.'s Gallery of Science and Art at 590 Madison Avenue.
The exhibit will run from Jan. 14 to March 28.


Curt Bois, Actor, 90
Curt Bois, a dapper German actor who performed in nearly 70 films, has died here.
He was 90 years old.
Mr.
Bois, who went to Hollywood after fleeing the Nazis in 1933, died on Christmas Day, said a statement from the Schiller Theater here.
Mr.
Bois, a native Berliner, had worked at the Schiller.


Arms Panel Is Reported to Suggest 50% Cut in U.S. Nuclear Arsenal
A special advisory panel has urged the Bush Administration to cut in half the already shrinking United States arsenal of nuclear weapons in recognition of the diminishing threat from what used to be the Soviet Union, The Washington Post reported in its Monday issue..
The Post said that the panel, the advisory group of the Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff, also proposed that the United States retarget its remaining weapons and aim them at "every reasonable adversary" around the world.


Bills and Lions Prevail
In the National Football League playoffs, Buffalo beat the Kansas City Chiefs, 37-14, to advance to the American Conference title game, and Detroit routed the Dallas Cowboys, 38-6, in the National Conference.
SportsMonday, page C1.


It's a Runaway for Lions On Their Passing Game
Playing the National Football League's version of chicken, Dallas stacked the line of scrimmage with defenders to stop Detroit running back Barry Sanders.
The Cowboys dared the Lions to beat them with a passing game that was crippled by injuries to three key receivers and guided by a quarterback, Erik Kramer, who had played the previous nine games as if he were incognito.
It wasn't until late in the third quarter, when Kramer had thrown his third touchdown pass of the day, and early in the fourth quarter, when Sanders got loose on a 47-yard touchdown run, that the Cowboys realized that their plan had failed miserably.
By then it was too late.
Kramer had been unmasked as a legitimate passing threat and the Cowboys had stumbled to a 38-6 loss today before 78,290 screaming fans at the Silverdome.


Albany Legislators Face Tough Session With Combustible Mix
Although it never really seemed to leave town, the State Legislature returns to Albany this week to convene a session that many participants predict will be the most difficult in recent memory because of an uncommonly combustible mixture of political ingredients.
Not that the last few sessions have been love fests: the Legislature and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo set consecutive records for budget tardiness in each of the last two years, which also brought the downgrading of the state's credit rating in 1990.


Results Plus
SKIING Tomba Wins No. 24 The Italian star Alberto Tomba flashed down the icy Podkoren slalom course in Kranjska Gora, Yugoslavia, yesterday to gain his 24th World Cup victory, beating runner-up Armin Bittner of Germany by nearly 2 seconds.
Tomba covered the two runs in 1 minute 40.84 seconds.
He was fastest in both runs.
It was his fifth victory of the season. (AP)
Schneider Takes Lead: Vreni Schneider of Switzerland mastered one of the toughest courses on the women's circuit with two blazing runs in Oberstaufen, Germany, to win the giant slalom and vault into the overall World Cup lead.
She posted the fastest times in both runs to win by a comfortable 1.24 seconds over Deborah Compagnoni of Italy.
Schneider had a combined time of 2 minutes 19.42 seconds, in scoring her third victory of the season. (AP) TENNIS Provis Tops McQuillan Nicole Provis used a series of blazing groundstrokes to wear down Rachel McQuillan and score a 6-3, 6-2 victory in the final of the Danone Queensland Open championships yesterday in Brisbane, Australia.
Provis, the 14th-seeded player, was more consistent than McQuillan in the first all-Australian final on the women's professional tour in 13 years. (AP)
Ivanisevic Makes Comeback: Top-seeded Goran Ivanisevic recovered from a slow start and slammed 15 aces to beat Christian Bergstrom of Sweden in the final of the Australian Hardcourt championships in Adelaide last night.
The powerful left-hander defeated the unseeded Bergstrom, 1-6, 7-6 (7-5), 6-4, in a two-and-a-half-hour match. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL Ga.
Tech Wins Opener Matt Geiger had 15 points and 11 rebounds and four other Yellow Jackets scored in double figures as Georgia Tech beat Maryland, 92-67, yesterday in Atlanta in the Atlantic Coast Conference opener for both teams.
The Yellow Jackets (11-2) got 4 points from freshman James Forrest in an 8-4 start of the second half and built a 52-41 lead that Maryland couldn't overcome.
Walt Williams led the Terrapins (7-4) with 28 points.
Georgia Tech (11-2) also got 17 points from freshman Travis Best. (AP)
Arizona 79, Santa Clara 60: The sixth-ranked Wildcats were a little ragged for about 25 minutes, then pulled away for their 70th straight victory at home in Tucson.
Sean Rooks scored 21 points for Arizona (9-1), which turned a 49-46 lead with 13:24 to play into another home victory with a 10-0 run highlighted by two 3-pointers by reserve guard Damon Stoudamire.
The Broncos (4-9) went scoreless for 5:48 as the Wildcats began to pull away. (AP).
LUGE Close to Qualifying Robert Pipkins of Staten Island and Erica Terwillegar of Lake Placid, N.Y., posted the fastest times in singles trials yesterday in Lake Placid, moving closer to qualifying for spots on the United States Olympic team.
Pipkins and Terwillegar had combined times of 2 minutes 52.978 seconds and 2:53.745, respectively. (AP) HORSE RACING Crystal Moment Wins Crystal Moment, a 49-1 long shot who did not win a stakes race in 1991, knocked off it'sallgreektome, the 1-2 favorite, yesterday in one of the biggest upsets in the 60 runnings of the $200,000 Hialeah Turf Cup.
It'sallgreektome, the 1990 Eclipse Award winner who shipped in from California, finished second by a neck.
Crystal Moment, a 7-year-old gelding ridden by Rick Wilson, earned $120,000.
Passagere du Soir was third in the field of 13, a length ahead of it'sallgreektome.
N.H.L.
Flames Edge Oilers Theoren Fleury and Paul Ranheim each had a goal and assist as the Calgary Flames won in Edmonton, Alberta, last night.
Calgary goaltender Mike Vernon faced only 21 shots but made several big saves.
Gary Roberts had the other goal for Calgary, which jumped past Edmonton into a third-place tie with the Los Angeles Kings in the Smythe Division. (AP)


Three Kings Day Is Celebrated at Brooklyn Community Centers


Bills Leave Chiefs With Nowhere to Go
The Buffalo Bills had decided long before the kickoff that their playoff fight here this afternoon with the Kansas City Chiefs would be decided by turning the game into a match of options on offense.
Buffalo had several such options, Kansas City had one, and several nearly always beats one.
This game was not an exception, and the Bills rolled to a 37-14 victory to earn a spot in their second consecutive American Conference championship game.


As Society's Need Increases, So Does Volunteerism
Moved and frightened by social problems that seem as persistent as they are public, increasing numbers of Americans are volunteering to work with the poor and the sick, charities and volunteer organizations report.
In New York, the Mayor's Voluntary Action Center said 11,000 people inquired about volunteer opportunities last year, up 28 percent from 1990.
In Kansas City, the Heart of America United Way Volunteer Center saw a 16 percent increase in 1991.
And the Volunteer Center of the Texas Gulf Coast in Houston said 24,000 people inquired last year about volunteering, a 20 percent increase over 1990.


Taiwan Voted for Status Quo, Not One China; Publicity Helps
To the Editor:
In "Two Humans' Rights in China" (editorial, Dec. 19), you state that Dai Qing, the journalist to whom China gave permission to come to the United States after she was prevented from meeting Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, "credits the international outcry over this incident with speeding her exit permit, proving once again that targeted humanitarian pressure can move even the hard-line Chinese regime."
Wei Jingsheng, a courageous and eloquent Chinese advocate for democracy, was imprisoned in 1979 and remains in jail.
His crime was saying, in 1979, "The current historical tide is a democratic tide, one that opposes feudal fascist dictatorship."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Repairing Battered Industries
Some leading American industries were left reeling last year, from autos and real estate to retailing and banking.
As top managers seek to repair the damage, an informal survey of some hard-hit industries found little hope that managers could solve the problems in 1992.
Rather, executives warned that business must hold on tight until the roller-coaster economy heads up.  [ Page D4. ] International
Japan is expected to offer President Bush trade concessions on his visit this week, most of them aimed at increasing Japanese imports of U.S. cars.
But for all the expected promises, many of the measures have nothing to do with opening Japan's market.
Instead, they add up to Government orders simply to buy more American products to reduce trade tensions.
News Analysis.  [ A1. ]
For years, the Big Three auto makers have been the most conspicuous case of what happens to companies that try to sell in Japan the products they sell in America, with few concessions to Japanese tastes, habits, and the width of Japanese roads.  [ A12. ]
Leading American economists are advising Russia and other former Soviet republics to move more swiftly than Eastern Europe in tackling economic changes.  [ D1. ] Companies
Many real estate developers are cutting back, but Edward S. Gordon is aggressively expanding.
The company is expected to announce the appointment of Stephen B. Siegel, a former Cushman &amp; Wakefield chairman, as its president.  [ D1. ]
In his first months at Tenneco, Michael H. Walsh has practically run a seminar on how to act swiftly to alter the course of an industrial giant in distress.  [ D1. ]
A proposal by some Revco creditors to maintain the drugstore chain's independence appeared to win support of creditors.  [ D2. ] The Economy
A research group proposes tax incentives for Americans who buy U.S.-made cars, to help stimulate sales and save "a dying industry." The proposal by the Economic Strategy Institute come amid calls for Government intervention in auto making.  [ D2. ] The Media Business
General Cinema won a yearlong battle to acquire Harcourt, but salvaging the publishing company will not be easy.  [ D1. ]
The magazine industry is beginning to look into the possibilities of audio cassettes as marketable spinoffs of magazines.  [ D8. ]
Congress will begin a third effort to pass legislation that would allow most cities to regulate prices for basic cable television services, after lawmakers struck out twice in two years.  [ D8. ]
Unconventional images, like tatoos and spiked hair, will be the focus of a tongue-in-cheek trade advertising campaign for Family Circle magazine.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D9. ]
Many businesses and organizations nourished by the newspaper industry have gone on short rations since advertising went into a steep decline 18 months ago.
Alex S. Jones: Press.  [ D8. ] Today's Columns
The recession has not brought hard times to all retailers.
Dollar General, which sells inexpensive necessities to low-income consumers, is growing at a pace that is the envy of merchants with more affluent customers.
Market Place.  [ D1. ]
Winter is usually a bad time for the bond market, and some analysts expect this year to be no exception.
Kenneth N. Gilpin: Credit Markets.  [ D7. ]


Menorah Case Raises Host of Separation Issues
To the Editor:
Prof.
Egon Mayer laments the unanimous decision of the White Plains Common Council to bar the display of any religious or political symbols, including the menorah, on city park land (letter, Dec. 21) and chides the American Jewish Committee for its role in this matter.
In his view, this action by the Common Council deprives the public of "the rich display of our diversity."


Broncos' Heroics Already Are Old News
There was little time to marvel again at John Elway's incredible Saturday afternoon.
Denver Broncos Coach Dan Reeves spent most of the day observing game film and listening to the radio, his eyes dissecting videotape and his ears catching the roar from Buffalo.
Fans were still gleefully replaying Elway's closing drive that shook the Houston Oilers, 26-24, but Reeves had already begun to ponder the Buffalo Bills and the American Football Conference championship game on Sunday.


Primerica Unit Picks Agencies
Kobs &amp; Draft New York, a direct-marketing agency, and its advertising-agency sibling, Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., have been awarded the direct marketing and advertising account of Primerica Financial Services Inc. in Duluth, Ga.
The billings are estimated to exceed $10 million.
Agency executives said the Primerica subsidiary, which offers insurance and other financial services through door-to-door sales, had previously handled its advertising and marketing in-house.


Cardinal O'Connor, in Israel, Officially Calls on Its Leaders
John Cardinal O'Connor paid official calls today on Israel's President and Prime Minister, and said later that relations between the Vatican and Israel had warmed even though the question of full diplomatic ties remained a "complex, delicate one."
Israeli officials and representatives of American Jewish groups called the Cardinal's visits significant, given the long chill in relations with the Holy See and the smoothness of his encounters today compared with the considerable tensions that marked his last journey here five years ago.


Essay; Redskins' Revenge
The Washington Redskins are winning; "Native Americans" are losing.
While the politically correct fret that the word "redskins" may be taken as an ethnic slur, they ignore a far more serious assault on the character and traditions of our aboriginal Americans.


Irving B. Kravis, 75, Who Was Specialist In Comparing Prices
Irving B. Kravis, a noted economist and educator who specialized in international price comparisons, died Friday after becoming ill at the Philadelphia airport on his way to receive an award.
He was 75 years old and lived in Haverford, Pa.
His family said he was suffering from lymphoma and Parkinson's disease.


Russians Urged to Act Fast
Leading American economists are advising Russia and the other former Soviet republics to move more swiftly than Eastern Europe has in tackling economic changes, especially as they attempt to sell off 45,000 state-owned factories to private owners.
They are also recommending that the United States and international agencies help to finance the changes, at least for a while.
"Privatization in Eastern Europe has been a debacle," Jeffrey Sachs, a professor at Harvard University, said at the three-day annual meeting of the American Economics Association here, which concluded today.
The topic of economic reform and aid to former Communist nations overshadowed discussions about the sluggish economy in the United States.


BATTERED INDUSTRIES Picking Up the Pieces in Six Struggling Business Sectors; Automobiles: What Detroit Car Makers Can Do While Waiting for the Recovery
The huge cutbacks announced by the General Motors Corporation just before Christmas capped what had already been a grim year for the American auto makers, and 1992 does not look much brighter.
After layoffs, plant closings and other cost-cutting steps, most industry executives say they can do little now but wait for a stronger economy.
Their 1992 models are already in production, and 1993 models are set as well.
The hope is that growth picks up and consumers flock to the showrooms.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-12  BUSH CAUTIONS SOUTH KOREANS
President Bush arrived in South Korea and quietly warned its leaders against moving too fast in dealing with the Communist North before there is evidence that the North is not producing nuclear weapons.
A1  JAPANESE TRADE AND U.S.
CARS
News Analysis: The trade concessions that Japan is expected to offer President Bush may add up to Government orders to buy more American cars and parts -- not exactly what Washington says it wants.
A1  IS DETROIT TO BLAME?
The Big Three auto makers complain about being shut out of the Japanese car market, but the Japanese say the American companies do not make concessions to their tastes, habits or the width of their roads.
A12  U.N.
TO DISCUSS YUGOSLAV TRUCE
Secretary General Boutros Ghali will ask the United Nations Security Council to send about 50 military observers to Yugoslavia as quickly as possible to encourage adherence to the current cease-fire.
A1  BATTLE OVER A JERUSALEM DISTRICT
The legal battle for the neighborhood called Silwan is a microcosm of antagonisms over Jerusalem's present and its future, with delicate religious, ethnic and political considerations hanging in the balance.
A1  NEW FOCUS ON VIETNAM P.O.W.'S
Expectations that the United States and Vietnam will soon establish diplomatic ties may be set back by a resurgence of interest in the fate of missing Americans.
A3  ISRAELIS TO ARRIVE FOR TALKS
Israeli negotiators headed for another round of Middle East peace talks in Washington as Arab delegations decide whether to join in.
A8  John Cardinal O'Connor visited two of Israel's top leaders.
A8  LONDON STATUE DISTURBS GERMANS
Plans for a statue in London of the commander who led air raids on German cities in World War II have disturbed some German officials, and they have begun a quiet but fervent campaign of protest.
A6  GEORGIAN CALLS FOR REFERENDUM
The President of Georgia, besieged by rebels, proposed a United Nations-supervised referendum on their demands that he resign.
A6  Diplomats from Eritrea are trying to end fighting in Somalia.
A2  A panel said to urge a 50 percent cut in the U.S. atomic arms.
A6  Cairo Journal: Egypt's Islamic fundamentalist movement is weak.
A4  National A14, B8-9  LAWS CREATE BIGGER DUMPS
New Federal rules meant to protect the environment are forcing thousands of community garbage dumps to close and giving rise to immense regional landfills owned by just a few companies.
A1  VOLUNTEERISM ON THE RISE
Moved and alarmed by persistent social problems, Americans young and old are volunteering in greater numbers to work with the poor and the sick, charity groups report.
A1  FIRE IN AN UNDERGROUND WORLD
A stubborn fire burned underneath a hill outside Kansas City, in one of the converted limestone mines that make up a subterranean world right out of a Batman movie.
A14  FAREWELL TO THE REVOLUTION
German Pompa Gonzalez said he felt tremendously calm as he and 33 others made a daring helicopter escape from Cuba, because "one way or another, it would soon be over." Now he is wondering how to begin life in America, a wanted man back in his homeland but a hero to thousands of Cuban exiles here.
A1  HOLY MAN OR TERRORIST?
Yahweh ben Yahweh once presided over a multimillion-dollar business and thriving religious sect, but a Federal jury prepared to hear accusations that his reign was one of murder, arson, extortion, racist rhetoric and sexual exploitation.
A14  KEEPING HOME PLATE IN SEATTLE
After towering as losers, the Seattle Mariners baseball team finally earned a winning season and the loyalty of two million fans.
But unless those fans come up with $10 million, the Mariners may call somewhere else home.
A14  Clinton and Kerrey criticize Bush's health-care proposals.
B9 Metropolitan Digest, B1  Business Digest, D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  Rap returns to the Garden.
C11  Creating the Pasha of "The Ghosts of Versailles." C11  Music: Opera from Shanghai.
C12  New Bolcom concerto.
C16  Dance: Dance in Review C13  Word and Image: "The Edmund Perry Story." C11  "Fugitive Spring," a memoir.
C16  "Education on Trial." C16  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials A16  Don't seek jobs in Japan.
A16  Frightening consumers.
A16  Topics: Passing Go.
A16  Letters A16  Leslie H. Gelb: Kennedy and Vietnam.
A17  William Safire: Redskins' revenge.
A17  John R. MacArthur: Remember Nayirah, witness for Kuwait?
A17  Charles Brecher, Raymond D. Horton: New York needs 3 heroes.
A17  Obituaries B10  Muhammad Kenyatta, professor and civil rights leader  John Elliott, reporter who saw the rise of Hitler  Sports C1-9  Baseball: Tartabull agrees to terms with Yanks.
C1  Basketball: Knicks edge Suns C3  Coleman hurt again.
C3  UMass stuns Oklahoma.
C3  Colleges: Focus on classroom for N.C.A.A.
C4  Column: Berkow on Lions' quarterback.
C5  Anderson on Bills' pledge.
C6  Features: Sidelines.
C2  Question Box C9  Football: Bills defeat Chiefs.
C1  Lions top Cowboys.
C1  No gimmicks for Redskins.
C6  Marveling at Elway's heroics.
C6  49er aide a top candidate for Packer post.
C6  Satisfaction for Norwood.
C7  Golf: Outlook for '92.
C9  Hockey: Devils' midseason report.
C2  Devils savor victory over Rangers.
C2  Yachting: Russian crews still feuding.
C4  New Zealand yacht looks strong C4  Neediest Cases B9


Keep the Bicyclists Off the Sidewalks
To the Editor:
The debate over cyclist vs. pedestrian safety in Central Park overshadows a more ominous metropolitan menace: the peril posed to walkers on city sidewalks by unprincipled bicyclists -- messengers, restaurant deliverers, commuters and exercisers -- who have abandoned riding with traffic in favor of careering wantonly and recklessly down congested sidewalks.


Bridge
Half a century ago two young men, Alvin Roth and Tobias Stone, won the National Open Pair Championship in Syracuse and introduced the bridge world to a new idea that is now standard.
It was the forcing no-trump response to a major opening, which makes it possible for two-level suit responses to show strong hands, virtually guaranteeing game.
Subsequently the Roth-Stone system gave us the negative double, the unusual no-trump and other theoretical ideas that are now well-known.
Roth is still creative, as his latest book shows.
It is "Picture Bidding," available in hard-cover for $24.95 including mailing from "Bridge Today," 18 Village View Bluff, Ballston Lake N.Y. 12019.


Bills and Notes This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings this week includes the regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills today, followed on Wednesday by an auction of new seven-year notes.
On Thursday, the Treasury plans to auction new one-year bills.
By late in the day on Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 3.85 percent and the six-month bill was bid at 3.88 percent; the one-year was at 3.94 percent.
In when-issued trading -- between when a new security is announced and the time it is issued -- the seven-year note was offered at a price to yield 6.49 percent.


Film Critics' Award to 'Life Is Sweet'
"Life Is Sweet," Mike Leigh's gastronomic view of family life in an English suburb, was voted last night the best film of 1991 by the National Society of Film Critics, a 35-member group representing critics from New York, Los Angeles, Chicago and other cities.
Alison Steadman and Jane Horrocks, who play a mother and daughter in the film, were voted best actress and best supporting actress, respectively.
River Phoenix was voted best actor for his performance as a narcoleptic male hustler in "My Own Private Idaho," and Harvey Keitel was named best supporting actor for roles in three films: "Bugsy," "Thelma and Louise" and "Mortal Thoughts." David Cronenberg was voted both best director and best screenwriter for his adaptation of William S. Burroughs's novel "Naked Lunch."


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Cyspower Technologies Inc., 1.1 million common shares.
First New England Securities Corp.
Digicon Inc., 6.75 million common shares. Paine Webber Inc.
Granite Broadcasting Corp., 2.75 million in nonvoting shares. Alex. Brown &amp; Sons.
Peoples Energy Corp., 1.8 million common shares. Smith Barney, Harris Upham.
SBS Engineering Inc., 1 million common shares. D. H. Blair &amp; Co.
TSS Ltd., 2.5 million units, each unit consisting of one common share and one warrant.
Paulson Investment Co. (Source: MCM CorporateWatch)


Tax Breaks Proposed for U.S. Autos
Tax incentives for Americans who buy domestically made cars could help stimulate sales and save "a dying industry" in Detroit, a research organization has proposed.
Calling on the Government to intervene as an advocate for the Big Three auto makers, a report by the Economic Strategy Institute advocates diverting some money from military research and development into a low-interest loan for a cooperative research and development project.
The report suggested that the project be sponsored by the auto makers.


A Big Oil Find By Occidental
The Occidental Petroleum Corporation has made an important oil find in northwest Oman, the country's oil minister, Said Ahmed al-Shanfari, said today.
The Los Angeles-based company discovered large quantities of light crude oil at the site in the Suneinah concession, Mr.
Shanfari said in a statement to the Oman News Agency.
He gave no details but said the find was "very encouraging."


Arizona St. Hires Cal Coach
Bruce Snyder, who turned California into a Pacific-10 football power, will try to do the same at Arizona State.
Snyder resigned as coach at California on Saturday night and accepted the job at Arizona State, where he will make more than twice as much money as he did leading the Golden Bears to a 10-2 record in 1991.


Japan U.N. Role Dubious: Bush
President Bush today gave only tepid support to proposals that Japan be given a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council, saying the idea has merit but would be "extraordinarily difficult."
Speaking at a news conference in Seoul, Mr.
Bush said "various friends" of Washington have approached him about expanding the five-member permanent security council to reflect a world in which Japan, Germany and other nations have emerged as economic, if not military superpowers.


Review/Rap; The World of Hip-Hop Returns to the Garden
The concert on Friday night at Madison Square Garden took place without any deaths or arrests, and about 14,000 people had a good time seeing favorite performers.
Normally, that would be taken for granted, but Friday's concert had a severe symbolic burden.
The show, featuring Public Enemy and six other acts, was the first all-rap concert at the Garden since late in 1987, when there were some highly publicized incidents of violence at rap events and insurance costs soared.
Rap tours have continued to play arenas around the United States, but had been absent from the Garden, a shame since the music was born in New York City.
On Friday, there was a major police presence outside the Garden, as well as metal detectors at entrances and many uniformed Garden personnel within.


Tartabull Agrees to Yankee Contract
Making a dramatic turnaround from their winter-long slumber, the Yankees executed a stunning move late last night, reaching agreement with Danny Tartabull, the most attractive free agent still available, on a five-year contract worth $27 million.
The Yankees made no immediate announcement, but a friend who spoke to Tartabull said the slugging outfielder told him shortly after negotiations were completed that he had accepted the Yankees' offer of $25.5 million in signing bonus and salary plus $1.5 million in endorsements.
The friend provided the information on condition he not be identified.


Cairo Journal; Militant Islam's Conquest Stops at Egypt's Border
In a small, barren room in downtown Cairo, three bearded members of the outlawed Holy War organization gathered late one evening to plot the next move in their struggle to topple the Egyptian Government.
But the euphoria of a decade ago, when these men were part of a group that gunned down President Anwar el-Sadat and seemed able to challenge the state, was gone.
Instead they talked morosely of comrades killed in clashes with the police and leaders languishing in prison.


Review/Philharmonic; The Many Sides of William Bolcom
William Bolcom's Clarinet Concerto had its premiere on Friday night at Avery Fisher Hall.
In the process it seemed to divide a New York Philharmonic audience into a number of camps.
First there were those taken aback by its accessibility.
Others were evidently suspicious of it.
Still others -- those perhaps unburdened by a recent history of public estrangement from new music -- seemed to welcome accessibility as their due.
Mr.
Bolcom's piece, as played by Stanley Drucker and conducted by Leonard Slatkin, was indeed easy to listen to, so much so that it often fit comfortably under the rubric of easy-listening.


BATTERED INDUSTRIES Picking Up the Pieces in Six Struggling Business Sectors; Banking: After Falling Into Risky Habits, Banks Relearn Value of Prudence
Recessions have never been kind to banks, and the current economic downturn is no exception.
But even when the economy recovers, the scars in the banking industry will remain, and bankers are vowing not to return to their old habits.
From giant Citicorp to small savings banks, bankers are relearning the principles of safe lending -- sometimes to the dismay of real estate developers and others in business.
But while banks tighten their lending standards to keep a rein on future loan losses, there are no miracle cures for the record amounts of bad loans already on their books.
Since most bankers cannot afford the losses that would occur if they sold these loans, they must nurse them along.
They can foreclose, carry borrowers under easier terms or offer new loans in hopes that more money will put some troubled developers over the hump.


Tentative Pact Reached in 3-Month-Old Steel Strike in Pennsylvania


Dance in Review
Lorellen Green
Performance Space 122
"Mangia Mangia" promised to be a theatrical banquet.
Lorellen Green took the title of her dance, which she presented on Friday night, from the Italian word for "eat." The floor was littered with plates of pasta, and the piece began when Peter Lynn entered riding an eccentrically designed bicycle that had a water wheel and an enormous rack attached to it.
He could have been a delivery man filling orders for food and drink.
But not enough sustenance arrived.


Tokyo Stocks Up Sharply
Stocks jumped in Japan today following the record highs reached last week on Wall Street.
Trading was limited to the morning on the first day after the weeklong New Year's holiday.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues rose 817.41 points, or 3.56 percent, to close at 23,801.18.
An estimated 180 million shares were traded.


Topics of The Times; When the President Passes Go
Prof.
David Weimer teaches the 4,000-year-old game of Go at the University of Rochester.
A few lessons might have helped President Bush prepare for this week's encounters in Seoul and Tokyo.
One out of five males in Korea plays it.
So do 10 million Japanese.
Professor Weimer aims to infuse students with the mind-set of Far Eastern culture.
Western games like chess, he says, take "the Clausewitzean view of conflict -- go for the capital and destroy everything along the way." (Mr. Bush's bombastic buildup to the trade talks is a striking example.) But in Go, Professor Weimer says, "you have to be patient; early moves may not have full consequences until much later."


How the Pasha in 'Ghosts' Grew So Big
Near the end of the first act of "The Ghosts of Versailles" -- the new opera by the composer John Corigliano and the librettist William Hoffman that has its final performances of the season at the Metropolitan Opera tomorrow and Friday evenings -- the ghost world of Beaumarchais, Louis XVI, Marie Antoinette and the French court dissolves into a colorful fantasy set in the Turkish Embassy in Paris in 1793.
The scene that unfolds over the next 10 minutes is mostly peripheral to the plot of the opera; in fact, it was composed not so much to advance the story as to give the mezzo-soprano Marilyn Horne a star turn.
Yet a combination of compositional, vocal and staging virtuosity has made the scene one of the most talked about parts of an opera that has proved to be an enormous popular success.


Severe Turbulence Injures 13 On Brazilian Flight to U.S.
Thirteen people aboard a TransBrasil Airlines jetliner were injured Saturday morning when the plane encountered severe turbulence near Puerto Rico, airline and Government officials said.
An airline spokeswoman, Jeri Beth Katz, said 12 passengers and a flight attendant were hurt.
The most serious injuries were a broken arm, suffered by the flight attendant, and a passenger's dislocated shoulder, she added.


Taiwan Voted for Status Quo, Not One China
To the Editor:
Having just returned from a mission to observe Taiwan's Dec. 21 National Assembly elections, I must differ with "A Strong Vote for One China" (editorial, Dec. 24).


Don't Look for Jobs in Japan
Americans buy much more from the Japanese than the Japanese buy from the U.S.
Everybody knows that these huge trade deficits force Americans out of work.
That's why President Bush is leading an entourage of big-shot executives to pressure the Japanese to import more goods and thereby create "jobs, jobs, jobs."
But what everybody knows just isn't true.
Trade deficits don't cause unemployment; indeed, the number of employed Americans is unrelated to the size of the trade deficit.
If that statement seems to contradict common sense, just recall the 1980's, when the U.S. rang up $100 billion trade deficits yet operated near full employment.
Bashing Japan might make good campaign rhetoric, but it's unlikely to lower the unemployment rate one tick.


Rogers Is Named
William Rogers, a former Secretary of State and Attorney General, was named yesterday to be chairman of the United States Olympic Committee's new ethics oversight committee.


Devils Consistently Seeking Consistency
The president of the New Jersey Devils doesn't want to hear about the team's accomplishments in the first half of the season.
If you want to talk to Lou Lamoriello about his hockey team, go see him late in the spring.
Even after their 6-4 victory over the Rangers here Saturday night gave the Devils their 20th victory -- the first time in club history that they have had 20 at the halfway point of a season -- Lamoriello was careful not to sound overwhelmingly optimistic.
He knows better than anyone how inconsistent his team can be.


Putting a Strong Breeze to Good Use


Toward Managing Memory
COMPUTER memories are made of silicon, and a computer can never have too many.
A new program is intended to organize those memories.
Adding memory to a Macintosh is a relatively straightforward proposition although opening the box with the one-piece models calls for special tools.
Still, after the chips are put in, the computer knows what to do with them.
The SE/30 around here, formerly a two-megabyte clunker, now barrels along with five.
System 7.0 loves elbow room.


Science of Home Runs
Long before he was a professor in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's department of aeronautics and astronautics, Dr.
Paul Lagace was a Red Sox fan.
So when the roof behind home plate was torn down after the 1988 season and replaced with a higher one, he noticed that fewer balls were hit into the center field stands.
"I have season tickets in the center field bleachers, and it was easy to see that something was up," he said.
Balls that once soared into the stands were falling short.


Lawmaker Seeks Revamping of Military
In the aftermath of the Soviet Union's demise, the United States military must make top-to-bottom changes in its size, shape and missions to deal with a new array of international security threats, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee said today.
Outlining a broad framework for restructuring the Pentagon, the panel chairman, Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, entered a battle that is unfolding between Congress and the Bush Administration over the changing role of the American military.


Accounts
*
PCs Compleat, a Marlborough, Mass., direct-response reseller of personal computers, to Haggman Krimsky, Ipswich, Mass., as its first agency for advertising, direct marketing and promotions.
The agency expects billings this year in excess of $2 million. *
Coral Gables Federal Savings and Loan Association, Coral Gables, Fla., to Cramer-Krasselt, Orlando, Fla., for its $1.3 million marketing communications acccount, after a review that also included the previous agency, Crispin &amp; Porter Advertising, Coral Gables.


Gorman Puts McEnroe And Leach on Cup Team
John McEnroe and Rick Leach were named yesterday to the 1992 United States Davis Cup Team by captain Tom Gorman, completing the four-man squad that faces Argentina in the first round at Hawaii's Mauna Lani Racquet Club from Jan. 31 to Feb. 2.
Gorman had previously picked Andre Agassi (12-4 in Davis Cup play) and Pete Sampras (0-2) as his singles players.
But he had been undecided about selecting a doubles unit following consecutive losses by established doubles teams in the 1991 semifinal (Scott Davis and David Pate) and final (Ken Flach and Robert Seguso) rounds.


Jets' Quarterback Coach Is Dismissed by Coslet
In what may be one more sign that they are contemplating a major change at quarterback next season, the Jets announced yesterday that they are not renewing the contract of Joe Daniels, the quarterbacks coach.
"I appreciate the job Joe did for us the past two seasons, but I've decided to make a change and go in another direction," Jets Coach Bruce Coslet said in a brief announcement issued by the club.


O'Connor Says Jerusalem Issue Fades
John Cardinal O'Connor of New York said today that the Vatican's views on Jerusalem had changed and that Israel's disputed control of the entire city no longer seemed to be an impediment to possible diplomatic relations between this country and the Holy See.
"The Church has no particular interest in who controls Jerusalem, who does the housekeeping for Jerusalem," the Cardinal said after meeting with the city's Mayor, Teddy Kollek.


Consumer Videophone By A.T.&amp; T.
The picture phone, that Tomorrowland marvel of Disneyland in the 1960's, is here -- well, almost.
A.T.&amp; T. announced yesterday that in May it plans to start selling a mass-market videophone for $1,500, about one-twentieth the cost of equipment meant for big corporations.
The new phone takes advantage of the latest signal-processing techniques, called compression technology, which edit out all but the essential features of a television picture.


WASHINGTON JOINS U.N. IN CONDEMNING ISRAELI EXPULSIONS
In the harshest criticism of Israeli policies ever made at the Security Council by the United States, the Bush Administration joined other Council members today in a resolution that "strongly condemns" the decision by Israel to deport 12 Palestinians from the Israeli-occupied territories.
As a result of the Israeli Government decision, which was announced last week but has not yet been put into effect, Palestinian and other Arab delegations declined to come to Washington for the resumption on Tuesday of the American-brokered direct peace talks with Israel.
The Palestinians had strongly hinted that a Security Council criticism might lead the Arabs back to the table, and the Bush Administration's vote today was clearly aimed at coaxing the Arabs back.


D.M.B.&amp; B. Changes On Burger King
William R. Kelly has been named executive vice president and managing partner at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York, in charge of the agency's Burger King account, a spokesman said yesterday, confirming a report in this week's issue of Advertising Age.


Chess
The Yugoslav Chess Federation had guaranteed the safety of the participants in the women's interzonal tournament in Subotica and it kept its word.
Although the explosion of bombs 20 miles away could be heard, the chess competition went off without a hitch.
Boris Gulko, of Fairlawn, N.J., the grandmaster coach of the Americans, wrote, in the Dec. 23 issue of Inside Chess: "I must congratulate the organizers of the 35-player event. Playing conditions were excellent. Yugoslavia is really a chess country."


New York City and L.I. Would Gain From Water Exchanges
To the Editor:
David Major, former chief of water resource planning for New York City, calls for additional water conservation to manage increasing demand and also new studies to increase system capacity (letter, Dec. 7).
He writes of an average shortfall of 250 million gallons a day, which could create severe drought emergencies every nine years, and implies larger shortfalls if the city system has to provide future water to Long Island.


Power Failure Darkens Much of Washington
Much of the capital was plunged into darkness early this evening when a power cable failed, turning out most of the lights at the State Department and the Federal Reserve Board, and producing a flickering at the White House before emergency generators took over.
People were trapped in elevators, and rush-hour traffic was snarled when the power failure occurred about 5:15 P.M.
Some power, including that on parts of Connecticut Avenue in the downtown area, began returning at 7 P.M.


American Home Shuffles Accounts
The American Home Products Corporation, based in New York, has reassigned among five agencies the accounts of several of the largest brands at its Whitehall Laboratories and A. H. Robins divisions.
In the shuffle, an American Home Products spokesman said yesterday, advertising for the Anacin pain relievers and Riopan antacid was reassigned from Partners &amp; Shevack in New York, to, respectively, McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York, and Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, also in New York.
Partners &amp; Shevack still handles advertising for other American Home Products brands; McCann handles the company's Dristan line.


Temtex Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Teledyne Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Energy Companies to Curb Drilling
Dismayed by low prices for oil and natural gas, many energy companies are concluding that it makes more sense to buy than to drill.
This finding -- from an annual survey by Salomon Brothers of the spending plans of 241 energy companies -- is more bad news for the battered oilfield services industry, the worst-performing sector of the stock market in 1991.


Scientists Unraveling Chemistry Of Dreams
SCIENTISTS studying the sleeping brain are making new progress in understanding the nerve cells and messenger chemicals that paint the mysterious mental images known as dreams.
The purpose of dreams remains as elusive as ever.
Some scientists believe they help consolidate the memories and learning that took place the previous day.
Others see dreams as a mechanism for allowing busy brain cells to recharge their depleted stocks of transmitter chemicals.
There is no physiological support so far, however, for Freud's view of dreams as repressed wishes, and psychoanalysts are for the most part busy trying to cut and trim their guru's theory to the framework of modern findings.


Black Children Beaten in Bias Attack, Police Say
Two black youngsters walking to school in the Bronx were beaten by white teen-agers yesterday and sprayed with a white substance in what the police have classified as a bias incident.
The attack at Allerton Avenue and Boston Road was quickly criticized by Mayor David N. Dinkins, who called it "truly heinous."


El Salvador Gets Loan
The International Monetary Fund said today that it would lend El Salvador $60 million to help it strengthen its economy after 12 years of civil war.
The 14-month credit agreement is designed to bolster El Salvador's 1992 economic reform program and to encourage others to pledge aid.


With Frustration, Yet Hope, Donors Give to Neediest Cases
"The individuals who populate our street corners and vestibules, our subway benches and vacant lots, seem increasingly to have passed a line beyond which there is not even hope," Mary S. Glucksman of Manhattan wrote in a note attached to her $500 contribution to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"I've stopped waiting to be asked for change in recent weeks; instead I've pulled bills from my pocket and thrust them at those who appear cold and hungry. This seems to me a paltry token effort, so I thought I would give something more substantial. I am sending it to you because I believe that you will use it best and because your colorful stories of the people who give and those who receive renews my faith in my fellow New Yorkers each year."


Classical Music in Review
'Honey and Rue'  Orchestra of St. Luke's Carnegie Hall
"Honey and Rue," with music by Andre Previn, lyrics by Toni Morrison and singing by Kathleen Battle, is the third major premiere in the last few weeks to have reached out eagerly for its audience from the opening bars.
At the Metropolitan Opera it has been "The Ghosts of Versailles"; at Avery Fisher Hall the Bolcom Clarinet Concerto, and on Sunday afternoon, with the help of the Orchestra of St.
Luke's and a quartet of jazz players, it was Mr.
Previn's settings of six texts.


Jeweler on Job a Day After Robber's Death
A 71-year-old jewelry store owner was back in his Chinatown store yesterday morning, but he said it was not easy, one day after killing a 40-year-old man who had tried to rob him.
The store owner, Herman Moser, said that he found that he could not concentrate on his work and that his eyes flickered to the door to size up anyone who entered his store, Canal Material House, at 94 Canal Street.





Nemchinov Finds Net, And Words
Sergei Nemchinov scored a goal, set up two others and then conducted his first postgame interview in English.
On a night when the humdrum Winnipeg Jets were at Madison Square Garden to absorb a methodical 4-2 licking by the Rangers, Nemchinov's stickhandling and linguistic grand slam provided the only real excitement in the house.


Oklahoma State to Big Eight: Beware
Oklahoma State held Kansas State to 11 first-half points tonight and went on to beat the Wildcats, 72-34, in their bruising Big Eight opener.
Sean Sutton scored 16 points as the Cowboys, now 13-0 and ranked third by The Associated Press, won their 23d straight home game.
Kansas State, held to 29-percent shooting, dropped to 6-4.


Woman, 25, Wins Right to Die
A Quebec judge today approved a request by a 25-year- old woman that her doctor be authorized to switch off the respirator that has kept her alive for the last two and a half years, setting what legal experts described as a precedent for such cases in Canada.
Jacques Dufour, a judge of Quebec's Superior Court, issued the ruling five weeks after the woman put her request directly to a court hearing that convened in her hospital room in Quebec City.


Alpha Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 24


A Clemens Victory
A judge in Houston has dismissed a charge against Boston Red Sox pitcher ROGER CLEMENS, who was found not guilty last month of another charge stemming from an alleged barroom brawl with an off-duty police officer.
The misdemeanor charge of interfering with a public servant was dropped Friday by Judge JAMES BARKLEY, said GEORGE TYSON, a lawyer for Clemens.


What Gloom? 4 Newcomers Turn Out Best Sellers
Some points of light flickering through the gloom that cloaks the fashion business today are the new designers.
Usually in their 30's, these creative people are also entrepreneurs.
They have established viable businesses during a bleak economic time and their clothes show up on stores' best-seller lists.
Their forte is party clothes, probably because there is more opportunity for expression in evening than daytime styles: customers are more accepting of flights of fancy.


What Lies Ahead For Users
THE new year is upon us, and it is customary among pundits to try to divine what lies ahead in 1992 from what occurred in 1991.
It does not require much of a leap to predict that computer prices will continue to fall, as they have every year since the industry started.
PC makers have realized that if they are to survive in 1992 (and some of them may not), they must reduce their manufacturing costs and learn to survive with thinner profit margins.
The pressure will be most intense on the big companies, including the International Business Machines Corporation, Apple Computer Inc., the Compaq Computer Corporation and the Tandy Corporation.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
ARCO, Los Angeles, filed a shelf registration covering $1 billion of debt securities to be offered from time to time through various underwriters.
The company said it would use the proceeds for general corporate purposes, including the purchase of its common stock. *
Private Colleges and Universities Authority of Georgia tentatively priced $73.3 million of series B revenue bonds at par to yield 8.70 percent for the long-term 2023 maturity through Robinson-Humphrey Inc.
The issue has received an AA rating from Moody's Investors Service Inc. and an AA- from Standard &amp; Poor.'s Corp.
Ratings  *
Connecticut Clean Water Fund's $105 million of 1992 series revenue bonds were rated AA by Fitch Investors Service Inc. *
Regional Airports Improvement Corp.'s $93.3 million issue of lease revenue bonds were rated A- by S.&amp; P. The rating service pointed to a security pledge for the bonds that involves a fee on almost all jet fuel provided at Los Angeles International Airport.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
U.S. auto sales finished 1991 on a positive note, as expected, capping the weakest year since 1983.
Sales of U.S.-made cars and light trucks rose 7.7 percent in the Dec. 21-31 period but were off 11.2 percent for the year.  [ Page D1. ]


76ers Sign Ruland
Center JEFF RULAND, who retired from the Philadelphia 76ers following a knee injury in 1986, was signed by the team yesterday.
Ruland, 33 years old, underwent an operation last summer and says his left knee can withstand the rigors of the National Basketball Association. (AP)


Tax Repeal Is Introduced In Assembly Tactics Duel
After weeks of a Republican boycott that brought legislating to a halt in the State Assembly, Democratic members finally managed a quorum today and introduced two sets of bills that would repeal the $2.8 billion tax increase they rammed through the Legislature 18 months ago.
But truculent Republicans, who showed up for the session only after the Democrats achieved a 42-member majority on their own, continued their stalling tactics.
An Appropriations Committee hearing on the repeal package was delayed until late in the evening as wary Democrats refused to leave the Assembly floor for fear that a new Republican boycott would emerge and again deny a quorum if committee members left for a hearing.


Workingmens Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


On My Mind; Presenting Hypocrisy Inc.
President Bush lands in Tokyo with 21 top American business executives and a full cargo of economic evasion, self-delusion, bombast and prefabricated "agreements" that cleverly avoid the realities of the problems between the United States and Japan.
But that's all right -- it will be fair trade at its best.
The Japanese will meet him with their own complete product line of economic hypocrisy, including that new and fast-growing specialty, contempt lightly camouflaged as compassion.


Intel Is Top U.S. Chip Maker
The Intel Corporation, propelled by sales of its microprocessors, passed Motorola Inc. to become the largest American manufacturer of semiconductors in 1991, according to preliminary rankings by Dataquest, a marketing company in San Jose, Calif.
Dataquest also estimated that American manufacturers of semiconductors dropped slightly in worldwide market share to 35.9 percent, from 36.5 percent in 1990, while the share held by Japanese manufacturers rose to 49.6 percent, from 48.7 percent.
In 1990, the American market share had risen and the Japanese share had fallen for the first time in years, largely owing to a collapse in prices of memory chips, a category dominated by Japanese producers.


Treat Haitian Asylum Seekers Equally
To the Editor:
"Haitians Are No Exception" by Daniel A. Stein (Op-Ed, Dec. 14) does not protest the exceptional treatment given to Haitians seeking asylum on our shores.
Our Government's position on Haitian boat people is clearly discriminatory, contrasted with the welcome we give, almost without exception, to Cubans, Vietnamese and Russians (and, going back a few years, to Czechs, Hungarians and others fleeing Communist countries).


Utilities Want Rates to Cover Health Costs
Public utility companies across the country are applying for substantial rate increases to finance the expensive medical benefits they have promised to their current and future retirees.
The increases, if granted universally, would add more than $4 billion each year to the nation's electric, gas and telephone bills, according to Government economists.
The requested increases have drawn strong opposition from state officials and consumer groups, in part because utility employees and retirees typically receive far more generous medical benefits than most Americans.


Inotek Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


In Nuclear Deal, Seoul Halts War Game With U.S.
South Korea today canceled the huge annual military maneuvers it was due to hold here with United States forces, after receiving indications that North Korea is ready to allow inspections of its secret nuclear installations.
There was no United States confirmation of the cancellation.


For Black Students in South Africa, Dismal Scores
In a confirmation of the crisis affecting black education in South Africa, more than half of its black high school students failed their final examinations in 1991, despite a modest improvement in the pass rate over 1990.
The Department of Education and Training, which supervises black education, announced that 39.2 percent of 287,666 black candidates passed their matriculation examinations, as the battery of comprehensive high school tests are called.


Let the Commercials Begin. And They Have.
The assault of the Olympic commercials has begun, as CBS pitches its February broadcast of the Winter Olympics from Albertville and NBC hawks its July 26-Aug. 9 pay-per-view cable package of the Summer Olympics from Barcelona, Spain.
The goals of both are divergent.
The intent of CBS's "Share a Moment With the World" campaign is to remind viewers to tune in from Feb. 8-23 -- a conventional promotional strategy.


Treat Haitian Asylum Seekers Equally; Punishing the People
To the Editor:
My company sells rosebuds and ribbon flowers to many industries.
Most of our work has been done in Haiti, which has the poorest economy in North America.
We have been through Duvalier regimes with never a word from Washington.
But to punish the new military government, President Bush has ordered trade with Haiti to stop.


Inmate Killed in Brooklyn
A convicted murderer serving 15 years to life at the Brooklyn House of Detention died last night, apparently choked to death by another inmate, the police said.
Andrew Lawrence, 20 years old, who had been in jail since October 1989, was discovered lying unconscious, outside his cell, at 5:40 P.M., officials said.
He died later at Long Island College Hospital.
The police said that another inmate, who was being questioned last night, had confessed to the killing.


The Politics of Finding Homosexuality Genetic; What of Bisexuality?
To the Editor:
"Are Some People Born Gay" by Michael Bailey and Richard Pillard (Op-Ed, Dec. 17) falls into the trap the "civilized world" has set for anyone wishing to discuss this topic for 2,000 years.
The strange and grave reluctance to admit of bisexuality leads straights and gays alike to think of themselves as one or the other.
Only the ancient Greeks seemed to grasp the fundamental bisexuality of human nature without hypocrisy.


The Politics of Finding Homosexuality Genetic; What of Bisexuality?
To the Editor:
"Are Some People Born Gay" by Michael Bailey and Richard Pillard (Op-Ed, Dec. 17) falls into the trap the "civilized world" has set for anyone wishing to discuss this topic for 2,000 years.
The strange and grave reluctance to admit of bisexuality leads straights and gays alike to think of themselves as one or the other.
Only the ancient Greeks seemed to grasp the fundamental bisexuality of human nature without hypocrisy.


Another Bomb Explodes In Hammond, Ind., Area
A bomb exploded in an apartment complex here over the weekend, the fifth to go off in the Hammond area since one killed a woman on Dec. 23.
The explosion on Sunday shattered windows in an apartment complex and sprayed shrapnel on a nearby residence but caused no injuries.


LSI Is Leaving Sematech; First of Founders to Defect
The LSI Logic Corporation today became the first founding member to drop out of the semiconductor consortium Sematech, citing disagreements with the industry group's agenda as well as the company's own financial imperatives.
The move by LSI comes as the consortium, a pioneering experiment in industrial cooperation by American companies, is seeking Government approval to continue its program for an additional five years after its initial five-year charter expires in October.
Sematech, based in Austin, Tex., has a budget of about $200 million a year, half provided by the Defense Department and half by its member companies, which until now numbered 14.


Teledyne Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Business and Health; Companies' Costs: How Much Is Fair?
LARGE employers, especially manufacturers, are telling Congress they have been saddled with an unfair share of the nation's health-care spending.
A new study for the National Association of Manufacturers contends that hospitals overcharged employers by $10.8 billion in 1991 to make up for losses on unpaid bills.
The study by Lewin/ICF, a Washington-based health-care consulting firm, also said that hospitals charged an additional $10.6 billion because Medicaid and Medicare payments did not fully cover hospital costs.
The association estimated that employees and their employers -- including Federal, state and local governments -- spent $171 billion on health care last year.


Stein Plans Fund-Raiser And Dinkins Sees Red
Mayor David N. Dinkins is not invited to the feast, but he already has indigestion over the plans of his longtime rival, City Council President Andrew J. Stein, to host a glittering political dinner with Frank Sinatra, Liza Minnelli and Shirley MacLaine to raise more than $2 million.
In fact, Mr.
Dinkins has been so concerned that some of his own friends were listed among the committee members on the invitation to Mr.
Stein's "Birthday Celebration" Jan. 21 at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel that he has called up to ask if they were abandoning him for Mr.
Stein, two years before the next mayoral election.
That put some of them where they least like to be -- in the spotlight in a public feud.


Cadillac, Aiming at Luxury Imports, Shows New Engine
Cadillac took the wraps off a powerful new multivalve engine, the Northstar, today.
The engine is intended to make the G.M. division more competitive with German and Japanese luxury car makers.
Japanese auto makers owe part of their success in the United States to multivalve engine technology, which develops more horsepower from smaller, lighter engines that operate at higher speeds and are often quieter than conventional engines.
Luxury car buyers increasingly demand the quiet, smooth power delivered by Lexus, Infiniti and Mercedes models.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in The Home Section on Dec. 26 about multiple adoptions referred incorrectly to Dr.
Joyce Maguire Pavao of the Pre and Post Adoption Consulting Team in Somerville, Mass.
Dr.
Pavao was adopted by her parents; she did not adopt her daughter.


Pedro M. Valls, Interior Designer And an Ex-Halston Assistant, 41
Pedro Manuel Valls, a partner in the New York interior design firm of Siskin-Valls and a former fashion assistant to Halston, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 41 years old.
The cause of death was complications from AIDS, said his partner and longtime companion, Paul Siskin.


Neither Party Offering a Good Economic Plan
To the Editor:
The failure of economists to expect much uplift to the economy from the Democratic Party plan to give middle-income families a tax cut of about $8 a week is easy to understand.
People concerned about losing their jobs would be slow to spend the extra money, even if they noticed it in their paychecks.


People
*
Robert Goolrick, senior vice president-creative at AC&amp; R Advertising, New York, has resigned to pursue personal interests.
Bill Isenberger has been promoted to executive vice president and manager-West Coast operations at the agency's Los Angeles office, from senior vice president and director of client services. *
Andrew Picone, associate media director at Warwick Baker &amp; Fiorein New York, has been promoted to senior vice president from vice president.


Brady, on Bush Trip, Expected to Press Tokyo
Japan's Finance Minister made a surprise announcement today that Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady would accompany President Bush on his visit here, which begins Tuesday.
The announcement caused speculation that he might press Japan for financial measures to bolster the ailing American economy and to help American companies doing business in Japan.
Japanese and American officials were unusually tight-lipped about Mr.
Brady's visit and its purpose, other than acknowledging that he was coming, and that added to the speculative fervor.
A senior Treasury official has been here since the weekend negotiating with the Japanese, but officials would say only that a range of macroeconomic issues have been discussed.


CHRONICLE
United States Representative JAMIE L. WHITTEN, Democrat of Mississippi, broke the record yesterday for serving the longest time in the House but is still six years away from becoming the longest-serving member of Congress.
Mr.
Whitten, 81, who is chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, had served 50 years, 2 months and 14 days as of Monday.
That's one day more than Carl Vinson, Democrat of Georgia, who died in 1981.
Mr.
Whitten, first elected to the House on Nov. 4, 1941, was re-elected 25 times, 11 times without opposition.


Lions Are Planning to Do Their Talking on the Field
It was quite clear, immediately after Detroit had shut the mouths of a few Dallas players with a convincing 38-6 victory, that Coach Wayne Fontes of the Lions did not want to provide the Washington Redskins with the same kind of fuel that the Cowboys used to stoke the flames leading up to Sunday's game at the Silverdome.
The Cowboys were embarrassed by the Lions in a regular-season game at the Silverdome and some Dallas players took the opportunity last week to say that they were looking forward to returning to Detroit to even the score.


Global Warming Threat Found in Aircraft Fumes
NITROGEN oxide fumes emitted by aircraft exert 30 times as great an effect on climate as the same fumes emitted at ground level by industrial processes and the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil, British scientists have calculated.
The nitrogen oxides react with other chemicals in the air to create ozone in the troposphere, or lower atmosphere.
At higher altitudes, in the stratosphere, ozone blocks ultraviolet rays from the sun that can cause cancer in humans.
In the troposphere, ozone is toxic to plants and animals, and it is one of a number of tropospheric gases -- carbon dioxide is the chief one -- that trap heat.
Many scientists believe that increases in the gases as a result of human activity will cause the earth's climate to warm substantially in coming decades.


Text of Resolution on Israeli Expulsion Plan
Following is the text of Security Council Resolution 726, adopted unanimously today, condemning Israel's decision to deport 12 Palestinians:
THE SECURITY COUNCIL,
RECALLING the obligations of member states under the United Nations Charter,
RECALLING its Resolutions 607 (1988), 608 (1988), 636 (1989), 641 (1989) and 694 (1991),
HAVING BEEN APPRISED of the decision of Israel, the occupying power, to deport 12 Palestinian civilians from the occupied Palestinian territories,
1.
STRONGLY CONDEMNS the decision of Israel, the occupying power, to resume deportations of Palestinian civilians;
2.
REAFFIRMS the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949 to all the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem;
3.
REQUESTS Israel, the occupying power, to refrain from deporting any Palestinian civilian from the occupied territories;
4.
ALSO REQUESTS Israel, the occupying power, to insure the safe and immediate return to the occupied territories of all those deported;
5. DECIDES to keep the matter under review.


Man Freed in Arson Case Is Arrested in Killing
A man who spent almost a decade in prison for setting a notorious 1978 blaze that left six firefighters dead at a Waldbaum's supermarket in Brooklyn was arrested yesterday and charged with strangling a pregnant homeless woman last November at a deserted concession stand in Coney Island.
The suspect, Eric Jackson, also known as Eric Knight, was seized at State Supreme Court in Brooklyn when he appeared for a hearing on a possible new trial in the Waldbaum's case.
He was charged last night with the murder of Linda Cassella, 43 years old, in a concession stand at West 33d Street on Coney Island's Boardwalk.


Throwing Back Undersize Fish Is Said to Encourage Smaller Fry
WHAT would happen to the human race if tall people were hunted down and killed en masse while short people lived and reproduced freely?
"Eventually I could play in the National Basketball Association," said Dr.
James A. Bohnsack, a biologist with the National Marine Fisheries Service whose dream of dunking professionally was dashed by his 5-feet 6-inch stature.
"What's now considered short would soon be tall."


Quotation of the Day
"The emerging world is likely to lack the clarity and stability of the cold war, and to be a more jungle-like world of multiple dangers, hidden traps, unpleasant surprises and moral ambiguities." -- REPRESENTATIVE LES ASPIN.  [ A13:3. ]


Linking Arms Cuts to Taxes
Senator Phil Gramm, one of the most influential Republican lawmakers on budget policy, called today for a 5 percent cut in military spending by 1993 to allow the Government to raise the personal income tax exemption for every taxpayer by $416.
The conservative Texas Republican said his plan would result in a $466-a-year tax cut for a family of four whose income is $35,000.
Because Mr.
Gramm's proposal would cut military spending by more than the 1990 budget agreement provided for, it would bend, if not break, the agreement, which he helped to negotiate.
Significance of Remarks
Mr.
Gramm's proposed cut in military spending from $291 billion this year to $276.5 billion in the 1994 fiscal year and $275.3 billion by the 1995 fiscal year is thought to be close to the kind of cut President Bush is thinking of proposing in his State of the Union Message later this month.
By making his proposal first, Mr.
Gramm could protect Mr.
Bush from criticism by Congressional conservatives who warn that military spending has already been sliced enough.


As Bonn Talks Louder, Some in the U.S. Wince
United States policy makers concerned with eastern and western Europe say they have become disturbed during the last six months by what they regard as new assertiveness on the part of the German Government and its willingness to flex its muscles in international relations.
Some of these officials -- at the White House below the level of President Bush, and at the State Department below the level of Secretary James A. Baker 3d -- say they are worried about this issue.
Their response for the time being is to discuss their feelings among themselves but not to convey them to the Germans.


Lee Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Embattled Georgian Leader Flees; Opposition Council Claims Power
The embattled President of the former Soviet republic of Georgia slipped away from the capital, Tbilisi, this morning, as rebel forces stormed the Parliament building where he and members of his family had been holed up during a violent two-week siege.
The leader, Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia, who had been elected with 87 percent of the vote less than nine months ago as the republic's first independent President, was reportedly fleeing across the Caucasus region.
He was said by the independent news agency Interfax to have stopped in Azerbaijan before moving to Armenia with an escort of 60 armed guards.


The Politics of Finding Homosexuality Genetic
To the Editor:
"Are Some People Born Gay?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 17) by Michael Bailey and Richard Pillard presents the reader with an example of a disturbing trend in which investigators make stronger sociobiological claims in the popular press than are warranted by the data they present in scientific journals.
Here the authors state, "Science is rapidly converging on the conclusion that sexual orientation is innate." In support they cite their study of male twins.


Comsat Video President Quits
Robert J. Wussler has resigned as president of Comsat Video Enterprises, the company announced today.
Comsat Video provides movies via satellite for hotel guests to view in their rooms.
It is a unit of the Communications Satellite Corporation.


Harleysville Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A brief article on Friday about John Cardinal O'Connor's visit to Lebanon misidentified a relief group that he heads.
It is the Catholic Near East Welfare Association.


Observer; Boat and Bridge People
Flu-smitten and oozing self-pity, I watched in deepening depression as the Washington Redskins disposed of a football team called the Atlanta Falcons.
The depression had nothing to do with the game, except that the game reminded me of a campaign afoot to rename the Redskins.
There is a nasty predicament created by humanity's insistence on constantly renaming everything at the same time its life span is constantly increasing.
As you age you don't want to be forever going back to elementary school to unlearn everything you learned as a tyke, yet this is what's necessary unless you're content to look hopelessly dotty.


Suffering From the Winter Blahs? A Bright Remedy Emerges.
IT doesn't get any worse than this.
The holidays are over.
The bright-colored lights seem sadly dated.
We get up in the dark and get home in the dark.
December's bills are arriving.
Days are a boring gray.
The leaves are gone.
The grass is brown.
Tax forms are coming.
Some bones complain, and the flu is everywhere.
It's six months until medical waste can be found on the beaches and five months until the next universal holiday (unless you're into white sales or that Pennsylvania groundhog).
In short, this is the time hereabouts for the doldrums, that endless period of murky puddles and sleepy cars, of cold fingers and street lights that sputter all day, of chest coughs and red noses.
Even in leap year, how can the five months from New Year's to Memorial Day be twice as long as the six months from July to Christmas?
Why are there only two seasons around here, a jiffy-quick summer of sunlight and wet-towel humidity and a slow-motion time when the rain is cold?


Record-Setting Dow Rally Ends on 1.35 Loss
The stock market's mighty winning streak finally ended yesterday, but just barely.
After 11 straight rises and 6 straight records, the Dow Jones industrial average inched downward for a change but hung on above 3,200.
At 3,200.13 at the close, it was off 1.35 points.
Trading was heavy, and while there appeared to be some weakness in large issues, the broad market continued to make strong advances.
The Nasdaq composite index rode to a new high of 597.90, up 5.25, and the American Stock Exchange's composite index also set a new record, up 0.44, to 399.27.


Tax Credit, or Health Discredit?
President Bush's advisers know he'd better come up with a domestic agenda for his State of the Union message Jan. 28.
They have evidently decided that the centerpiece should be health care reform.
The idea seems to be to provide tax credits, refundable as cash to the poor, to help families pay for health insurance.
If the plan stops there, it would be a fraud, bordering on public policy malpractice.


Careers; Real Estate May Require New Skills
IN spite of a recession that has been devastating to real estate, good job opportunities may eventually appear in real estate, said Lynn K. Cherney, a managing director of Ferguson Partners Ltd., a Chicago consulting firm that specializes in advising the real estate industry.
A recent study by the firm documents many changes in the industry and calls for finding a new approach to educate people going into real estate by the year 2000.
This education, the study says, should shift the emphasis away from finance and law in many real estate programs at the degree level of master of business administration.
"For the study we talked to real estate executives around the country as well as professors of real estate at many universities," she said.


Customs Chief Is Seen as Cabinet Choice
The Commissioner of Customs, Carol Boyd Hallett, has emerged as the leading candidate to succeed Samuel K. Skinner as Transportation Secretary, Administration officials said today.
Another contender is James B. Busey 4th, former head of the Federal Aviation Administration, who became Deputy Secretary of Transportation on Dec. 4.
A retired Navy admiral, Mr.
Busey is now Acting Secretary of the department.


Surgery for Smith
STEVE SMITH, the Miami Heat's rookie point guard, was scheduled to undergo arthroscopic surgery today to repair torn cartilage in his right knee.
Smith suffered the injury in Sunday's 123-111 loss to the Los Angeles Lakers.
It was not immediately known how long Smith would be out.


Lewis to Georgia Tech
BILL LEWIS, who guided East Carolina to an 11-1 record, was named Georgia Tech's coach yesterday, succeeding BOBBY ROSS, who became coach of the San Diego Chargers.
In three years at East Carolina, Lewis has a 21-12-1 record, including a 37-34 victory over North Carolina State in the Peach Bowl on New Year's Day. (AP)


Bird Is Placed on Injured List
Larry Bird, the only player among the league's top 20 in scoring, rebounds and assists, was placed on the injured list by the Boston Celtics tonight because of a back problem.
Dave Gavitt, the Celtics' basketball operations chief, said that doctors had recommended rest and anti-inflammatory medication for Bird, and no timetable has been set for the 13-year veteran's return.


American Nursery Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Instrument Failure Halts Mapping of Venus
FLIGHT controllers have halted the radar mapping of Venus by the Magellan spacecraft while they examine its malfunctioning primary radio transmitter, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration announced yesterday.
Jim Doyle, a spokesman for the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., said that mapping of the planet had been temporarily halted because of a component failure in the Magellan's main radio, the one capable of the high-speed transmissions necessary for communicating the tremendous amounts of imaging radar data for producing maps.
A secondary transmitter is sending engineering data on the spacecraft's health.


By Design; Daringly Veiled
There has always been something alluring about what is half revealed.
Evening clothes with bits of veiling here and there are perennial fashion favorites.
Designers know that a daringly deep decolletage, for instance, doesn't seem nearly as extreme when the plunge is filled in with a wisp of chiffon.
It makes it seem more discreet, although it isn't really.
And many women of a certain age have learned to appreciate the charm of a gown with shoulders, sleeves, even a back, of sheer net or chiffon.
It gives the illusion of bareness while masking any errant bumps and sags.


PANEL ON MISSING TO VISIT INDOCHINA
The special Senate committee that is looking into cases of Americans still missing from the Vietnam war is planning to take the unusual step of going to Indochina to conduct investigations and hearings in February, a committee spokeswoman said today.
The Senators hope to visit Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam Feb. 7 to 18, the spokeswoman, Deborah De Young, said.
It will also meet with American officials in Bangkok assigned to investigate information about the 2,273 Americans still unaccounted for.


Allwaste Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Auto Sales Fell 11.2% Last Year
United States auto sales ended 1991 on a positive note, but the upturn capped the weakest year since 1983 and one in which the industry performed far worse than many experts had predicted.
In addition, the Big Three auto makers relinquished a larger share of the American market to the Japanese.
Retail sales of domestically made cars and trucks rose 7.7 percent in the Dec. 21-31 period, largely because of strong pickup truck sales by Ford and Chevrolet, a year-end surge stimulated by incentives for buyers and anticipated by analysts.
That closed out a year in which sales of all vehicles sold in the United States dropped 11.2 percent from the year before.
For all of December, car and truck sales, domestic and foreign, declined 2.5 percent.


Arthur Milford, 89, Film Editor, Is Dead; Winner of 2 Oscars
Arthur Eugene Milford, a film editor who won Academy Awards for editing Frank Capra's "Lost Horizon" (1937) and Elia Kazan's "On the Waterfront" (1954), died on Dec. 23 at Santa Monica Hospital in California.
He was 89 years old.
He died of pneumonia, said his wife, Dorothy.


Gulf States Utilities Names Key Manager to Top Posts
The Gulf States Utilities Company, the Texas-based power provider that has been in financial trouble since it finished a nuclear plant in 1986 in the midst of a regional recession, yesterday named Joseph L. Donnelly as chief executive.
Mr.
Donnelly, senior executive vice president and a chief architect of the company's partial recovery, will also become chairman on March 1.


On Japan Leg of Journey, Bush's Stakes Are High
President Bush arrived in Japan today for four days of politically freighted trade talks, hoping to cap a four-nation sweep of the Western Pacific with concessions from Tokyo that will appear, at least, to prop up America's slumping economy.
Mr.
Bush brings his top advisers on the region, his commerce secretary and a platoon of 18 American corporate leaders with him to Osaka and Tokyo.


A Stunning Deal in the Style of Steinbrenner
George Steinbrenner, the old college hurdler, still hasn't cleared the hurdle that blocks his way to the meeting with Commissioner Fay Vincent that could restore him to his position as the man in charge of the Yankees.
But one week after the latest change in that office, Steinbrenner seems closer to running the club than at any time since his banishment from baseball 17 months ago.
No one accused Steinbrenner yesterday of ordering, approving or engineering the Yankees' signing of Danny Tartabull for more than $5 million a year, none of which he is permitted to do under his agreement with the commissioner.
But if someone dusted the deal with an ethereal fingerprinting kit, the principal owner's hands might be discovered all over it.


The Analyst Behind the Lowering of New York's Rating
For months, George W. Leung, vice president of state debt ratings for Moody's Investors Service Inc., has been worried about New York State's mounting budget deficit.
Yesterday, he acted on his concerns, recommending a lower rating for the state's appropriations-backed bonds, which represent about two-thirds of New York's $20.9 billion in debt.
After reviewing Mr.
Leung's analysis, Moody's public finance department concurred, issuing the lower rating.
Aaa Rating for the Rater
"This decision reflects the fact that time is running out because we are in the final quarter of the fiscal year," Mr.
Leung, who lives in South Orange, N.J., said in a telephone interview yesterday.
"Not only has the state not dealt with the problem, but the problem has grown."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY MAYOR WORRIED OVER STEIN PARTY
City Council President Andrew J. Stein, gearing up to run for Mayor, is hosting a glittering political dinner with Frank Sinatra, Liza Minnelli and Shirley MacLaine to raise more than $2 million.
David N. Dinkins, not on the list, was worried enough to call friends listed as committee members to ask if they were abandoning him.
That put some of them where they least like to be -- in the spotlight in a public feud.
B3.


SUNY Campus Delays Opening Over PCB Fears
Officials of the State University here announced today that they would delay the spring semester by two weeks and move 1,000 students out of dormitories after electrical transformers exploded or overheated last week, contaminating five buildings with PCB's.
Three dormitories and two academic buildings were contaminated after a car struck a utility pole on Dec. 29, causing a power surge that damaged the transformers.
In the transformer room of one academic building, the level of PCB's was 3,200 times the level considered safe under state guidelines, although some samples revealed no contamination in parts of the affected buildings.
Concern From Students
Twenty-two people, including seven students, were exposed to smoke-borne polychlorinated biphenyl particles.
They were treated at local hospitals and released.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with Danny Tartabull, outfielder, on a five-year contract.
National League
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Fired Larry Doughty, senior vice president and general manager of baseball operations.
Basketball National Basketball Association
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Waived Michael Ansley, forward.
Signed Jeff Ruland, center.
Continental Basketball Association
ROCKFORD LIGHTING -- Acquired Chris Childs, guard, from the Tri-City Chinook for a 1992 second-round pick.
Waived Joe Williams, forward.
Global Basketball Association
MID-MICHIGAN GREAT LAKERS -- Signed Antoine Joubert, guard.
Football National Football League
NEW YORK JETS -- Fired Joe Daniels, quarterback coach.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Named Tom Flores coach.
Hockey National Hockey League  EDMONTON OILERS -- Called up Peter Ing, goaltender, and Martin Rucinsky, forward, from Cape Breton of the American Hockey League.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Assigned Rob Robinson, defenseman, to Peoria of the International Hockey League.
East Coast Hockey League  DAYTON BOMBERS -- Announced the retirement of John Sullivan, center.
Tennis  United States Tennis Association  USTA -- Named John McEnroe and Rick Leach to the Davis Cup team.


Market Place; A Look Ahead For the Big Board
THE New York Stock Exchange kicked off the celebration of its bicentennial year yesterday with brave words from its chairman, William H. Donaldson, about becoming "the centerpiece of a global securities market."
But even as Mr.
Donaldson was re-emphasizing the Big Board's efforts to trade more foreign stocks, by allowing so-called world-class stocks to be traded without complying with American disclosure requirements, substantial opposition to the move was apparent.


Sports of The Times; Tartabull: Headlines Or Headache?
WHEN the Yankees finally blew the cobwebs off their bankbooks, they spent $25.5 million for the services of outfielder Danny Tartabull, a 29-year-old slugger, over the next five seasons.
But what will be the Yankees' return on this investment?
Maybe $25.5 million in headlines.
Maybe $25.5 million in headaches.
More likely a little of each.


The Perils of 'Lustration'
When Czechoslovaks swept away Communism in a velvet revolution, demonstrators chanted, "We are not like them." That proud distinction has been sadly blurred by a "lustration law" recently enacted by the Federal Assembly.
The term itself has unfortunate roots.
It derives from the Latin "lustrum," meaning a purifying sacrifice carried out at five-year intervals in Imperial Rome.
Coincidentally, the new law provides for a five-year ban on employment of former Communist officials in government or private managerial posts.


Cheaper, Faster Civil Justice
The spectacle of Chief Judge Sol Wachtler suing Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo over the state courts' budget would be funny if the system itself was not such a mindless, wasteful drain on tax dollars and litigants' assets.
Common sense could probably cut the cost of civil justice in half while speeding it up.


New Mayor Says Philadelphia Needs 'Change From Top to Bottom'


Shooting Death Is Latest Of Brighton Beach Terrors
When Leonid Vinokur was shot and killed early Sunday morning as he struggled with a man trying to mug his wife, his death on a graffiti-covered street in Brighton Beach became a symbol for what has gone wrong in the Brooklyn neighborhood.
As friends and family members gathered at his home yesterday to mourn his loss, residents of the predominantly Russian neighborhood spoke with anger against the muggers and drug addicts who control their streets and transform the daytime bustle of families and shoppers into a nighttime terror.


Russians Sniff at Beef, Miffing British Donors
There may be no meat in most Russian food stores, and prices for what little there is may be shooting skyward, but agricultural inspectors in Moscow turned up their noses at a shipment of 120 tons of British beef on Sunday, fearing that it was infected by "mad cow disease."
Instead, after hours of wrangling and telephone calls between Moscow, Brussels (headquarters of the European Community, which is providing the beef as part of an emergency food aid program for Moscow and St. Petersburg), and London, the Russians sent the Russian cargo plane carrying the shipment off to the Arctic Circle.


Dizzy Gillespie Stays Put, but Not for Long
Over the next month, Dizzy Gillespie will probably wade through "A Night in Tunisia" 50 more times.
Considering that he's been playing the tune twice a night, 300 nights a year for the last 50 or so years, another 50 times won't mean a thing.
The idea doesn't seem to bother him.
"Even 'Night in Tunisia,' doesn't bore me; I'm never bored," Mr.
Gillespie said on Sunday afternoon before rushing off to perform "The Star-Spangled Banner" at the Knicks game at Madison Square Garden.
"There's always a new way to play anything."


Seaver Is on Deck As Next Hall of Famer
There will be protest votes for PETE ROSE.
There will be sentimental votes for BILL MAZEROSKI.
Most important, though, there will in all likelihood be sufficient votes tonight for TOM SEAVER to be elected to baseball's Hall of Fame.
Seaver, the overpowering right-hander who led the Mets to their World Series triumph in 1969, is expected to earn admission to the Hall in his first year of eligibility with the official announcement of voting by the Baseball Writers Association of America.


CHRONICLE
EDWIN W. EDWARDS of Louisiana was the winner in November in the bitterly contested gubernatorial race against David Duke, and he apparently was a winner again on New Year's Eve, in a casino in Las Vegas, Nev.
According to Peter Nicholas, a reporter for The Times-Picayune in New Orleans, who stood near the Governor-elect and watched him for two hours at Caesars Palace, Mr.
Edwards left the craps table with a pile of chips worth $40,000 to $50,000 after a winning streak.
Mr.
Nicholas reported on the episode in his paper's Sunday issue.


F.D.A. SEEKS HALT IN BREAST IMPLANTS MADE OF SILICONE
The Food and Drug Administration today asked all doctors to stop inserting silicone breast implants, and all manufacturers to stop supplying them, because of new concerns about their safety.
The Commissioner of Food and Drugs, Dr.
David A. Kessler, said, "The F.D.A. cannot assure the safety of these devices at this time."
About two million American women have received the implants since they came on the market in the early 1960's, and about 100,000 to 150,000 are now put in every year, according to various estimates.
Advice for Implant Recipients
Addressing himself to these women, Dr.
Kessler said: "If you are not experiencing any difficulties, there is no need to consider removing the implants. However, if you are having symptoms you think may be related to your implants, you should see your doctor. And all women with implants should have periodic checkups for problems such as rupture."


United Stationers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Keeping a Watchful Eye on the Front Line


Beaver Harris, 55, A Leading Drummer In Jazz Ensembles
William G. (Beaver) Harris, a jazz drummer who worked with the leading avant-gardists of the 1960's and led his own groups, died on Dec. 22 at his home in New York City.
He was 55 years old.
His wife, Glo, said he died of prostate cancer.
With avant-garde groups, Mr.
Harris's drumming was both swirling and muscular, waves of rhythm that gave propulsion and texture to the incantations of saxophonists like Albert Ayler and Archie Shepp.
But Mr.
Harris was also steeped in more traditional forms of jazz swing and in African and Caribbean rhythms.
His own group, the 360-Degree Music Experience, included a steel drummer along with saxophonists and the rhythm section, and moved freely between traditional and experimental jazz on its albums "From Ragtime to No Time" and "A Well Kept Secret."


Western Microwave Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Nets' Bench Provides Winning Touch
It was a night for the Nets' scrubinis.
With the Nets leading by 86-82 but the Clippers closing hard, Kenny Anderson and Tate George came off the bench with 7 minutes 33 seconds left and led a benchwarmers' surge that blew away Los Angeles, 105-90, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Islamic Plan for Algeria Is on Display
Redwan Hasnaoui leaves little doubt when he expresses full confidence that the rule of Islam is just a few days away.
He moves with ease in a vast exhibition hall that has been set up by the Islamic fundamentalists in downtown Algiers to show how an Islamic government would resolve the country's economic, social and political problems.


Carnesecca Denies St. John's Involvement In Effort to Pay Player
Lou Carnesecca, the St.
John's head basketball coach, yesterday denied that a representative of St.
John's offered an athlete $30,000 if he would agreed to play for the school.
Dexter Cambridge, who played forward at the University of Texas before being declared ineligible this season, said someone who claimed to represent St.
John's offered him $30,000 in November 1989.


U.S. Figure Skater Has Brain Tumor
Doctors have discovered a benign brain tumor in Kim Seybold, who competed in pairs figure skating with her brother in the 1988 Olympics.


Lawyer Is Sentenced In Theft of Millions
A Manhattan lawyer who stole more than $7 million from the trust and escrow accounts of four clients and told them that he was dying of brain cancer was sentenced yesterday to 7 1/2 to 22 1/2 years in prison.
The 55-year-old lawyer, Steven J. Romer, maintained his innocence even as he was being sentenced yesterday, saying to the judge, "How can I show remorse when I'm innocent?"


New Effort Is Begun to Treat Boston Schools' Ills
Boston schools, plagued recently by racial turmoil, high dropout rates and stubborn budget deficits, began a new chapter today when a seven-member school board handpicked by Mayor Raymond L. Flynn officially replaced an elected body that had become synonymous with all that is thought wrong with Boston's schools.
The Mayor, who has called for major changes in the bureaucracy and in vocational, athletic and other programs, led a successful legislative effort last year to oust the members of the nation's oldest elected school board, which had been bickering for years over how to solve the system's problems, and to start over with an appointed body.


Flores to Wear 3 Helmets
Tom Flores, the Seattle Seahawks' president and general manager, took over as the team's coach today, succeeding Chuck Knox.
The announcement was expected since Friday, when Flores said that the University of Miami coach, Dennis Erickson, was not interested in taking the job.


Review/Music; Handel's First Operatic Success
How serious was opera seria?
Not very, according to the production of Handel's rarely staged opera "Agrippina," which opened on Saturday night at the Kennedy Center here.
The Washington Opera, having just recovered from a labor dispute with its orchestra, is offering the work in Italian with supertitles through Feb. 8.
"Agrippina" was Handel's first operatic success, written to a taut and witty libretto, receiving an extraordinary 27 performances in Venice in 1710.
One early report said the audience was "thunderstruck with the gravity and sublimity of his style" and hailed Handel as the "dear Saxon."
But this Michael Hampe production, first seen at the Cologne Opera, with additional direction in Washington by Florian-Malte Leibrecht, hardly left room for gravity or sublimity in its attempts to rekindle that popularity.
This tale of Empress Agrippina's maneuverings to get her son, Nerone, crowned Emperor of Rome featured an over-age gray-haired Nerone, who may not have fiddled, but who rode around on a gold hobbyhorse he occasionally treated like a love object.
It offered a Claudius who was a doddering Emperor and husband to Agrippina, half-fool and half-buffoon, and an Agrippina who could take time out from scheming to sneer at her enemy Poppea's taste in pearls.
One of the few aspects of the drama taken seriously was not in the libretto: several lingering incestuous kisses between plotting mother and infantile son.


Big Sports, Big Names, Big Money
DECADES ago, the sportswriter Grantland Rice declared that it was is not whether you win or lose, but how you play the game.
Today, it seems, it is not whether you play the game, but whether you sponsor one.
Eight executives from consumer-marketing giants and advertising agencies have been named to the annual list of the 100 most powerful people in sports, as compiled by The Sporting News, the weekly newspaper.
They outnumbered the players by 4 to 1; the two active athletes on the list -- both, by no coincidence, busy product endorsers -- were the basketball superstar Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls and the golfer Jack Nicklaus.


Corrections
The Advertising column in Business Day on Thursday misidentified the marketing company that imports Santa Margherita, the top-selling fine Italian wine in the United States.
It is Paterno Imports Ltd. of Chicago.


Super Rite Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Yankees Show a New Appetite by Snaring Tartabull
After two months of off-season lethargy and front-office chaos, the Yankees emerged yesterday with a $25.5 million free-agent outfielder and a suddenly voracious appetite for the trade market.
In a quick move that surprised fans and baseball people alike and reminded many people of George Steinbrenner's previous spending sprees, the Yankees signed slugger Danny Tartabull to a $25.5 million contract just after midnight yesterday.


President Is Appointed For Laura Ashley Unit
Laura Ashley Holdings P.L.C., the British apparel and home furnishings retailer, announced yesterday that Donna Moore, an executive with the Walt Disney Company, had been named president of the North American division, which represents about 40 percent of its business.
On Feb. 1, Ms.
Moore, 51, will take over a division still reeling from the dismissal of its president and most of its merchandisers shortly after Jim Maxmin was appointed chief executive last July.
The company made the moves amid a worldwide sales slump; sales declined 11 percent in the six months ended July 27.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  U.N. VOTE CONDEMNS ISRAEL
With American support, the United Nations Security Council unanimously condemned Israel's decision to deport 12 Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
A1  ISRAELIS IN WASHINGTON FOR TALKS
An Israeli delegation arrived in Washington to resume Middle East peace talks, but Syrian, Lebanese, Jordanian and Palestinian negotiators stayed away in protest.
A9  Cardinal O'Connor said the Vatican had reconsidered on Jerusalem.
A9  GEORGIAN PRESIDENT FLEES
The President of the former Soviet republic of Georgia slipped away from the capital as rebel forces stormed the government building where he and members of his family had been holed up.
A1  Russia reluctantly accepted an aid shipment of beef from Britain.
A6  U.S.
AND JAPAN AT ODDS OVER TRADE
As President Bush visits Japan, negotiators for the United States and Japan are at odds over an American demand for higher Japanese targets for buying American automobiles and parts.
A1  President Bush's trade talks in Japan are politically freighted.
A8  The Treasury Secretary will accompany the President in Tokyo.
A8  SEOUL WAR GAMES CANCELED
South Korea announced it would cancel it's annual military exercises with the United States after North Korea indicated that it would allow inspections of its nuclear sites.
A8  GERMAN ASSERTIVENESS PONDERED
United States policy makers say they have become disturbed during the last six months by what they regard as Germany's new willingness to flex its muscles in international relations.
A2  A Senate panel on Vietnam War missing is to go to Indochina.
A5  Surprising records of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis were released.
A5  After plea, Imelda Marcos tosses her shoe in the presidential ring.
A8  Algeria's fundamentalist Muslims say Islamic rule is imminent.
A3  There is a crisis affecting black education in South Africa.
A3  Blacks are boycotting white businesses in a South African town.
A3  Fort St.
John Journal: A Canada-Alaska road will be celebrated.
A4  National A10-13  FOR BUSH, A LESSON FROM BRITAIN
Measures that President Bush has prescribed to improve education in the United States are now the law in Britain, but the results there so far serve as a warning to him that success is far from guaranteed.
A1  CHANGE IN BOSTON SCHOOLS
In Boston, where public schools have long had financial and racial troubles, a school board appointed by the Mayor formally replaced the elected board.
A12  A NEW WAY OF WORKING
If planners have their way, long drives to work and worsening traffic will be a thing of the past thanks to development of regional work centers where employees can do their jobs by computer, telephone and fax machines.
A10  THE POST-COLD WAR PENTAGON
Responding to the death of the Soviet Union, the head of the House Armed Services Committee outlined a broad framework for restructuring the Pentagon.
A13  MILITARY CUTBACK IS PROPOSED
Senator Gramm, a Texas conservative, proposed a cut in military spending and an increase in the personal income tax deduction.
A13  NEW WOMAN IN CABINET?
Carol Boyd Hallett, a woman with strong political credentials who Administration officials say would be an asset to President Bush in an election year, is the leading candidate to become Transportation Secretary.
A10  FIFTH BOMBING IN INDIANA
A bomb that shattered windows in an apartment complex was the fifth detonated in two weeks in the Hammond, Ind., area.
A10  A power failure darkens part of Washington.
A13  Metropolitan Digest, B1 NEW YORK CREDIT DOWNGRADED
Moody's Investors Service downgraded the rating on most of New York State's debt, citing Albany's inability to solve the state's budget problems.
The downgrading could mean that the state will have to pay higher interest rates to borrow money.
A1  PCB'S CLOSE SUNY CAMPUS
Officials of the State University of New York at New Paltz have delayed the spring semester by two weeks because an explosion in an electrical transformer has left at least five buildings contaminated with PCB's, which are known to cause cancer in animals.
Twenty-two people were exposed to polychlorinated biphenyl particles.
A1  Neediest Cases B3  Business Digest D1  Science Times C1-10  BREAST IMPLANT HALT  The Food and Drug Administration urged doctors to stop using silicone-filled breast implants until a full study of whether they are safe can be completed.
A1  What are dreams made of?
A chemical mechanism is suggested.
C1  Major effort is mounted to measure impact of the ozone hole.
C1  A machine to capture plagiarists raises hopes and doubts.
C1  Running may not be a man's world a few years down the pike.
C3  Arts/Entertainment C11-22  Dizzy Gillespie in New York for a month for his jubilee.
C11  Top price of $50 announced for two Broadway plays.
C11  A festival for mid-career choreographers.
C11  Word and Image: A new Michael Frayn novel.
C15  Fashion Page B9  Four newcomers' best sellers.
Obituaries B7-8  Dr.
Robert Gordis, author and rabbi.
B8  Pedro Manuel Valls, interior designer.
B8  Sports B10-15  Baseball: 'More things coming,' say Yanks.
B11  Steinbrenner's role discussed.
B11  Basketball: Nets defeat Clippers.
B12  New Knicks breaking old habits.
B12  Column: Anderson on Tartabull.
B11  On Pro Football.
B14  Football: Lions will do their talking on the field.
B14  Hockey: Rangers recapture share of first.
B11  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials A14  Tax credit?
Health discredit?
The perils of "lustration." North Korea opens up.
Mr.
Gingrich's prison math.
Letters A14  Russell Baker: Boat and Bridge People.
A15  A. M. Rosenthal: Presenting Hypocrisy Inc.
A15  James Bovard: Don't brake for Detroit.
A15  Whitney North Seymour Jr.: Cheaper, faster civil justice.
A15  Aram Bakshian Jr.: America first, Buchanan last.
A15


Classical Music in Review
Alma Jean Smith
Soprano Merkin Concert Hall
Alma Jean Smith is a soprano from Cleveland who has been active in opera on both sides of the Atlantic since the mid-1970's.
She now sings and teaches from a base at Miami University in Ohio and has been doing some stage directing as well.


Martha Montgomery, Educator, Dies at 62
Martha Barber Montgomery, assistant vice president for program evaluation at Drexel University in Philadelphia, died Saturday at Presbyterian Hospital in Philadelphia.
She was 62 years old..
She died of cancer, university officials said.


Tax Revolt Brings Assessments Under Scrutiny
The Wilson place, a rambling array of gables and porches in this tiny and genteel summer colony, has become the unlikely centerpiece of a court battle that could force most Connecticut towns to review the way they assess property for real-estate taxes.
It was here, on the waters of Long Island Sound, that John C. Wilson 3d declared war against the tax assessor for the town of Old Saybrook, of which Fenwick is a borough, after his tax bill rose to $14,000 a year, from $4,000.


Broad Effort Under Way to Track Ozone Hole's Effects
DESPITE growing anxiety about the "ozone hole" that has begun appearing each year in the stratosphere above Antarctica, inhabitants of the white continent seem to be taking the resulting seasonal blasts of solar ultraviolet radiation in stride -- the wildlife, by producing protective pigments, and the humans, by wearing dark glasses, heavy clothing and sun-blocking lotions.
But while scientists say the dangers of exposure to intense ultraviolet are presently under control, the hazard is expected to increase sharply in the coming years, and experts have begun the most comprehensive environmental monitoring study of its kind to keep track of it.


Thriving Where Others Won't Go
Mariano Diaz stood, hands on hips, in the front of a Ctown grocery store where Harlem meets Central Park.
He looked as if he owned the place, which he does.
"How many Dominicans do you know in the supermarket business?" he asked his friend Teodoro Cortes.
Mr.
Cortes, a builder for many of these stores in the New York area, knew the right answer: "How many supermarkets are there?" he asked.


RATING FOR CREDIT OF NEW YORK STATE DOWNGRADED AGAIN
Strongly censuring New York State's fiscal condition and the political paralysis in Albany, a major Wall Street credit agency today downgraded the rating on most of the state's debt, leaving New York with the second lowest rating of all states.
The new rating from Moody's Investors Service, which affects only the portion of the state's debt backed by annual legislative appropriations, is the lowest in the state's history and could mean that New York would have to pay higher interest rates when it borrows money in the future.
The lower rating places New York in a tie with Louisiana for the nation's second lowest credit rating, ahead of only Massachusetts.


Schools Vie in a Marketplace: More 'Choice' Can Mean Less
More than three years after Britain applied a free-market cure to its ailing schools, using the same ideas President Bush endorses for American education, its schools relish their growing authority but parents find they still do not have enough good schools to choose from.
The measures that President Bush prescribes for American educational ills are now the law in Britain: national curriculum standards, national tests and "choice," a voucher-like system in which money goes not to parents but to schools, based on the number of students they attract.


Cambex reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


Overhaul of Dividend Tax Is Urged
Challenging a fundamental feature of the nation's tax law, the Treasury contended today that the double taxation of dividends -- first at the corporate level and then at the shareholder level -- distorts decision-making throughout the economy and thereby reduces output as much as $25 billion a year.
The Treasury proposed to "integrate" corporate and shareholder levies so earnings would no longer be taxed two or more times and suggested options to do so.


Jesse C. Goodwin, 76, A Packaging Executive
Jesse C. Goodwin, co-founder of Mother's Food Products, which packaged kosher foods, died on Dec. 30 at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
He was 76 years old and lived in Verona, N.J.
He died of heart failure caused by a variety of pulmonary conditions, his son Richard said.


New Knicks Have Broken Their Old Habits
It seems like only last season when the Knicks often faltered in pressure situations.
In fact, it
was
only last season.
But that was before John Starks's game and his confidence grew by leaps and bounds.
That was before Xavier McDaniel arrived to give New York another weapon to lift some of the late-game scoring burden from Patrick Ewing.
That was before Mark Jackson retooled his body and resurrected his career.
And that was before Pat Riley's coaching coaxed more out of the Knicks than most people expected.


Classical in Review
Max Lifchitz
Pianist Christ and St. Stephen's Church
Composers who also perform tend to put their interpretive skills primarily at the service of their creative ones, and selflessness is not generally part of the equation.
But Max Lifchitz, a Mexican-born composer and pianist whose works are heard frequently in New York, put his own music aside on Sunday afternoon and gave carefully shaped and largely persuasive accounts of pieces by eight of his colleagues.


Argonaut Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BRIEFS
*
Berry Petroleum Co., Taft, Calif., acquired interests in certain ARCO oil and gas assets in California. *
Computer Products Inc., Boca Raton, Fla., completed the previously announced acquisition of the assets and business of Heurikon Corp., Madison, Wis.


Results Plus
TENNIS Forget, Wheaton Gain Guy Forget and David Wheaton both advanced yesterday to the second round of the New South Wales Open in Sydney, Australia, but they had their hands full with players ranked well below them.
Forget, the defending champion, who won six individual titles last year and then played a key part in France's Davis Cup championship, beat Richey Reneberg of the United States, 6-3, 3-6, 6-3.
Wheaton fended off Wally Masur of Australia, 7-5, 7-5, in his first appearance since taking the $2 million top prize in the Grand Slam Cup last month.
Derrick Rostagno, No. 6, of the United States was the first casualty, losing by 6-2, 6-4 to Cristiano Caratti of Italy.
Barbara Paulus of Austria, who became the women's No. 17 seeded player when Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere of Switzerland withdrew, quickly followed, losing by 6-0, 6-2 to Amy Frazier of the United States.
Aaron Krickstein beat Goran Prpic of Croatia, 6-7, (9-7), 6-4, 6-4, in a three-hour match.
Olivier Delaitre of France defeated Patrick McEnroe of the United States, 6-4, 4-6, 7-6, (7-3).
Stefano Pescosolido of Italy was defaulted after injuring a spectator when he drop-kicked his racquet during a qualifying match.
It flew over a fence and cut an unidentified woman over the right eye.
She was carried off by stretcher and taken to a nearby hospital.
Pescosolido was fined $1,500. (AP) Cherkasov Defeats Grabb: Second-seeded Andrei Cherkasov of Russia defeated Jim Grabb of the United States, 6-4, 6-7, (4-7), 6-4, yesterday in the first round of the New Zealand Open at Auckland.
Fouth-seeded Francisco Clavet of Spain and fifth-seeded Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands also advanced.
Clavet defeated Marian Vajda of Czechoslovakia, 6-4, 3-6, 6-3, and Haarhuis beat Brett Steven of New Zealand, 3-6, 6-4, 6-3. (AP) N.H.L.
Leafs Win in Overtime Dave Ellet's goal with 8.5 seconds remaining in overtime gave the Toronto Maple Leafs a 3-2 victory over the St.
Louis Blues last night.
Ellett took Glenn Anderson's back pass inside the St.
Louis blue line and beat goalie Curtis Joseph with a slap shot from the high slot.
Anderson and Rob Cimetta also scored for the Leafs, who outshot St.
Louis, 41-25, and halted a five-game losing streak.
Brett Hull scored his league-leading 40th goal for St.
Louis, and Nelson Emerson also scored.
Hull has scored in nine consecutive games.
He has points in 18 consecutive games, with 22 goals and 9 assists for 31 points during the streak. (AP)


The Cuba Missile Crisis: Kennedy Left a Loophole
Records of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, made publicly available today for the first time, suggest that the United States did not give Moscow any ironclad assurance that it would refrain from invading Cuba.
That disclosure comes as a surprise to some historians of the crisis, who believed that the Soviet leader, Nikita S. Khrushchev, had agreed to remove Soviet intermediate-range ballistic missiles from Cuba after receiving such an assurance.


2 Experts Say Women Who Run May Overtake Men
IF women's running performance continues to improve at the rate at which it has soared since the 1920's, the top women will soon be running as swiftly as the best men, and may even outrun them someday, two physiologists say.
The researchers suggest that elite female runners have been getting so much faster at such a rapid pace that they should be running marathons as quickly as men by 1998, and other shorter track events before the middle of the next century.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices fell in Tokyo today after soaring more than 3.5 percent on the first trading day of the year.
At the end of the afternoon trading session, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 234.79 points, or just less than 1 percent, to 23,566.39.
On Sunday, the index rose 817.41 points.


Bennett Can Deliver Without the Billing
At first, Cornelius Bennett tried to hide the depth of his feelings.
He stood in front of his locker at Rich Stadium on Sunday after Buffalo had routed Kansas City, 37-14, in playoff action and said, yes, he had heard the pre-game analysis that said the Chiefs' defense was rock-solid and that the Bills' defense was porous.


Patterns
Brits in High Places
It is the beginning of a new chapter in fashion history, and we don't mean Chapter 11.
Liz Tilberis, the highly regarded editor of British Vogue, was named editor in chief of Harper's Bazaar magazine yesterday, ending months of speculation.
The new editor is soft-spoken, silver-haired and British.
And she wears Chanel. (Note: With Anna Wintour at Vogue, this puts British editors at the top of two of America's most venerable fashion magazines.)


Unitrin Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
4.00
2.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.85
3.85
6.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.86
3.88
6.51
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.46
6.48
8.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.43
7.47
8.31
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.56
8.63
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.68
6.70
7.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Most's Legs Amputated
JOHNNY MOST, the gravelly voiced Boston Celtics' radio announcer for 37 years, had both his legs amputated yesterday at New England Baptist Hospital in Boston because of a blood circulation problem.
Most, 68 years old, was reporting to be doing well following the surgery, which apparently was not an emergency procedure.


Randy Warshaw Taking Next Step, at the Joyce
Randy Warshaw would seem to be in an enviable position.
A former dancer with the popular and influential modern-dance choreographer Trisha Brown, he is now much in demand himself as a teacher of modern dance.
He has a vibrant seven-member company of his own that has performed at some of the major dance theaters in New York City and in Europe, and is establishing a second home in Miami, where he grew up.
And tonight, Mr.
Warshaw and his company open the three-week Altogether Different festival at the Joyce Theater, where the choreographer will present four new dances.
But at the age of 32, Mr.
Warshaw is also at a difficult point in his career.
He does not fit into the categories of hot new choreographic Wunderkind or acknowledged older master.
How do you sell a "middle-aged" choreographer?
Without the resources to hire a manager, he must devote a large chunk of time to the business of dance, losing the time and energy to focus on and create the new work that will help him develop both his audiences and an individual voice.
Paradoxically, too, there are fewer places in New York for him to perform.
His company has grown beyond the intimate loft theaters that dot Manhattan, but it is not ready for larger, more formal theaters.
All of which makes him just right for the Altogether Different festival.


Pirates Let Go Doughty
The Pittsburgh Pirates dismissed General Manager LARRY DOUGHTY yesterday despite the team's consecutive National League East titles.
Doughty said he was told he had been let go "because my gross errors far outweighed my sucesss."


Books of The Times; A 'Noises Off' Struggle in a Michael Frayn Novel
A Landing on the Sun By Michael Frayn 249 pages. Viking. $21.
Michael Frayn's characters are obsessed by order and control, dismayed by change, confusion and messy emotion.
The bumbling actors in his farcical play "Noises Off" struggle to continue playing their roles amid growing disorder on stage and off.
The prim, punctilious schoolmaster in the movie "Clockwise" misses his train and finds himself unable to extricate himself from a snowballing set of complications.
And the pompous professor in Mr.
Frayn's last novel, "The Trick of It," endeavors to make his life conform to the neat rules of literary theory.


North Korea Opens Up
North Korea has now told the International Atomic Energy Agency that it will shortly sign a nuclear safeguards accord.
Barring a last-minute hitch, Pyongyang will then open all nuclear facilities to inspection.
That's a giant step toward making the Korean Peninsula nuclear-free.
It may also help free North Korea from years of self-imposed isolation.
North Korea deeply resents its reputation as a harshly regimented, deprived country desperate to acquire nuclear arms to stave off collapse.
Yet only the North can dispel that impression -- by letting outsiders in to see for themselves, starting with international inspectors.


A Winning Year for Stock Funds
With a striking 8.7 percent price jump in the final 11 days of December, stock mutual funds posted a yearly gain of 36 percent in 1991, their best since 1967.
In contrast to 1990, when they lost 6.3 percent of their value, stock funds were brawny last year.
They out-performed two traditional competitors for small investors' money: fixed-income funds, which were up 18 percent, and money-market funds, up 5.6 percent.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Ahold USA Inc., Parsippany, N.J., a subsidiary of the Netherlands-based food retailer Koninklijke Ahold N.V., named Marshall J. Collins Jr. vice chairman of two of its supermarket chains, Bi-Lo Inc. and Giant Food Stores Inc.
Also, Allan Noodle was named chief executive of Giant Food Stores. *
Allied Stores Corp., Cincinnati, a subsidiary of Campeau Corp., Toronto, said Sam L. Simmons, president of its Jordan Marsh division, had resigned effective Feb. 1.
Hal Frank, the division's chairman and chief executive, will assume Mr.
Simmons's duties.


ISRAELIS ARE ALONE AT MIDEAST TALKS
An Israeli delegation arrived in Washington today to resume Middle East peace talks, but negotiators from Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and the occupied territories stayed away in protest.
The Arab delegations want Israel to reverse a decision last week to deport 12 Palestinians from Israeli-occupied territories.


And Once Again, Cuomo Won't Run
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo slammed the door today on an effort to make him a favorite-son candidate in the state's April 7 Democratic Presidential primary.
In a statement, Mr.
Cuomo said that "because of the current intensity of the state's fiscal difficulties and for the good of the party," he would not be a favorite-son candidate.
"The Governor is sending a clear signal, for the second time now, that he's not a candidate," Anne Crowley, the Governor's press secretary, said.
On Dec. 20, the Governor announced that he would not be a candidate for President.
Ms.
Crowley also said Mr.
Cuomo would ask that his name be removed from the Georgia Presidential primary ballot.
It had been included by Georgia officials when Mr.
Cuomo was considering a possible Presidential campaign.
On Sunday, a group of powerful New York Democratic county chairmen met in New York City to plan a Cuomo favorite-son candidacy.


National Medical Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Mr. Gingrich's Flawed Prison Math
The year has just begun, but Representative Newt Gingrich, second-ranking Republican in the House, may already have won the 1992 glibness award.
In a speech Friday attacking the "welfare state," he as much as blamed its soft-headed "value structure" for the crimes of a Georgian crack addict reported to have murdered his father, stepmother, sister and niece.
The killer had recently been paroled from a state prison.
A society ruled by sterner values, he suggested, would build enough prisons to lock up "every violent criminal in America." He said this could be achieved at "common-sense cost" by taking "three or four large military bases . . . we lease the land to every state in the country and we allow them to build prisons without having to worry about neighborhood problems." Construction could be carried out at bargain rates, he said, by National Guard engineering battalions.


When Bullets Pierce the Body, Mind and Soul
Nancy Jones's surgeon decided against removing the bullet that ripped through her left side, then lodged under her right collarbone after gunfire exploded in a Crown Heights deli where she was shopping.
Two years later, she is still carrying around the bullet -- as much in her mind as in her body.
In New York City, the toll of gunfire is not limited to the dead.
There are thousands more, about 4,500 in 1991, who are shot and survive.
In a city overwhelmed by violence -- and saturated with increasingly powerful guns -- they are unnoticed victims.
Whether paralyzed or simply grazed, they have similar stories to tell.


Unions Want McDonnell Deal Delay
Unions representing aerospace workers in California began a drive today to delay the McDonnell Douglas Corporation's plan to sell a 40 percent stake in its commercial aircraft business to Taiwan.
The unions are convinced that the deal will lead to the disappearance of jobs in the United States.
Officials of unions representing nearly 25,000 workers at McDonnell Douglas and the General Dynamics Corporation, a major subcontractor on McDonnell Douglas aircraft, said they would seek to find alternatives to the proposed $2 billion deal with the Taiwan Aerospace Corporation.
They said they were exploring possible investments in McDonnell Douglas by pension funds or by other American companies, although they said they had no specific prospects.


The Politics of Finding Homosexuality Genetic; Explain and Oppress
To the Editor:
The dual claim by Michael Bailey and Richard Pillard in "Are Some People Born Gay?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 7) that science is rapidly converging on a biological explanation of homosexuality and that such explanations are good news for gay rights advocates leaves me wondering if history is always destined to repeat itself.


Mego Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Fort St. John Journal; For That Long Road to Alaska, a Long Birthday
Leslie Markham, a 79-year-old who lives in a trailer park here just off the Alaska Highway, recalls the day in 1942 during the road's construction when the muskeg "ate" one of the United States Army's Caterpillar tractors.
As the driver of a two-and-a-half-ton truck, Mr.
Markham watched from more solid ground as "that Cat sank deeper and deeper and just got swallowed whole." The tractor's operator climbed out safely, and three other tractors sprouting cables and winches managed to extract the sunken machine many hours later.


Mrs. Marcos Seeks Presidency
Imelda Marcos announced today that she would run for President to succeed Corazon C. Aquino, a move that is certain to increase pressure on Mrs.
Aquino to seek a second term.
"After months of direct consultations with our poor and oppressed citizens," Mrs.
Marcos told reporters, "I have decided to run for office to seek the presidency by submitting to the democratic process."


Circon Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


St. John's to Show How Good UConn Is
The Big East Conference season has already started for the Connecticut Huskies, but the serious mind games have just begun.
A victory over St.
John's on Tuesday night at Gampel Pavilion would give the Huskies a record of 11-0 and tie the second-best start in school history.
Another defeat to the Redmen, Connecticut's most troublesome conference opponent, could suddenly raise questions about a team ranked fifth in both major national polls.
Which explains the timing of the mind games.


Classical Music in Review
Jerry Grossman and Diane Walsh
Cellist and Pianist Christ and St. Stephen's Church
Every now and then an orchestral musician steps out of the mass to remind concertgoers that a modern orchestra is not just a huge music machine, but an association of individual players with notions of their own.
Jerry Grossman, the principal cellist of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra, has given several impressive recitals in recent years, the most striking having been his single-evening traversal of the Bach solo suites last year.


City College Shifts Site for Basketball
A basketball game between Yeshiva University and City College will be played at Yeshiva tomorrow night instead of the Nat Holman Gymnasium on the City College campus.
The change in site was made at City College's request as a result of the incident Dec. 28 in which nine people died at a benefit basketball game.


Spiegel to Close Honeybee Unit
Spiegel Inc. said yesterday that it plans to close its 17-store Honeybee division on Feb. 29, a move that will result in a pretax write-off of $9 million in the 1991 calendar year.
The Honeybee stores had sales of $12 million in 1991, Spiegel said.
Honeybee, a retailer of women's apparel, will continue to sell clothes through Spiegel's catalogues.


CHRONICLE
One surprise -- a sermon by the Rev.
NORMAN VINCENT PEALE -- was not deemed sufficient to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the Rev.
ARTHUR CALIANDRO'S association with the Marble Collegiate Church on Fifth Avenue.
So a second surprise -- a dinner for 600 -- was held last night.
The service on Sunday drew 1,600 people to the church, founded by Peter Minuit in 1628.
Last night at the dinner, religious and lay leaders lauded the man who followed Dr.
Peale into the senior ministry when Dr.
Peale retired in 1984.


Bradley Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


As a Death Is Mourned in Brighton Beach, the Anger Begins


Cecile Naumburg, 94, Philanthropist, Is Dead
Cecile L. Naumburg, a philanthropist and former board member of Carnegie Hall and other cultural organizations, died on Friday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
Mrs.
Naumburg was 94 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Her death was caused by respiratory failure, her family said.


Q&amp;A
Compass in Space
Q.
How does a compass behave in orbit and in outer space?


Bridge
Some four decades ago, in "Moonraker," James Bond made use of a famous trick deal to get the better of the villainous Hugo Drax.
Convinced that Drax was cheating at the Blades club, he maneuvered to play against him for a very high stake indeed.
Apparently drunk, Bond switched decks in order to achieve the diagramed layout, which many will recognize.
He then opened seven clubs as South, and redoubled when Drax, as East, confidently doubled with his 31 high-card points, more than most players see in a bridge lifetime.


Trade Discord Persists as Bush Arrives in Japan
President Bush began his visit to Japan today in an atmosphere of contention and confusion, with negotiators for the United States and Japan in sharp disagreement over an American demand for Japan to buy more American automobiles and parts.
At issue are both the amount of cars and parts that Japanese auto makers and dealers would purchase and how the commitment would be described in light of Tokyo's insistence that purchases should be left up to Japanese businesses and not to the Government, officials on both sides said.


INSIDE
Utilities' New Rate Campaign
Utilities are seeking higher rates to finance retirees' medical benefits.
The increases could add more than $4 billion a year to consumers' electric, gas and telephone bills.
Page D1.
Redrawing the Military
The head of the House Armed Services Committee offered a framework to reorganize the Pentagon for a post-cold-war world.
Page A13.
Fulfilling Commuters' Dream
Regional work centers that take advantage of computers and fax machines are touted as a way to reduce traffic and air pollution.
Page A10.
Gunfire's Other Toll
For many New Yorkers, being shot wasn't the worse of their ordeal.
It was the fight back to recovery that was the most painful.
Page B1.
Stein Event Upsets Dinkins
Mayor Dinkins hasn't been invited to Andrew J. Stein's fund-raising gala, but the dinner has nonetheless settled heavily on the Mayor.
Page B3.
Steinbrenner's Imprint?
The guiding hand of the Yankee owner seems to loom over the club's signing of Danny Tartabull to a $25.5 million contract.
Page B11.


The Politics of Findin Homosexuality Genetic; What of Bisexuality?
To the Editor:
"Are Some People Born Gay" by Michael Bailey and Richard Pillard (Op-Ed, Dec. 17) falls into the trap the "civilized world" has set for anyone wishing to discuss this topic for 2,000 years.
The strange and grave reluctance to admit of bisexuality leads straights and gays alike to think of themselves as one or the other.
Only the ancient Greeks seemed to grasp the fundamental bisexuality of human nature without hypocrisy.


Rabbi Robert Gordis, 83, Dies; Defined Conservative Judaism
Dr.
Robert Gordis, an author, rabbi and biblical scholar at the Jewish Theological Seminary, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old.
He died of complications after a stroke, his family said.


Delay Sought In Paying Tax On L.I. Homes
Here in the suburbs, where a home is a passport to the American dream, the Nassau County Executive declared today that the "American dream is dying" and called for emergency measures including a moratorium on foreclosures for homeowners who cannot pay their taxes.
The County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, who has a budget crisis that is forcing layoffs of up to a quarter of the county's workers, said the local economy was "closer to a depression" than a recession and was driving people out of the county.


Polydex Pharmaceuticals Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Plagiarists Take Note: Machine's On Guard
FEW figures in science have engendered more emotion than Walter Stewart and Dr.
Ned Feder -- and that was before they invented their little "plagiarism machine."
"You put the papers in here," Mr.
Stewart said as he bent forward and peered through thick glasses bound to his head by a rubber band.
The scanner digests the paper, transforming it into a computer file ready for the test.


Du Pont to Take After-Tax Charge
The Du Pont Company said it expects to take a $3 billion to $4 billion charge in 1993 when it adopts a new accounting standard.
The change will require companies to account on an accrual basis for the cost of health and life insurance benefits provided to current and future pensioners and survivors.
Du Pont and most other companies now account for such costs on a cash basis.


Economist Post Filled By Salomon Brothers
Salomon Brothers yesterday announced the appointment of John P. Lipsky as its first chief economist since the 1988 departure of Henry Kaufman, whose economic insights dominated Wall Street for years.
The firm also named David G. Shulman to the new job of United States equity strategist.


Corrections
A report in the Business People column on Saturday about the new chairman of Whitbread P.L.C. misstated the year in which the company's brewery was established in London.
It was 1748.


For Traffic-Weary Workers, an Office That's a Long Way From the Office
In six years, Roxanne J. Cox-Drake put 300,000 miles on her Jeep Cherokee and untold gray hairs on her head.
An information services manager for Southern California Edison, she drove every day from her house in Moreno Valley to work in Rosemead, suffering through 120 miles of round-trip traffic.
Like hundreds of thousands of people with jobs in Los Angeles or its most crowded suburbs, she and her husband, Donald E. Drake, could not afford to buy a home close to work.
But they pay a price for living in a remote suburb.
"Some days," she said, "it's taken me three hours to get home."


Total Systems Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Treasury Prices Rise on Report
Prices of Treasury securities rose in moderately active trading yesterday, the first true working day of the year for financial markets.
Although markets have been open, firms have been operating with skeleton staffs since the Monday before Christmas.
And until yesterday, financial markets in Japan had been closed for more than a week.


Study of H.I.V. Transmission at Birth
A STUDY of twins born to mothers infected with the virus that causes AIDS indicates that most infants who become infected acquire the virus during the birth process.
The researcher, Dr.
James J. Goedert of the National Institutes of Health, said the study confirmed other reports suggesting that mother-to-infant transmission of H.I.V. comes late in gestation, most likely at the time of birth.
"The observation that twins born first are at greatly increased risk of H.I.V. infection is intriguing," Dr.
Goedert said in an interview.
"It suggests that many infants remain uninfected until time of delivery, and that specific measures might prevent some of these infections."


A Rural South African Town Finds Black Boycott Costly
The stores in this small copper-mining town glitter with bright decorations, leftovers from Christmas, and with advertised post-season sales.
But a trickle of white customers is the only thing that has kept them from shutting down.
Phalaborwa, situated in the Transvaal, on the edge of Kruger National Park, has endured three months of a shopping boycott by black consumers.
It has driven at least one store out of business and put pressure on many others.


Companies Rush to Sell Debt Issues
A torrent of new corporate debt securities flooded the credit markets yesterday, as companies began to react to the drop in interest rates since Dec. 20.
Analysts and investment bankers have been expecting a surge ever since the Federal Reserve Board cut its discount rate by a full percentage point, to 3 1/2 percent, and lowered its target on the overnight Federal funds rate by half a point, to 4 percent.


Parcells and Bucs: Here We Go Again
Will he or won't he, and when?
Bill Parcells, the former Giants coach and recently coy studio host for NBC-TV, will reportedly meet today with the owner of the Buccaneers about Tampa Bay's vacant head coaching job.


Editorial Notebook; The Fate of Jerusalem
The most emotional and intractable obstacle to Middle East peace -- the future control of Jerusalem -- refuses to stay in the background.
Last month, militant Jewish nationalists again seized houses in the Arab neighborhood of Silwan, this time with Government backing.
Irate Palestinian leaders, fearing that much of the city may be lost to them before substantive peace talks even begin, are insisting that Jerusalem be made a priority topic.


Pirates Too Much For Miami
They say Florida's blue skies and balmy weather will attract the franchise basketball player that will eventually make the University of Miami a winner in the Big East.
But for the time being, Miami's inaugural season has been anything but a day at the beach.
The Hurricanes lost their third straight Big East game, dropping a 64-52 decision tonight to Seton Hall at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


A French Socialist Shake-Up Aims to Reverse Party's Slide
The head of France's ruling Socialist Party resigned today, setting the stage for a political shake-up aimed at improving President Francois Mitterrand's sagging popularity and heading off anticipated opposition victories in coming regional and parliamentary elections.
The resigning Socialist leader, Pierre Mauroy, a 63-year-old former Prime Minister who has been first secretary of the party since May 1988, said Laurent Fabius, another former Prime Minister who is now president of the National Assembly, was "best placed" to be named as his successor.


Werner Dannheisser, An Art Collector, 83
Werner Dannheisser, a businessman and art collector, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old and also had a home in East Hampton, L.I.
He had been ill for some years with Parkinson's disease, said his wife, the former Elaine Fansling.


Vallone Seeks Broader Role On Schools
Speaker Peter F. Vallone plans to open the first session of the newly expanded City Council today by offering a proposal intended to give the Council greater power over the purse strings of the city school system.
In his opening speech to the new Council, Mr.
Vallone is expected to propose doing this by setting aside property taxes from homes and apartment houses to finance the city's contribution to the central Board of Education's budget, his aides said.


Redmen Not Planning Inquiry on Cambridge
The St.
John's athletic director, Jack Kaiser, met today with Dexter Cambridge, the University of Texas basketball player who has said he was offered $30,000 to attend the university, and said there were no plans to pursue the matter.
"We're not planning any further investigation, unless something else comes to our attention," Kaiser said.
"He didn't remember the person's name or what he looked like. Basically, he said that it wasn't anyone from the St. John's coaching staff that he met with."


Maxwell Official Sees Hope for U.S. Holdings
David H. Shaffer, chairman of the publishing company Macmillan Inc. and managing director of its parent, Maxwell Communication, said in an interview yesterday that he had strong hopes that Maxwell's American-based assets would remain intact, despite the turmoil in the publishing empire of the late Robert Maxwell.
The Maxwell board, which filed for bankrutpcy court protection in the United States hoping to avoid a liquidiation of its main American-bassed assets -- Macmillan and the Official Airlines Guide -- saw most of its power transferred last week to a British-appointed administrator and an American examiner.


Sign Language: A Way to Talk, but Is It Foreign?
Nearly 30 years after linguists recognized American Sign Language as a language, colleges and high schools nationwide are debating whether the language of the deaf satisfies scholastic requirements for a foreign language.
Opponents say it should not satisfy such requirements because the language is used in the United States and therefore is not foreign, and because it has no literature, in the conventional sense of a written language.


Economic Scene; Condo Auctions: Who Really Wins
SEARCHING for that ultimate bargain in the depressed market for condos?
Chances are you may have been tempted by the auction extravaganzas, in which dozens of apartments in half-empty developments are offered to the highest bidders.
But the temptation, suggest Orley Ashenfelter of Princeton and David Genesove of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is probably worth resisting.
For the only real winners seem to be buyers who wait until the auction is completed, and then scavenge the remains.


Canonie Environmental Services reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Stich and Lendl Upset


Food Notes
A 'Different' Store
The second generation of Korean produce markets is starting to emerge.
Leading the pack is Marche Madison, at 931 Madison Avenue (74th Street) in the space occupied until recently by Fraser Morris.
It is owned by Yong and Moon Choi, graduates of the University of Michigan who came to New York four years ago and found the best way to make a living was to open a typical Korean produce store.
They did, on 92d Street and Madison Avenue.


Hillhaven Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Applied Spectrum Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Message to Albany: Bah-Humbug
It is a symptom of the times that New York State's credit rating has become not only a financial benchmark but a significant political one as well.
In the last two years, the state's credit rating has twice been downgraded because of the inability of its leaders to balance the budget.
In both cases, Wall Street rating agencies have made it clear that the dismal grades were given primarily for the state's political failure, not the sluggishness of its economy.


Seaver in Hall on a Truly Terrific Reception
The mechanics on the mound were straightforward and sound, the strategy a mix of sophistication and strength, the slider as precise as the fastball was powerful.
The demeanor was one of professional pride.
With Tom Seaver there was always something both elemental and authoritative about his talent, and so it seemed only appropriate that his election to the Baseball Hall of Fame last night was pure and definitive.
He received an unprecedented 98.8 percent of the ballots cast by members of the Baseball Writers Association of America.


What Now? Many Ask After Implant Decision
LaVerne Murphy says she is not the sort of person who runs to the doctor with every ache, not the sort "anyone could accuse of being a hypochondriac" and certainly not the sort who "ever went looking for a lawsuit."
But yesterday, by her own description, Mrs.
Murphy was "getting a little scared" that she had ignored a number of suspicious symptoms that might be related to the silicone gel breast implants that she has had for the last dozen years.


Captain and Crew From Missing Fishing Trawler Are Rescued


Security Council to Chart Post-Cold-War Path
A three-part declaration defining the United Nations' role in the post-cold-war era is expected to be adopted by President Bush and heads of government from the other 14 member nations of the United Nations Security Council when they hold their first summit meeting here on Jan. 30.
Mr.
Bush has already agreed in principle to attend, said diplomats involved in preparing the meeting.
President Boris N. Yeltsin is to attend as the leader of Russia, which has just taken over the former Soviet Union's permanent Security Council seat.


Officials Pledge Drive To Counter Bias Attack
A day after two black children were attacked by four white youths who sprayed them with white shoe polish, New York City officials met last night in an effort to "stop those who would spread hate." They called upon residents to denounce the attack in the Bronx but to remain calm.
Throughout the day, Mayor David N. Dinkins and other officials met to discuss broad actions to take against what the police believe was a racially motivated attack on the brother and sister, 14 and 12 years of age, about 8 A.M.
Monday.
They were on their way to the Frank D. Whalen Intermediate School in Williamsbridge.


Japan Stocks Fall Sharply
Stocks slumped in late-afternoon trade, pressured by index-linked selling amid worries about the economic slowdown, brokers said.
The 225-share Nikkei average was down 851.39 points, or 3.61 percent, at the close of trading to 22,715.


Aura Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


2 Charged in Killing in Brighton Beach
Two teen-age brothers were arrested last night in the slaying of a Russian immigrant early Sunday morning in the Brighton Beach section of Brooklyn, the police said.
The murder of 48-year-old Leonid Vinokur, who was killed during a robbery as he returned home from a party with his wife at about 2 A.M., had quickly becoeme a public symbol of the problems of the predominantly Russian neighborhood, which has been plagued in recent months with drug activity and muggings.
Daniel Velasquez, 13 years old, of 2120 Randall Avenue in the Bronx, was arrested near his home at about 7 P.M., the police said.
They said his brother Carlos, 15, who lives at the same address, was taken into custody in New Jersey later last night.
The police said a third suspect is still being sought.


Vigilance Is Called Essential For Women With Implants
Women who have silicone breast implants should not be alarmed about the moratorium on their use that was imposed by the Food and Drug Administration, but must vigilantly monitor them, doctors said today.
"Women must get more information," said Dr.
William Shaw, chief of plastic surgery at the University of California at Los Angeles.
"They must be more alert."


For a 'Wild' Boy, Help From Neediest
When a visitor arrived last week at Alex N.'s Brooklyn apartment, the 12-year-old had the door open almost before the buzzer stopped.
After offering his guest some candy, he raced off to retrieve his prize possession.
"I have the complete set of N.B.A. players," he said with a slight Russian accent, flipping through trading cards faster than Michael Jordan runs the fast break.
"Magic Johnson is my favorite, but a lot of my friends at school like Larry Bird."
His mother, Liliya, smiled in wonder.
"He was never interested in anything," she said in Russian.
"He had no hobbies, no friends."


Japan's Consumers Are Proud to Buy Japanese; Selling to the Market
To the Editor:
Considering President Bush's visit to Japan with several big men of United States automobile manufacturing, Kiichi Miyazawa, Prime Minister of Japan, announced that Japanese car makers should cooperate with United States manufacturers.


Japanese Visit, on the Surface: Jovial Bush, Friendly Crowds
He is about to engage the Japanese Government in a titanic struggle over his nation's economic future.
But on Tuesday, opening a four-day state visit to Japan to discuss trade and security issues, President Bush was trying his utmost to build bridges, not wreck them.
He played tourist at an ancient palace.
He engaged an astonished circle of middle-aged Japanese men in a slightly goofy, highly telegenic game in which a leather ball is kicked around.
He waxed enthusiastic to college students about brotherhood and understanding.
He undertook that most American of political tasks -- a ribbon cutting at a new store.


INSIDE
Vigilance on Breast Implants
A moratorium on silicone breast implants has left thousands of women more in the dark than before.
Doctors say women with the implants should not be alarmed, but must vigilantly monitor them.
Page A16.
For the Dying, a Model Home
A home for AIDS patients in Seattle, resembling a spa more than an institution, is seen as a saving grace in treating the terminally ill.
Page A12.
New Era for the Council
The speaker of the New York City Council is prepared to use the opening day to establish the legislature as a major player in city affairs.
Page B1.


A National Curriculum: Seeking Fairness for All
The 11-year-olds in Richard Nokes's history class are not having an easy time.
They are trying to figure out how ancient Roman roads were built, and their only sources are translations of descriptions by writers of the time.
It is a sophisticated lesson in how to read primary documents, a skill expected of every child now that Britain has a required national curriculum.


Agencies Named
Architectural Digest has named two agencies for separate advertising campaigns: Sacks &amp; Rosen, New York, for a trade campaign, and McKinney &amp; Silver, Raleigh, N.C., for a consumer circulation campaign.
A spokeswoman for the Knapp Communications Corporation monthly said that the magazine had not had trade or consumer agencies for some time.
Billings were not disclosed.


An Author's Look At 1940's Harlem Is Being Reissued
Every day, when she went to work at an after-school program in Harlem, Ann Petry would see the tumult of life on West 116th Street, the lonely children with keys on strings draped around their necks going home to empty apartments, their parents at work but too poor to pay for baby sitters.
She would see, too, the men with their bottles of booze in brown paper bags, waiting to prey on the innocent.
It was a place of few survivors, she noted with sadness and stark grace in her novel "The Street," a story of the disintegrating lives of Lutie Johnson, a single, black, working mother, and her 8-year-old son, Bub, who live amid the poverty and danger of West 116th Street.


CHRONICLE
Another personage in the musical world, ROBERT SHAW, seems more blase about receiving awards.
Asked yesterday about being named musician of the year by the magazine Musical America, he said, "I didn't know there was a 'musician of the year' award, so this was a total surprise."
"I suppose I will go on living as I have in the past," Mr.
Shaw said.
"Charles Ives once said that giving prizes to composers would be like offering a prize to the curate who loves God the most."


Psychiatrist Is Sentenced
A prominent Manhattan psychiatrist who used confidential patient information from the wife of one of New York's leading financiers to profit from illegal inside securities trading was sentenced yesterday to five years' probation and community service.
Dr.
Robert Willis, who pleaded guilty in 1990 to two counts of securties fraud, was charged with using inside information he learned in the course of treating Joan Weill, the wife of Sanford I. Weill, chairman of the Primerica Corporation.


Bank Funds and C.D.'s Fall
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit continued to decline sharply in the week ended yesterday, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, a publication that watches interest rates.
The lowering of interest rates by the Federal Reserve to help spur the economy has hurt consumers who rely on income from savings accounts and other relatively safe investments.
Banks are much slower to reduce interest they charge on loans and much faster in cutting the interest they offer depositors.  'Grim Picture'
Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor, said yesterday: "Unfortunately for the consumer, although bank yields are dropping like rocks, borrowing rates still remain stubbornly high. For example, the prime rate has come down two percentage points in the past four months, from 8.50 percent to 6.50 percent, and average certificate of deposit yields have fallen by more than one percentage point, to the 3 percent to 4 percent range. But personal loan rates have declined by only one-half of 1 percent.


Autoinfo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Bridge
The first tournament of the year for players in the New York metropolitan area begins today at the Rye Town Hilton in Port Chester, N.Y.
The following major events are scheduled at the tournament, the Tri-State Regional Championships:
Today: Open and Women's Pairs, 1 P.M. and 7:30 P.M.; Open Pairs, 7:30 P.M. (and continues).
Thursday: Flighted Knockout Teams, 9 A.M.; Senior Pairs, Open and Women's Swiss Teams, 1 P.M. and 7:30 P.M.
Friday: Stratified Open and Women's Pairs, 1 P.M and 7:30 P.M.
Saturday: Flighted Open Pairs, 1 P.M. and 7:30 P.M.
Sunday: Flighted Swiss Teams, 11:30 A.M. and 6:30 P.M.; Senior Pairs, 11:30 A.M. and 5:30 P.M.


Pact for Guerrero
PEDRO GUERRERO agreed to a one-year contract with the St.
Louis Cardinals yesterday for $2,425,000 rather than go to arbitration.
The salary represents a 6.1 percent raise from the $2,283,333 Guerrero received in 1991.
The 35-year-old Guerrero, a 12-year veteran, hit .272 last year with 8 homers and 70 runs batted in.
He missed 47 games after suffering a leg fracture in a July 7 collision in the field with his own catcher, TOM PAGNOZZI.


Damon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


A Former Agency President Enters Corporate-Imaging
EDWARD H. VICK, the last president and chief executive of Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver before that New York advertising agency was closed, surprisingly, is changing fields.
He has been named president and chief executive of Landor Associates, San Francisco, the world's largest specialist in corporate identity, image consulting and packaging and logo design.
Among Landor's best-known work: the futuristic logo for the Saturn division of General Motors and the distinctive packaging for Miller Lite beer.


Japan's Consumers Are Proud to Buy Japanese
To the Editor:
In "Distorted Diplomacy on Japan" (editorial, Dec. 31), you object to the attempt to pressure Japan "voluntarily" to restrict access to the United States auto market.
You accuse President Bush of leaving his free-trade principles behind.


Bush Offers a Proposal to Battle Pollution in Asia
Hoping to exploit American leadership in environmental protection in a part of the world where rapid population and economic growth is creating some of the worst industrial pollution and depletion of natural resources, the Bush Administration unveiled an environmental initiative for Asia today.
The program, involving 18 United States Government agencies working jointly with as many as 29 developing nations, territories or island groups in Asia and the Pacific, will attempt to match American expertise with the needs of nations where anti-pollution measures are not keeping pace with industrial development.


Hartmarx Will Merge 2 Retail Units
The Hartmarx Corporation announced yesterday that it would merge the operations of two of its retail divisions in yet another effort to curb costs as the recession continues to chip away at its sales.
The manufacturer and retailer, based in Chicago, said it would combine its Hartmarx Specialty Stores Inc., the troubled parent of Wallach's, Baskin, Field Brothers and 26 others, with its Kuppenheimer Men's Clothiers, a discount chain.


Paramount Net Off 53%, But Outlook Improves
Paramount Communications yesterday reported financial results for 1991 that only the Addams Family could love: For the fiscal year that ended Oct. 31, profits were less than half the prior year's level, despite slightly higher revenues.
Martin S. Davis, Paramount's chairman and chief executive, said he believed that cost cutting and management changes last year will produce "markedly better results" in the current fiscal year.
Indeed, the first fiscal quarter is getting off to a powerful start with the popularity of the company's newest film releases, "The Addams Family" and the latest in the "Star Trek" saga.


Helping to Mate 2 Arts That Seemed as One
John Duffy has two favorite stories.
Each has a great deal to say about Meet the Composer, which Mr.
Duffy helped found in 1974 and which he now directs, and the Composer-Choreographer Collaboration Project, one of the organization's most popular programs.
The first story is about a little boy who stood up at a session in which a composer discussed his work with schoolchildren.
When had the composer been born? the child asked.
"And when did he die?" The second anecdote comes from a newspaper interview in which the composer Aaron Copland was asked why he never created dance music after "Appalachian Spring," the score for Martha Graham's work of the same name.
No one had asked him, the composer answered.
"That was kind of a jolt," Mr.
Duffy said.


California Olive Oil May Follow Wine In Upward Mobility
WHEN Californians talk about varietals, harvests and pressing these days, they may have olives, not grapes, in mind.
The same undaunted pioneer spirit that over the years has successfully conquered the gastronomic frontiers of wines, goat cheeses and sun-dried tomatoes is now tackling olive oil.


Digital Update for a 325-Year-Old Tool
A Silicon Valley company has embedded a computer chip and special circuitry in a carpenter's level, creating what one expert calls the first major advance in levels since 1666, when a Frenchman named Jean de Thevenot wrote down his ideas for a device based on an air bubble floating in a thin glass vial of liquid.
Wedge Innovations Inc. of San Jose, Calif., calls its tool the Pro Smartlevel.
It resembles a conventional carpenter's level except that the familiar bubble vial has been replaced by a "sensor module" containing a digital liquid-crystal display.
The user presses a button to see the degree of level, measured to an accuracy of one-tenth of a degree.
The Smartlevel can also measure angles, plumb and percent of slope, as well as degree of pitch measured in inches per foot.


Metaphor Post Filled
The International Business Machines Corporation said today that it had named Catherine Y. Selleck president of its Metaphor Computer Systems Inc. unit, based in Mountain View, Calif.
I.B.M. completed the acquisition of Metaphor in November.
Ms.
Selleck, 58 years old, was recently director of I.B.M.'s United States office and publishing systems division; she left I.B.M. to join Metaphor.


Spirit of Christmas Calls Again to Russians
The Christmas services were already well under way when a well-dressed woman squeezed tentatively into St.
Pimen's Church and looked around.
After a while she saw other worshipers buying candles and bought a handful herself, then followed the others to a candle stand.
Once her candles were burning, the woman sidled up to an old babushka whose nonstop devotions suggested she might be an authority, and quietly asked what, exactly, was happening.


Harazin Holds Meeting With Cone's Agent
AL HARAZIN, the general manager of the Mets, met yesterday with the agent for DAVID CONE in the first stage of negotiations on a potential longterm contract for the right-handed pitcher.
Harazin, who has said he is interested in signing Cone to a significant deal to avoid the danger of losing him to free agency after the 1992 season, held what he termed a preliminary meeting with STEVE FEHR in New York.
Harazin said no proposals were exchanged and characterized the discussion as exploratory in nature.


2d Guilty Plea In Abuse Case At St. John's
A former St.
John's University student pleaded guilty yesterday to sexually abusing a female student in a widely publicized case in which three other men had been acquitted.
The plea by the former student, 24-year-old Adam Gerber, came six days before the sodomy trial of the final defendant was to begin.
Mr.
Gerber is the second of the six defendants to plead guilty to sexually abusing the 23-year-old woman in a student house near the university's campus in Jamaica, Queens, in March 1990.


Nassau Beaches Are Latest Budget Victim
For decades workers from the Nassau County Health Department, traveling on foot and by motor launch, monitored the waters off some of Long Island's best-known beaches, assuring the public that they were safe for swimming and fishing.
But as part of sweeping budget cuts, the county today disbanded its two units monitoring ocean water quality, laid off its marine biologist and announced plans to turn the monitoring over to the operators of the beaches.


CHRONICLE
Honorary committees can be an eclectic lot.
Take, for example, the the list for the national campaign of the National Museum of the American Indian.
They include PRESIDENT BUSH, the four living former Presidents and their wives, KEVIN COSTNER, PAUL NEWMAN, ARNOLD PALMER, SARGENT SHRIVER, BARRY GOLDWATER, the writer OCTAVIO PAZ, Chancellor W. ANN REYNOLDS of the City University of New York, the Navajo Indian artist R. C. GORMAN and such Indian leaders as WILMA MANKILLER, chief of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma, and LaDONNA HARRIS, president of Americans for Indian Opportunity.
"We went down a list of people in elected office, people who are active in the national Indian community and those in entertainment," said Representative BEN NIGHTHORSE CAMPBELL, Democrat of Colorado, the only American Indian in Congress.
"We wanted high-profile people whose support would make it easier for us to raise money, and we chose them for their interest and sensitivity to Indian issues. My gosh, it's pretty hard to find a group with five living Presidents!"


2 Named to Bush's Campaign
After weeks of searching, President Bush's re-election campaign has filled vacancies in its public relations team, picking two longtime Congressional campaign aides as communications director and press secretary, campaign officials said today.
William J. Feltus 4th, staff director of the Senate Republican Conference who is a former associate of Robert M. Teeter, the campaign chairman, was named deputy campaign manager for communications.


U.S. Asks Japan to Wait On Reshaping U.N. Role
Bush Administration officials say that although they have agreed to Russia's assuming the permanent seat of the former Soviet Union on the United Nations Security Council, they do not see this as the right time to reshape the Council to allow Japan also to become a permanent member.
Administration officials say the message President Bush is conveying on his visit to Japan is that "in principle" Washington would be ready to support Japan's taking a permanent seat on the Security Council -- with veto powers equal to that of China, Russia, Britain, France and the United States -- but that such a move right now raises several legal, political and possibly even strategic problems from a United States point of view.


Dow Up 4.70 In Resuming Its Advance
After a one-day pause, the stock market resumed its daily record-setting yesterday, as investors, unable to find better returns elsewhere, continued to beat a path to equities.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 4.70 points, to 3,204.83, its seventh record in eight sessions.
Don Hays, director of investment strategy for Wheat, First Securities in Richmond, said he was amazed at the amount of money pouring out of bank certificates of deposit and money market funds that has found its way into this market.
"There are people who have never invested in stocks before, sticking their toes in," he said.


Seaver in Hall on a Truly Terrific Reception
The mechanics on the mound were straightforward and sound, the strategy a mix of sophistication and strength, the slider as precise as the fastball was powerful.
The demeanor was one of professional pride.
With Tom Seaver there was always something both elemental and authoritative about his talent, and so it seemed only appropriate that his election to the Baseball Hall of Fame last night was pure and definitive.
He received an unprecedented 98.8 percent of the ballots cast by members of the Baseball Writers Association of America.


Dance Artifacts Given To Missouri Society
Katherine Dunham has given a substantial portion of her collection of costumes, musical instruments, papers and films to the Missouri Historical Society in St.
Louis, where they will be housed in the society's new Library and Collections Center.
Ms.
Dunham, the internationally known dancer, choreographer and teacher, had stored the collection in the Dynamic Museum in East St.
Louis, Ill., which will remain open.
"During our years of touring," Ms.
Dunham said, "I have seen our trunks and boxes come out of storage, and with the costumes would drift a cloud of fine dust, mold and small moths. Now that our collections of art, videotape, film, costumes and manuscripts are safely in the custody of the Missouri Historical Society, I feel at ease. I am so happy that the major body of my life's work will receive the needed attention and will be available for future use."


Lillian Vernon reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Watchdog of the Parking World Seeks Tax Justice
The automobile is the uncrowned king of Manhattan.
As horrible as that might seem to you, it rings like a cash register in the agile mind of Jerome W. Gottesman, whose company owns or operates 77 parking lots and garages in the cluttered borough.
Just two things cloud his pleasantly congested horizon.
One is the stratospheric sales tax of 18 1/4 percent for parking in New York City.
The other, outlandish as it sounds, is government's laxness in collecting it.


Textron Lycoming In Pact With Rolls
Textron Lycoming Inc. has won a large subcontract for a new Rolls-Royce jet engine, that puts the small jet-engine maker in direct competition with Pratt &amp; Whitney Inc.
Lycoming has said it would build parts for the Tay 670, a Rolls-Royce turbofan engine.
The engine will be offered on several passenger jet models, including the proposed MD-95 by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.
Neither Lycoming nor Rolls-Royce would estimate the value of the engine market for the MD-95.


Message to Albany: Bah-Humbug
It is a symptom of the times that New York State's credit rating has become not only a financial benchmark but a significant political one as well.
In the last two years, the state's credit rating has twice been downgraded because of the inability of its leaders to balance the budget.
In both cases, Wall Street rating agencies have made it clear that the dismal grades were given primarily for the state's political failure, not the sluggishness of its economy.


Body Drama Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


The Pop Life; Nirvana's 'Nevermind' Is No. 1
That crunching noise heard in record stores across the country last week was the sound of Nirvana's "Nevermind" (Geffen) stepping on just about every other album.
In a surprise move, the album, featuring adventurous college rock, bolted to the No. 1 spot on Billboard's album charts.
It sold 373,520 copies, according to Soundscan, Billboard's sales reporting system, bumping off, in order of appearance, Garth Brooks, Hammer and U2.
The big loser was Michael Jackson's "Dangerous," which dropped to No. 5 from No. 1.
Mr.
Jackson's decline actually began a week earlier, when his album was dislodged from the top spot by Mr.
Brooks's "Ropin' the Wind"; the change wasn't noted because Billboard didn't publish that week.


Sports of The Times; How Casey Predicted Tom Seaver
CASEY STENGEL used to tell us the Youth of America was coming.
It might be named Bearnarth or Hinsley or Powell or Wakefield, but it was coming.
All Casey could do was fight a rear-guard action, hold the fort with quips instead of a subma chine gun, wait for reinforcements, for players "who ain't failed yet," as Casey put it.


Where Bowman Goes, Intrigue Follows
When Jill Trenary announced last month that she was withdrawing from the national figure skating championships, she virtually cleared a path to the medal podium and the 1992 Albertville Olympics for Kristi Yamaguchi, Tonya Harding and Nancy Kerrigan, the medalists at last year's national and world championships.
But as this year's nationals opened tonight with the compulsory competition for dance teams, none of the other categories seemed so well-defined.
The men's competition may be especially intriguing.


New York May Sue Hertz for Surcharge
The executive director of New York State's Consumer Protection Board said yesterday that he would sue Hertz if the company did not rescind surcharges it has imposed on New York City residents who rent cars in the metropolitan area.
The executive director, Richard M. Kessel, said that the surcharges, which the Hertz Corporation began imposing on Jan. 2, violate a two-year-old provision of state law.
The law, he said, includes a clause that bars rental car companies from imposing any surcharges.


Castle Energy reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Heart Seizure or Panic Attack? Disorder Is a Terrifying Mimic
TERRIFIED that her sharp chest pains, profuse sweating, dizziness and a sense of impending doom meant she was having a heart attack, the woman went to a hospital emergency room.
Sent home again when cardiac tests there found no problem, the woman nevertheless was back in the emergency room four times in the next week with the same symptoms.
Over the next 10 years, she sought help in emergency rooms more than 50 times.
Six times, concerned doctors admitted her to the hospital's cardiac unit where, each time, tests found no heart problem.


Imelda Marcos Back on Center Stage
With the announcement by Imelda Marcos that she will run for President in the Philippine elections, the widow of former President Ferdinand E. Marcos added further uncertainty today to an already chaotic and unpredictable campaign.
Mrs.
Marcos, declaring that her candidacy was a reaction to the "sick and misdirected Government" of President Corazon C. Aquino, has undermined the presidential ambitions of several former Marcos family cronies and put new pressure on Mrs.
Aquino to reconsider her refusal to seek a second term.


Frank Yerby, Writer, 76, Is Dead; Novels of the South Sold Millions
Frank Yerby, who wrote 32 historical novels that sold in the millions, died on Nov. 29 in a hospital in Madrid.
He was 76 years old and lived in Madrid.
He died of heart failure, said his wife, Blanca.
She said she had kept news of her husband's death secret for five weeks at his request.


Hardships the Job Numbers Miss
The United States unemployment rate is officially 6.8 percent today.
But economists are now saying that this figure considerably underestimates the real number.
They warn that the current unemployment figure, influential in gauging the nation's economic health and determining what policies should be adopted to improve it, provides a false sense of the economy's strength and its potential for rebounding.
The problem: changes in the work force over the last 15 years that are not accounted for in calculating the rate.
One such change is the growing number of people on the edge of unemployment, counted as working but facing the hardships and insecurity of the jobless.
These people, probably numbering more than three million, include many temporary and freelance workers, older men pushed into lower-paying jobs, consultants and single mothers who cannot work as many hours as they would like.


2 Britons Buy The European
The European, the money-losing weekly newspaper started by Robert Maxwell, was sold on Monday to a company controlled by David and Frederick Barclay, twins who are two of the richest men in Britain.
The sale was announced by the court-appointed administrators of the late Mr.
Maxwell's bankrupt private companies, one of which owned The European.
The price was not disclosed.


Metropolitan Diary
Dear Diary:
Before I took down my Christmas cards on Twelfth Night I did a quick census on what this year's batch contained.


Mr. Marino's Bad Budgeting
New York State's lowered credit rating hardly comes as a shock.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo has been warning about it and the rating agencies have been hinting at it.
Despite these alarms Senate Republicans, led by Ralph Marino, the majority leader, accused Mr.
Cuomo of crying wolf and refused to help resolve the state's latest budget impasse.
On Monday, Moody's Investors Service downgraded the rating on most of New York's debt, leaving the state with the second-lowest rating, Baa1, in the country.
The least Mr.
Marino can do now is limit the damage by negotiating in good faith on a plan to close a gap of $875 million in this year's $30 billion budget.


Lewis M. Friedman, Cabaret Impresario, 47
Lewis Michael Friedman, a leading cabaret impresario in New York City in the 1970's and 80's, died on Friday at his home in Cazadero, Calif.
He was 47 years old.
He died of AIDS, said his mother, Kit Friedman of Dayton, Ohio.


Real Estate; A Gamble For an Urban Developer
"THE better mousetrap will always sell," says Ernest F. Belle Donne, whose company, Belle Donne &amp; Associates, was a major force in the transformation of Wilmington's skyline during the 1980's, beginning with its development of the Chase Manhattan Bank building on Interstate 95.
Now, with the city's parking authority, the company has begun work on what Mr.
Belle Donne calls the better mousetrap -- a $10 million parking and retail complex that will serve as the base for a $20 million office building.


Japanese Visit, on the Surface: Jovial Bush, Friendly Crowds
He is about to engage the Japanese Government in a titanic struggle over his nation's economic future.
But on Tuesday, opening a four-day state visit to Japan to discuss trade and security issues, President Bush was trying his utmost to build bridges, not wreck them.
He played tourist at an ancient palace.
He engaged an astonished circle of middle-aged Japanese men in a slightly goofy, highly telegenic game in which a leather ball is kicked around.
He waxed enthusiastic to college students about brotherhood and understanding.
He undertook that most American of political tasks -- a ribbon cutting at a new store.


Books of The Times; The Bill of Rights, Stretching and Growing
A People's Charter  The Pursuit of Rights in America  By James MacGregor Burns and Stewart Burns  577 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
In a majestic chronicle that covers history, political science and the philosophy behind the social contract between citizen and government, "A People's Charter" celebrates and extends the Bill of Rights toward the dawn of the next century.
It's a bold and path-breaking book that brings the first 10 Amendments down to earth and, at the same time, reaches for the moon in its idealism.


60-Minute Gourmet
AS a fisherman, I am always looking for new ways to prepare my catch.
With cod season at hand, I have been experimenting with that firm-fleshed, mild-tasting fish.
Cod is good poached and served with a hollandaise sauce.
A classic French preparation for cod is cabillaud etuve a la creme.
The fillet is browned in butter, then braised in cream.
Cod can also be broiled or roasted, but it has so little moisture that dryness is always a risk.
With the recipe here, I took the safe, though delicious, road: using cod in a fish chowder.
I have used cod in bouillabaisse many times and it works splendidly.
This recipe is less time-consuming than bouillabaisse, yet wonderfully flavorful.
The recipe calls for a second fish as well.
You may use halibut, another firm, lean fish, or red snapper, fluke or any other mild white-fleshed fish.


Experts Call Georgia's Future Unclear
American and British experts on the Caucasus and the former Soviet Union voiced uncertainty yesterday about the degree of popular support for the opposition forces that have taken power in Tbilisi, Georgia.
In telephone interviews, the experts also expressed uncertainty about Georgia's future, and they emphasized present and potential divisions within the opposition, which has formed a military council to wield authority.


Linking Bits of Leftover Land To Put Parks Closer to Home
In a movement that is changing the way American parks are created and used, an open-space conservation drive in the New York region and across the country is stitching together thousands of acres of new parkland from abandoned and unused areas.
This "greenway" movement is fighting to save undeveloped and overlooked corners of suburban areas for recreation and wildlife preservation.
The results are not like the big, formal parks created for 19th-century cities or the vast wilderness National Park preserves created shortly afterward.
They are networks of trails connecting existing parks, riverways and historic sites. 'Parks of the Future'
"These are the parks of the future, because suburbanization is the future," said James C. Amon, director of the New Jersey's Delaware and Raritan Canal Commission.
"Instead of looking at parks as distant preserves to be visited on special occasions, we are integrating parks right into our own backyards and into our daily lives."


Digital Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Santa Monica Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Message to Albany: Baa1-Humbug
It is a symptom of the times that New York State's credit rating has become not only a financial benchmark but a significant political one as well.
In the last two years, the state's credit rating has twice been downgraded because of the inability of its leaders to balance the budget.
In both cases, Wall Street rating agencies have made it clear that the dismal grades were given primarily for the state's political failure, not the sluggishness of its economy.


McDonnell Sale Delay
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that the closing of its deal to sell 40 percent of its commercial aircraft business to the Taiwan Aerospace Corporation would be delayed beyond its target date of Jan. 31.
Michael Burch, a McDonnell spokesman, said the closing would be pushed back "weeks or maybe months" as Taiwan Aerospace analyzed McDonnell's books.
Executives from Taiwan arrived at Douglas Aircraft's commercial jet plant in Long Beach, Calif., today to being examining the business.


Wait Until the Soviet People Have Spoken
To the Editor:
Enough rhetoric about the failure of Soviet socialism ("The Soviet State, Born of a Dream, Dies," front page, Dec. 26).
How about facts?


Algeria Offers Atom Arms Vow
Algeria will sign the treaty against the spread of nuclear weapons "very soon," a senior official of the Algerian Foreign Ministry said today.
The official did not say when the treaty would be signed but asserted that the decision to do so had been made and would be carried out in the immediate future.


Paramount Communications Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Twin Comes to Terms
Outfielder SHANE MACK and the Minnesota Twins reached agreement on a one-year contract.
Mack, who earned $270,000 last season, will earn $1.075 million this year.
Mack, 28 years old, is coming off his best season.
He batted .310 with 18 home runs and 74 runs batted in. (AP)


AID PANEL STALLS ON FORMER SOVIETS
Just 15 days before the Washington Coordinating Conference on aid to the former Soviet republics is scheduled to begin, American and foreign diplomats are still trying to assemble a detailed agenda, a complete list of participants and even a consensus on what aid should be included.
Born of a last-moment insert in a speech on Dec. 12 by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, the conference is seen by American officials as a way to prevent countries from duplicative efforts and insure that no region of the former Soviet Union is neglected.


Bell Atlantic To Cut Profits
The Bell Atlantic Corporation, one of the largest of the regional Bell operating companies, plans to take a $1.55 billion one-time charge for the year just ended to meet new suggested accounting rules for retirees' health costs.
The charge does not mean that Bell Atlantic, based in Philadelphia, must set aside new money, so it will not affect cash flow or dividend payments.


New Jails Breaking Down Old Habits
In the piney woods just outside this small town is a county jail that bears little likeness to the noisy, graffiti-adorned and violent institutions that have become common around the country.
The Horry County jail here, the J. Reuben Long Detention Center, houses a mix of people, from those accused of minor crimes to convicted murderers, yet all blend in a place that is quiet, clean and safe and as sparkling today as it was when it opened two years ago.


Market Place; Junk-Bond and Mark Funds Excel
Last year was a strong one for bond funds, particularly for those invested in high-yield junk bonds.
In the fourth quarter, however, the best-performing funds were those that invested in the Deutsche mark and in long-term domestic securities.
Figures compiled by Lipper Analytical Services showed that the year's top-performing bond funds had annual returns exceeding 60 percent.
The best-performing fund was the Dean Witter High Yield Fund, with a 67.21 percent return, followed by the Liberty High Income Bond Fund, which returned 60.5 percent.


Study Points to Increase In Tolerance of Ethnicity
Tolerance of ethnicity seems to be rising and anti-Semitism dropping, according to a study of polls conducted over several years by seven national polling organizations in which people were asked to describe or rank different ethnic groups.
The study was made public yesterday.
The new analysis of existing polling data, sponsored by the American Jewish Committee, provides intriguing glimpses of the images, social standing and conflicts that different ethnic groups are generally perceived to have.


Miller Tinkering With Lite Spots
The Miller Brewing Company is tinkering with the much-talked-about advertising campaign for Miller Lite, adding a jingle to television commercials.
Since the campaign, which carries the theme "It's it and that's that," was introduced in July, opinion has been sharply divided over its creativity and effectiveness.
Miller executives continue to express satisfaction with the campaign, which was created by the Leo Burnett Company after Lite's longtime agency, Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., was dismissed.


Barrett Resources Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A2-11 TRADE TALKS WITH JAPAN BOG DOWN
On the first day of President Bush's visit, Tokyo announced incentives to make it easier for American companies to sell goods in Japan.
But the package fell short of American demands, and talks bogged down.
A1  BUSH TRIES TO BREAK ICE IN TOKYO
By playing tourist and by cutting a ribbon, President Bush did his best to improve the unflattering image that his stopover has acquired in Japan, that of a strongarm raid on Tokyo's mercantile system.
A1  Should Japan have a permanent seat on the U.N.
Security Council?
A6  Washington unveiled an environmental initiative for Asia.
A6  ARABS READY TO RESUME TALKS
Arab negotiators indicated that they were prepared to resume peace talks with Israel in Washington now that the United Nations has condemned Israel for its planned deportation of 12 Palestinians.
A1  YUGOSLAVS DOWN OBSERVER FLIGHT
Despite a cease-fire, five European Community observers were killed when their helicopter was shot down by a Yugoslav Army fighter.
A1  A U.N. envoy said he doubted the incident would reignite fighting.
A3  CHRISTMAS CELEBRATED IN RUSSIA
With Christmas a state holiday in Russia for the first time in more than seven decades, an entire nation seemed embarked on a search for a feast, a tradition, a heritage lost to jealous ideology.
A1  RUSSIANS PROTEST FOOD PRICES
The first expressions of angry protest were reported among the battered consumers of Russia as they tried to cope with drastically rising food prices.
A8  An agenda for aiding the former Soviet republics is in the works.
A9  Experts expressed uncertainty about the future of Georgia.
A8  MARCOS ADDS TO CAMPAIGN CHAOS
By announcing that she will run for President of the Philippines, Imelda Marcos added uncertainty to an already chaotic campaign.
A4  China expelled three Canadian human rights investigators.
A11  The U.N.
Security Council is charting its post-cold-war path.
A5  The head of France's governing Socialist Party resigned.
A10  Calcutta Journal: Street dwellers are part of a vigorous economy.
A2  NATIONAL A12-17  FEAR OVER BREAST IMPLANTS
Not since the Dalkon Shield was taken off the market have American women been so frightened and confused by Federal officials' concerns about a medical device.
The announcement on Monday of a requested moratorium on silicone gel breast implants has left many women more uncertain than ever.
A16  What recipients of the silicone gel device should watch for.
A16  THE LAST PLACE THEY'LL CALL HOME
When AIDS patients in Seattle were given a chance to create a residence from the ground up, they built the Bailey-Boushay House.
About every 30 hours, somebody will die there.
Yet in many evident ways, the building is an affirmation of life.
A12  QUESTIONS ON INFANT MORTALITY
A Federal study found that health records may underestimate infant mortality for some minorities because of errors and inconsistencies in the way race is reported.
A14  STUDY FINDS TOLERANCE RISING
Tolerance of ethnic differences seems to be rising and anti-Semitism declining, according to a study of surveys by seven national polling organizations.
A12  CHANGES AT THE JAILHOUSE
A county jail outside a small South Carolina town is quiet, clean and safe, and run by an increasingly popular corrections management concept called direct supervision.
A16  DAHMER TO SWITCH PLEA
Jeffrey L. Dahmer, accused of killing and dismembering 15 men, will plead guilty, his lawyer said.
But a jury may still decide whether he was sane at the time of the crimes.
A14  A CONGREGATION DIVIDED
When a pastor told his congregation that he was a reformed hired killer who had slain 28 people, members of the congregation were willing to forgive him.
But some found the truth less appealing: that the minister was a parole violator from Illinois who had killed his wife and left a female companion for dead.
A14  A Senate report said watchdog agencies delegated too much work.
A17 Education Page B7  THE BRITISH EXPERIENCE
As the debate begins in the United States over a national curriculum and national tests, Britain's experience in devising both provides some insights.
A1  Should sign language meet foreign language requirements?
B7  METROPOLITAN Digest, B1 THE GREENING OF AMERICA
The "greenway movement" is changing the way parks are created and used in the New York region and across the country, with thousands of acres of abandoned and unused land being stitched together to form wildlife preserves and recreation areas.
A1  Neediest Cases B3  BUSINESS Digest D1  The Living Section C1-10  Eating Well: Folding green grows at all-natural supermarkets.
C1  A new appellation for olive oil: California.
C1  Wine Talk: Bottles that are better than perfect.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Helping musicians and choreographers work together.
C13  2,000 artworks are pledged to the National Gallery.C13  A writer's look at Harlem in the 40's is being reissued.
C13  Music: The Pop Life C13  Sports B8-13  Baseball: Seaver and Fingers in Hall.
B9  Yanks sign Gallego.
B9  Basketball: Knicks lose.
B9  College: St.
John's not planning further inquiry.
B13  Column: Vecsey on Seaver B9  Health Page C12  Heart seizure or panic attack?
Disorder is a terrifying mimic.
Obituaries D19  Gretchen Householder Poston, former White House social secretary Frank Yerby, novelist  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials A18  Timeout on breast implants.
Georgia democracy hijacked.
Mr.
Marino's bad budgeting.
Philip M. Boffey: Jerusalem.
Letters A18  Anna Quindlen: Women in combat.
A19  Lawrence R. Klein: Turning swords into toasters, again.
A19  Garry Trudeau: Overkill.
A19  Phyllis Chesler: A double standard for murder?
A19  Viet D. Dinh: Drifting to freedom -- a survivor's story.
A19


Spirit of Christmas Calls Again to Russians
The Christmas services were already well under way when a well-dressed woman squeezed tentatively into St.
Pimen's Church and looked around.
After a while she saw other worshipers buying candles and bought a handful herself, then followed the others to a candle stand.
Once her candles were burning, the woman sidled up to an old babushka whose nonstop devotions suggested she might be an authority, and quietly asked what, exactly, was happening.


Seaver in Hall of Fame


Seaver in Hall on a Truly Terriffic Reception
The mechanics on the mound were straightforward and sound, the strategy a mix of sophistication and strength, the slider as precise as the fastball was powerful.
The demeanor was one of professional pride.
With Tom Seaver there was always something both elemental and authoritative about his talent, and so it seemed only appropriate that his election to the Baseball Hall of Fame last night was pure and definitive.
He received an unprecedented 98.8 percent of the ballots cast by members of the Baseball Writers Association of America.


U.N.'s Yugoslavia Envoy Says Rising War-Weariness Led to the Cease-Fire
Cyrus R. Vance, the special United Nations envoy for Yugoslavia, said yesterday that he believed that general war weariness was the primary factor leading to the cease-fire accord that took hold there under his supervision last Friday evening.
In an interview in New York, he said that while he was dismayed by the incident yesterday in which a Yugoslav Air Force jet shot down a helicopter, killing five European monitors, he did not think this could cause hostilities to resume between Serbs and Croats.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


EXEL Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


JAPAN ANNOUNCES A HOST OF STEPS TO AID U.S. TRADE
Seeking to demonstrate its willingness to take concrete steps to reduce its growing trade surplus with the United States, the Japanese Government late on Tuesday announced a host of incentives to make it easier for American companies to export their goods.
The move came on the first day of President Bush's visit here.
Some measures had been announced earlier, while some merely expanded on existing programs.


Blackout in Capital Is Linked To an Irregular Power Burst
The Potomac Electric Power Company said today that much of the nation's capital lost electricity on Monday evening because of an irregular burst of power between two high-voltage cables and the resulting automatic shutdown of both the cables and a nearby power plant.


Somerset Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cintas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


5 European Observers Are Killed As Yugoslav Troops Down Copter
Five European Community military observers were killed today when their helicopter was rocketed by a Yugoslav Army MIG fighter over a rural area about 30 miles north of Croatia's capital, Zagreb, Croatian officials said.
Some seven hours after the incident, the most flagrant violation of the four-day-old United Nations inspired cease-fire, the Serbian authorities in Belgrade admitted that the helicopter had been brought down by a plane from the pro-Serbian Yugoslav Army and promised to punish those involved.


U.S. Auditors Are Criticized on Use of Contractors
Federal watchdog agencies are delegating too much of their work to private contractors, resulting in conflicts of interest and compromising Government accountability and efficiency, according to a Senate subcommittee staff report.
The report, by the majority staff of the Senate Governmental Affairs Subcommittee on Federal Services, Post Office and Civil Service, says that inspectors general, the independent offices in Government agencies assigned to monitor activities, use contractors for many jobs they ought to do themselves.


Cut in Rates Gives Banks a Windfall
To the Editor:
The financial and news media sounded the Dec. 20 lowering of the discount rate from 4.5 percent to 3.5 percent and a moving of the prime rate from 7.5 percent to 6.5 percent (front page, Dec. 21).
You report that this full-point cut in the rate charged on loans to banks brings the discount rate to its lowest in 27 years.
But you did not report that 27 years ago the
prime
rate was 4.5 percent: banks now enjoy a 200 percent increase in their margin over the discount rate.


Serving Workers on the Road With Data to Go
Just as cellular telephone technology vaulted car telephones from rare curiosities to mass-market products, a new generation of nationwide data networks is making it possible for both large and small companies to extend their office computer systems to employees on the road.
Mastercard International plans to use such a network for wireless credit-card verification terminals at county fairs or merchants' sidewalk kiosks.
Otis Elevator uses a mobile data network to dispatch repair technicians around the country from a single office in Connecticut and to receive back their reports.
Another emerging group of converts to the mobile office: insurance claims adjusters, who shuttle between the scenes of accidents and disasters, trying to estimate the costs of repairing a car or replacing a roof.


B. &amp; W. Tobacco Cuts an Agency
The Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation has unexpectedly dismissed one of its three advertising agencies, Geer, DuBois Inc., which had an estimated $30 million in billings.
The dismissal, effective immediately, involves creative work on the company's Capri, Raleigh and Raleigh Extra brands, as well as the media-buying services that the agency had provided in the United States for all B. &amp; W. brands, which include Kool, Viceroy and Bel Air.


Drug Emporium reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Raychem Cutback
The Raychem Corporation said the Taliq Corporation, a unit based in Sunnyvale, Calif., that manufactures special windows using liquid crystal technology, would be closed.
The move is expected to occur over the next few months and will affect all of Taliq's 95 employees.
Raychem's fiscal second-quarter results are expected to include a $8 million charge to discontinue Taliq's operations, Raychem said.
"Although the technology is promising, Taliq failed to achieve profitability in its basic product lines," said Raymond J. Sims, the vice president and treasurer.


Autoclave Engineers reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Readicare Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
IKEA U S West Inc., Torrance, Calif., a unit of IKEA Holding U S Inc., will commence its offer to buy the outstanding common and common nonvoting shares of Stor Furnishings International Inc.
The price is $3.10 a share. *
MidSouth Corp., Jackson, Miss., a railroad operator, said its Tenrail unit had completed the purchase of the operating assets of Corinth and Counce Railroad Co., a subsidiary of Packaging Corp. of America.
The price was $32 million. *
Motorola Codex, Mansfield, Mass., a unit of Motorola Inc. that makes computer network products, has eliminated about 400 jobs. *
Unisys Corp., Blue Bell, Pa., and Subaru of America Inc., Cherry Hill, N.J., have reached an agreement for Unisys to receive a $45 million longterm facilities management contract from Subaru. *
USAir, Arlington, Va., a unit of USAir Group Inc., said it had received U.S.
Bankruptcy Court approval to buy Continental Airlines' 62 jet and 46 commuter takeoff and landing slots at LaGuardia Airport.
The airline may also buy Continental's six slots at National Airport in Washington, as well as Continental's operations at LaGuardia.
The total price is $61 million.
U.S.
Generating Co., Bethesda, Md., has executed a power sales agreement with Niagara Mohawk Power Corp., Syracuse, for a $250 million cogeneration plant to be built in Rotterdam, N.Y.


Kurt Weil, 96, Dies; Professor at Stevens
Prof.
Kurt H. Weil, a figure in early German aviation history and professor emeritus at Stevens Institute of Technology, died last Thursday at his home in Montclair, N.J.
He was 96 years old.
He was long associated with Prof.
Hugo Junkers, the aircraft designer, and the Junkers Aviation Corporation in Dessau.
There he worked, among other things, on the transport Ju-52, the all-metal, multi-engine aircraft incorporating the design concept of the modern, economical airliner.


Quotation of the Day
"These are the parks of the future because suburbanization is the future. Instead of looking at parks as distant preserves to be visited on special occasions, we are integrating parks right in our own backyards and into our daily lives." -- JAMES C. AMON, director of the Delaware and Raritan Canal Commission.  [ A1:5. ]


Surgery for Gaston
The Toronto Blue Jays manager, CITO GASTON, who missed 33 games during the 1991 season with a back injury, underwent successful surgery on his lower spine yesterday.
Gaston, 47, who had suffered from a compressed nerve root at the fifth lumbar, had the compression relieved and "will be ready to function fully in time for the opening of spring training" in seven weeks time, according to a statement from the doctors.
The surgery was performed at Mount Sinai Hospital in Toronto by Dr.
ALLAN GROSS, the club's orthopedic surgeon, and Dr.
EZRA SILVERSTINE, a spinal specialist. (AP)


Theater in Review
Five Very Live  The Atlantic Theater 336 West 20th Street Manhattan Through Jan. 18 Five one act plays by contemporary American playwrights: David Ives, Patrick Breen, Howard Korder, David Van Matre and Peter Hedges; scenery by James Wolk; lighting by Howard Werner; production stage manager, Matthew Silver.
Presented by the Atlantic Theater Company.
WITH: Robert Bella, Ron Butler, Sarah Eckhardt, Steven Goldstein, Kristen Johnson, Mary McCann, Neil Pepe, David Pittu, Robin Spielberg and Damian Young.


ARABS SAY TALKS ON MIDEAST PEACE CAN NOW RESUME
Lebanese, Jordanian, Syrian and Palestinian negotiators indicated today that they were prepared to resume peace talks with Israel in Washington now that the United Nations had condemned the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir for its planned deportation of 12 Palestinians.
Israel, for its part, bitterly criticized the United States for voting in favor of the Security Council resolution, which the Arab delegations had in effect made a condition for the resumption of negotiations.


5 European Observers Are Killed As Yugoslav Troops Down Copter
Five European Community military observers were killed today when their helicopter was rocketed by a Yugoslav Army MIG fighter over a rural area about 30 miles north of Croatia's capital, Zagreb, Croatian officials said.
Some seven hours after the incident, the most flagrant violation of the four-day-old United Nations inspired cease-fire, the Serbian authorities in Belgrade admitted that the helicopter had been brought down by a plane from the pro-Serbian Yugoslav Army and promised to punish those involved.


President of MBIA Adds Duties of Chief
MBIA Inc., the leading insurer of municipal securities, said yesterday that its president, David H. Elliott, had been named the chief executive.
Mr.
Elliott, who is 50 years old, will remain as president.
He is also president of the MBIA Corporation, the operating subsidiary.
He succeeds William O. Bailey, 65, who has served as chairman and chief executive since MBIA was formed in 1986 and who will continue as chairman.


People
*
Brian Fandetti, a group creative director at DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago, has been promoted to senior vice president from vice president.


Creating a Pleasant Stop On the Journey to Death
For the last four years, the designers of the Bailey-Boushay House have been wondering precisely how to create a large home in which somebody was going to die about every 30 hours.
Of course, it would need emergency equipment and the tools of hospitals and hospices, as well as places to cry and to say goodbye.
But the designers wanted something more.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Monday about magazine audio cassettes referred incorrectly in some editions to a radio program being produced by Newsweek and The Associated Press.
It is "Newsweek on Air." A picture caption with the article misidentified the co-host from The A.P.; he is Warren Levinson.


Oracle Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Brooklyn Slaying May Be 6th In Mob Families' 2-Month Feud
One man was gunned down and another wounded yesterday in Brooklyn in what New York City law-enforcement officials described as the continuation of a feud between two organized-crime families.
The police identified the dead man as Nicholas P. Grancio, 62 years old, of 1756 East 23d Street in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn.
A law-enforcement official who spoke on the condition of anonymity said that Mr.
Grancio was shot in the head as he sat in a car at the intersection of McDonald Avenue and Avenue U in Gravesend.
He was also known as Nicky Black, and was believed to be a captain in the Colombo crime family, the official said.


DAHMER CHANGES HIS PLEA TO GUILTY
Defense lawyers for Jeffrey L. Dahmer, who is charged with killing and dismembering 15 boys and young men in his apartment, plan to change his plea from not guilty to guilty, a move that would still allow a jury to find he was insane and have him hospitalized rather than imprisoned.
Mr.
Dahmer's chief defense lawyer, Gerald P. Boyle, sent a letter last week to Judge Laurence C. Gram Jr. of Milwaukee County Criminal Court stating his intention to enter a new plea of guilt by reason of insanity.


Air Force Joins Protest Of Contract
The Air Force, in effect acknowledging that it was too hasty in awarding a billion-dollar computer contract last month, is joining with protesters in asking that the award be canceled and reopened for bidding, an official of one of the original winners said today.
Judy Bitterli, director of corporate sales for the Compuadd Corporation of Austin, said a joint motion to dismiss the award is expected to be signed Wednesday by an administrative judge with the General Service Administration Board of Contract Appeals in Washington.


Teen-Agers Charged in Attack Released for a Lack of Evidence
Saying they lacked sufficient evidence to file charges, the authorities yesterday released 12 of 23 Brooklyn teen-agers who had been accused in a gang attack on three young men in lower Manhattan on Sunday evening.
Four youths accused of leading the attack were arraigned yesterday in Manhattan Criminal Court on robbery and attempted-robbery charges, said Gerald McKelvey, a spokesman for the Manhattan District Attorney's office.
Seven others were sent to Family Court to face charges.


METRO DIGEST
THE PARKS OF THE FUTURE
In a movement that is changing the way parks are created and used, an open-space conservation movement in the region and across the country is quietly stitching together thousands of acres of new parklands from abandoned and unused lands in some of the most heavily developed reaches of suburban sprawl.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY SUSPECTS SOUGHT IN BIAS ATTACK


Joe Sapora, 87, Wrestling Standout And College Coach
Joe Sapora, the wiry collegiate wrestling champion who coached the sport at City College from 1932 to 1968 and helped steer Henry Wittenberg to the heavyweight gold medal in the 1948 Olympics, died Monday at Ormond Beach Memorial Hospital in Florida.
He was 87 years old and lived in Daytona Beach.
His wife, Marguerite, said he died of pneumonia.
During his 36 years at City College, Mr.
Sapora, who was a professor of physical education, turned out his share of champions.
Although Mr.
Wittenberg was undoubtedly the best, Mr.
Sapora's greatest accomplishment as a coach may have been when Jacob Twersky, a blind wrestler, made it to the collegiate finals in 1942.


Broncos' Mecklenburg Hasn't Given an Inch
Perhaps it's just the slow passage of time, but it sometimes seems as if Karl Mecklenburg has been playing professional football for decades, enduring one game after another, one season after another, always at the center of the Denver Broncos' defense and always rising for one more play.
He's been around since leather helmets, hasn't he?


Little Switzerland reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Some Tips on Leadership for Coleman
Some day, perhaps when Derrick Coleman is authoring his autobiography, a la Charles Barkley, he will be asked to look back at his early, turbulent days under Coach Bill Fitch.
The chapter will no doubt be titled: "It Was All His Fault."
When Fitch is gone from the Nets, he will be remembered by Coleman as his first pro coach and one he couldn't wait to get rid of.
The two don't mix, and haven't since Coleman arrived last season.
But Coleman should not for a second delude himself into thinking that Fitch is his only problem, or his biggest.
With enormous talent, competitive fire plus a rare and special ability to make everyone around him better players, Coleman has a chance to be an N.B.A. franchise player in the truest sense.
With that role will come responsibility and leverage.


New Study Strongly Links Passive Smoking and Cancer
A THREE-YEAR study of nonsmoking women in five metropolitan areas has fortified earlier conclusions that secondhand smoke increases a spouse's risk of lung cancer.
Taking into account other possible influences on a woman's cancer risk, the study, the largest of its kind, found a 30 percent higher risk of lung cancer if the women's husbands smoked, a risk that rose with the number of cigarettes and years of exposure.


Homeless People Protest at City Hall Hearings on Shelters


CHRONICLE
The Lark Quartet was just over Newfoundland en route to St.
Petersburg for the Shostakovich International String Quartet Competition when EVA GRUESSER, the first violinist, discovered that she had left her scores at home.
What to do?
"I was in a spasm of horror and anxiety," Ms.
Gruesser said yesterday by telephone from a rehearsal in Manhattan.
"A musician without music is not worth much." Her husband, ROHAN SMITH, also a violinist, found her scores, all Shostakovich and Beethoven quartets, sitting on a music stand at their home in New York, and tried to send them to Russia by fax.


Beeba's Creations reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Better Than Perfect: Wines That 'Excite'
IT'S list-making time.
The 10 most interesting people of 1991, the one most interesting person of 1991 (Man of the Year, naturally), the 10 best athletes of 1991, the 10 most interesting news stories of the year and, who knows, probably, somewhere, the 10 dullest stories of the year.
Wine, which thrives on lists, has its own year-end compilation: The Wine Spectator's top 100.
Lists like this one fill in the time between the arrival of the Beaujolais nouveaux in November and the announcement of the opening prices of the latest Bordeaux vintage in the early spring.
They are, one might say, the hot stove league of wine.


Public &amp; Private; Women In Combat
Videotape confers a peculiar kind of immortality.
The parents of Maj.
Marie Rossi can watch their daughter, alive as anything, tell the world how she feels about what she does.
In a jaunty camouflage hat, she stands in the desert and tells the cameras what some of us were saying in print: that national defense is sex-blind.
"What I am doing is no greater or less than the man who is flying next to me," she said, as pundits were opining the same on the home front.
But we were only operating word processors while Major Rossi was flying a Chinook chopper for the Army, and the day after the cease-fire the chopper crashed.
She was buried in Arlington Cemetery, where a memorial to women in America's wars is planned.
Rewind.
Play.
"We thought it was pretty neat that three women were going to be across the border before the rest of the battalion," Major Rossi tells CNN, forever upbeat.


National Is Pledged 2,000-Work Collection
Two New York collectors who live modestly and have spent virtually all of their money on Minimalist, Conceptual and post-1960's art have pledged the more than 2,000 paintings, sculptures and drawings they have acquired over three decades to the National Gallery of Art in Washington.
"We liked the idea of giving art to our nation," said Herbert Vogel, 69 years old, a retired postal clerk.
His wife, Dorothy, 56 years old, a retired reference librarian for the Brooklyn Public Library, added, "We spent our honeymoon in Washington, and I got my first art lesson at the National Gallery."


Bristol-Myers's Drug Prices Are Cut for Health Programs
Acting at a time when Congressional drug-industry critics are demanding Government regulation of pharmaceutical prices, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company announced yesterday that it was reducing its prices by $20 million to Federal programs for veterans, the military and the Public Health Service, and by $60 million for the Federal-state Medicaid program for the poor.
Bristol-Myers Squibb said it was the first drug company to make reductions for the Federal programs that were as low as, or lower than, rebates that all drug companies are now required to give to state-run Medicaid programs.


Georgia's Democracy, Hijacked Again
Democracy has now suffered a double blow in the republic of Georgia.
No sooner had Zviad Gamsakhurdia been elected President than he began acting like a dictator.
Now he has been driven from his bunker by a bloody palace coup.
For democracy to recover, it's essential for Georgia's new leaders to hold genuinely free elections, and soon.
Then will come the harder steps: tolerating opponents, including supporters of Mr.
Gamsakhurdia . . . fostering a free press . . . protecting the rights of non-Georgians . . . obeying the law and enforcing it fairly.


Ferraro's Four Goals Put Icing on the Day
When Ray Ferraro of the Islanders was named to the Wales Conference All-Star team this afternoon, it seemed like a routine, minor honor.
Every team has to have at least one representative, and Ferraro is a respectable and respected veteran.
He is one of the better players on a struggling team and he has no previous All-Star experience.
So it seemed like a nice gesture.


The Steinbrenner Ban Resembles a Farce
On the eve of what George Steinbrenner hopes will be his greatest triumph of all -- winning the right to run the Yankees again -- it seems inconceivable that the Yankee owner would flirt with disaster.
So the question must be asked: Why would Steinbrenner and his allies in the Yankees' hierarchy begin scattering clues galore that the owner, in defiance of an agreement that bars his activities in the day-to-day operations of the team, was operating as if it were June 1990 and he was back wheeling and dealing.
And if the signs are true, if Steinbrenner is indeed back in business without ever having had to wait for a pardon, what will Commissioner Fay Vincent do about it?


Calcutta Journal; On Meanest of Streets, Salvaging Useful Lives
As night dissolves, the sidewalks and gutters of this decayed city stir with life.
From hovels of burlap and cardboard emerge naked children trailing their mothers, who wrap their soiled saris more snuggly against the morning chill.
Using brackish water from open pipes, men hurriedly swab their bodies, shivering in the faint chill as the smoke of pavement cooking fires filters dawn's light.


Two Assistant Coaches Dismissed by Giants
When the Giants' disappointing season ended almost three weeks ago, Coach Ray Handley intimated he would shake up his staff.
The shake-up started yesterday when the Giants released Ron Erhardt and Mike Pope, two longtime assistants on offense, and Handley left the door open for more changes.
Erhardt had been a Giant coach for 10 seasons, Pope for nine.
Each had a year remaining on a two-year contract.


Right-Hand Ford Model Set for Japan
The Ford Motor Company, in a move intended to increase the appeal of its vehicles to the Japanese, said today that it would begin building right-hand-drive Ford Probe sporty coupes for export to Japan and Britain.
This will be Ford's first model adapted specifically for sale in Japan.
It will take the company 20 months to re-engineer the car, which will be produced at the Mazda Motor Corporation's Flat Rock, Mich. plant, said Alex J. Trotman, executive vice president in charge of North American operations.
Ford owns 25 percent of Mazda.


Chase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Something's Cooking in This Bookstore
In most bookstores, cookbooks are found in the back.
At Books for Cooks, a cook is in the back, and the books are everywhere else.
The store sells only cookbooks, 5,000 titles piled floor to ceiling in a space not much larger than a pantry.
From "The Joy of Cooking" to "The Exotic Foods of Mauritius," tomes fill this narrow shop off Portobello Road in west London.
The owner, Heidi Lascelles, said she has one of the largest selection of cookbooks for sale in the world.
She certainly is in the running for most per square foot.


Salick Health Care reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Accounts
*
Jim Beam Brands Co., Deerfield, Ill., to Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis, its agency of record, to advertise seven liquor brands recently acquired from Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons.
The accounts, largely inactive for the last few years, had been handled by DDB Needham Worldwide, New York, and Ogilvy &amp; Mather, New York, which continue to handle other Seagram products.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Spirit Cruises, Norfolk, Va., to Earle Palmer Brown, Norfolk, its first agency for media planning and buying and public relations.
The agency said that media spending was expected to exceed $2 million.


Japan's Consumers Are Proud to Buy Japanese; Showroom Showdown
To the Editor:
There in our driveway sits a testament to unpatriotism.
Gleaming garnet color, moon roof, leather, compact disk player.
Everything about it says "made in Japan." We set out to buy another Ford.
We had two last week.
We really do hate the trade deficit.
We really do want to buy American (and did so three years ago with the Fords after years of Volvos, Volkswagens, even some beaten up but great old Jaguars).


JAPAN ANNOUNCES A HOST OF STEPS TO AID U.S. TRADE
Seeking to demonstrate its willingness to take concrete steps to reduce its growing trade surplus with the United States, the Japanese Government late on Tuesday announced a host of incentives to make it easier for American companies to export their goods.
The move came on the first day of President Bush's visit here.
Some measures had been announced earlier, while some merely expanded on existing programs.


Gretchen Householder Poston, 59, Ex-White House Social Secretary
Gretchen Householder Poston, the White House social secretary in the Carter Administration, died Monday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
She was 59 years old and lived in Washington.
She died of breast cancer, her family said.


Aldo C. Podesta, 72, Retired Fund-Raiser
Aldo Clement Podesta, a retired fund-raising executive and former member of the Rye, N.Y., Board of Education, died on Saturday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 72 years old and lived in Rye.
He died suddenly as a result of adverse reactions to medication, his family said.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 3
Dec. 27
Jan. 4
1992
1991
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.3
6.5
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.2
2.9
Gasoline stocks
221.7
216.3
222.7
Distillate stocks
143.4
142.9
129.6
Crude imports, daily
5.5
5.0
5.4
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.9
1.5
Crude stocks
328.7
325.5
321.7
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
85.6
87.0
79.5
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Moving to Notre Dame
RICK MINTER, the architect of Ball State's highly respected defense, was named defensive football coordinator at Notre Dame yesterday.
Minter, 37 years old, will replace GARY DARNELL, who left the Irish after two seasons to become assistant head coach at Texas under the new coach, JOHN MACKOVIC.


Obession Over Witt
He is a 47-year-old man who lives with his mother.
She thinks he's mentally ill, as did a psychiatrist who once examined him and decided he was a paranoid schizophrenic.
Indeed, HARRY VELTMAN seems to have developed a full-blown obsession with the former Olympic champion KATARINA WITT, so much so that he was arrested in California last month and charged with sending her obscene and threatening letters.
Federal agents said they made the arrest at the time because they were afraid Weltman would harm Witt at an ice show the next day.


Trenton Tax-Bill Holdout Threatens Assembly Plan
Assembly Democrats have scheduled a final vote on Wednesday on their $2.8-billion tax rollback, but the outlook for its passage is clouded by a Paterson Democrat who refuses to back any rollback unless his own, competing package is also approved.
The Paterson legislator, Assemblyman William J. Pascrell Jr., may hold the critical 41st vote the Democrats will need to pass the rollback, and he is using it to hold the legislation hostage until he gets his way.


Sears Cuts Jobs In Modernizing
In a continuing effort to cut costs, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said yesterday that it was spending $60 million for 28,000 computerized cash registers.
The move would eliminate 1,000 full-time non-sales jobs and 5,900 part-time clerical jobs by the end of the first quarter in March, Sears said.
The job cuts will reduce operating expenses by about $50 million a year beginning in 1992, Sears said.


Health-Food Supermarkets? Why, Yes. It's Only Natural.
WHEN Fresh Fields opened its first "healthy food supermarket" in a Washington suburb last summer, the tight-knit natural foods industry was aghast.
What interlopers dared enter a business that had, until that moment, been peopled exclusively by a health-food counterculture?
Who were these mainstream entrepreneurs -- Leo Kahn, the former owner of a chain of conventional supermarkets, Mark Ordan, an investment banker, and Jack Murphy, who had worked in the supermarket industry -- with the chutzpah to treat the selling of organic food, natural sugars, whole grains, pure water, and the concepts of saving the dolphins, saving the whales, saving the planet as a pure business opportunity?
The industry is still abuzz as the company plans to open stores No. 3 and No. 4 this year.


An American Express Plan
The American Express Publishing Corporation has reorganized its magazines, the company announced Monday.
Travel &amp; Leisure, the company's most widely circulated magazine, will stand alone, while the other five -- Atlanta, D, Departures, Food &amp; Wine and L.A.
Style -- will be grouped together.
New York Woman, a five-year-old magazine that has been hit particularly hard by declining advertising revenues, has been for sale since November and is not included in the reorganization.


Manhattan Assemblyman Wins Ways and Means Chairmanship
Capping a brief but intense power struggle within the Democratic-led State Assembly, Sheldon Silver of Manhattan has been chosen by Speaker Saul Weprin for the powerful position of Ways and Means Committee chairman, legislative officials said tonight.
The chairmanship, which involves a major role in negotiations over the state's budget, had been held by Mr.
Weprin, a Queens Democrat who rose last month to the Speaker's chair after the conviction of the chamber's leader, Mel Miller, on Federal fraud charges.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.00
3.50
3.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.74
3.85
6.43
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.78
3.86
6.42
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.39
6.46
8.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.43
8.37
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.55
8.56
9.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.66
6.68
7.46
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Costco Wholesale Corp. reports earnings for 12wks to Nov 24


Yankees Stay Active by Acquiring Gallego
The Yankees continued reaching into their wallets, shuffling their lineup and refining their approach to rebuilding yesterday when they signed a free-agent infielder, Mike Gallego, to a guaranteed three-year, $5.1 million contract.
After months of disarray in the front office and promises that the club would proceed with its young players, the Yankees, who signed Danny Tartabull on Monday, have done an about-face and signed two free agents for $30 million in two days.


Fury and Protests Erupt in Russia As Price Rises Strain Consumers
The first expressions of angry protest were reported today among the battered consumers of Russia as they tried to cope with drastically rising food prices.
The incidents seemed more the exception than the rule thus far, as Russia and its neighbors adjusted warily but peacefully to the unpredictable situation.
Price controls on most basic goods were ended last week in the hope of engendering free-market forces of supply and demand, but the effects thus far have proved uncertain at best.


At Scranton's Steamtown, Our Industrial Past Comes to Life
To the Editor:
"The Steamtown Steamroller" (Topics of The Times, Dec. 17) and a Nov. 23 news article on the Steamtown National Historic Site in Scranton, Pa., which is transforming an abandoned railroad yard into a tourist attraction, ignore knowledgeable sources who would give quite a different picture from your reports.


ARABS SAY TALKS ON MIDEAST PEACE CAN NOW RESUME
Lebanese, Jordanian, Syrian and Palestinian negotiators indicated today that they were prepared to resume peace talks with Israel in Washington now that the United Nations had condemned the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir for its planned deportation of 12 Palestinians.
Israel, for its part, bitterly criticized the United States for voting in favor of the Security Council resolution, which the Arab delegations had in effect made a condition for the resumption of negotiations.


Bias Thrives In a Vacuum
Some people have a definite opinion about Wisian-Americans.
The trouble is: Wisians are a fictitious group, added by poll takers to a list of ethnic groups in order to test the respondents in a study of ethnic images in the United States.


Microwave Cooking
AFTER the holidays, I feel like a beached whale -- overweight and lethargic, not very interested in cooking.
Enter rapidly prepared fish dishes from the microwave.
They are good for the health and diet, take a minimum of time to prepare and are interesting enough to serve at an informal meal for friends.
The Chinese-style fish fillets use a lot of ingredients, but since they're all thrown together at the same time, the preparation is easy.
Tuna with tomatoes is a truly minimal recipe and would go nicely with spaghettini.
Scrod with clams Livornese takes advantage of the fact that in a microwave oven, the inner portion of the pan cooks more rapidly than the outer portion.
The scrod will still be moist when the clams that surround it open.
The fish with vegetables also benefits from this unevenness.


Theater in Review
Varieties  Rainbow and Stars 30 Rockefeller Plaza Manhattan Through January Conceived and produced by Steve Paul and Gregory Dawson; staged by Fred Greene; lights and sound by Shawn Moninger; production manager, Scott Perrin.
Presented by Rainbow and Stars.
WITH: Douglas Bernstein, Jason Graae, Marilyn Pasekoff, Sharon Douglas and Fred Wells; special guest appearances by Chris Durang and Dawne, Anne Francine, Tony Roberts and Brian O'Connor.


One Who Filled Out on the Low-Fat Fill-Yourself-Up Diet
REMEMBER calories?
Those quaint things you were supposed to count, and by eliminating 3,500, lose a pound?
In the last few years, toting up calories has fallen out of favor.
These days, the word is fat.
Eliminate it or sharply reduce it, the thinking goes, and you will lose weight.
By the new orthodoxy, there is no need even to think about calories.


For Pet Lovers, a Tragedy Relived
Sylvia Strauss sat in a Brooklyn courtroom yesterday and fretted for her husband and son, who are charged with turning a Long Island pet cemetery into a hellish site of mass graves, broken-down equipment and moldering animal corpses.
Try as she might, she couldn't avoid the low mutters and pointed stares of the clutch of angry pet owners across the aisle, who have done their best to make life miserable for her family since their arrests last spring.


Cleared to Play, Coleman Practices
Derrick Coleman was back from the doctors and apparently out of Bill Fitch's doghouse today.
Coleman, the Nets' 6-foot-10-inch power forward, was fined and benched Monday for missing an appointment Sunday to have X-rays on his left ankle and missing a Monday shoot-around before the game with the Clippers.


China Expels Three Canadians on Rights Mission
Three Canadian members of Parliament who came to China to investigate human rights gained first-hand insight into the issue today when the Government detained them, jostled them and put them on the first flight out of the country.
The legislators had planned to go to Tiananmen Square, reporters in tow, to honor the victims of the 1989 military crackdown on the democracy movement.
They had also intended to go to the gate of a Beijing prison to request permission to visit dissidents who are known to be inside.


Mary Louise Hafford, Violinist, 89, Is Dead
Mary Louise Gale Hafford, a violinist, conductor and music teacher, died on Friday at Waterview Hills Nursing Center in Purdy's, N.Y.
She was 89 years old.
She died of a stroke, said her granddaughter Carol Bruzzese of Mount Vernon, N.Y.


Judge Suspends Deportation of Irish Alien
A Federal immigration judge in Manhattan suspended the deportation of an illegal alien from Northern Ireland and granted political asylum to his family yesterday on the ground that their return would expose them to danger.
Lawyers for the man, Sean Mackin, 33 years old, said the ruling by Judge Annette S. Elstein was the first to extend political asylum to refugees from the political violence that has taken thousands of lives in Northern Ireland.


College Official Says He Pleaded With Police for Help With Crush
A City College administrator said yesterday that he pleaded with a police captain for help at a crucial moment around the time that a human crush ultimately killed nine people at a celebrity basketball game, but the captain, instead of responding promptly, reproached him for an agonizing five to seven minutes about the college's mistakes before finally calling for an ambulance.
The union that represents police captains yesterday denied the official's account.


Man, 71, Slain in Flushing
The superintendent of a Queens apartment building was found bludgeoned to death on his kitchen floor yesterday, killed during an apparent robbery Monday night, the police said.
William Nelson, 71 years old, the superintendent of a 14-story building at 133-36 41st Road in Flushing, had been beaten with an unidentified blunt object, the police said.


Wise Timeout on Breast Implants
Between one and two million American women have undergone breast implant surgery -- some to correct a deformity or replace a breast lost to cancer, the vast majority for purely cosmetic reasons.
Many of them, citing no ill effects, will say they made the right decision.
Sadly, however, none can say it was a truly informed decision.
As the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration has only just discovered, at least one manufacturer withheld safety information and at least one of its employees lied in telling plastic surgeons that safety studies were under way.
The F.D.A., then, is absolutely right to ask for a voluntary moratorium on silicone breast implants (saline implants are unaffected) until safety concerns are answered.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly to the new chief executive of Giant Food Stores Inc. in Carlisle, Pa.
He is Allan Noddle.


Book Notes
A Change of Fortune
It is raining gold at Arte Publico Press in Houston.
A year ago, the small, independent publishing house dedicated to Hispanic literature was not sure it had enough money or manpower to market a hard-cover book.
This month, the Rockefeller Foundation announced that it would give the press $2.7 million over the next 10 years to help finance a project to restore the Hispanic literary heritage of the United States.


PCB Concerns Endanger Research at New Paltz
David B. Straus knows a lot about toxic substances.
An associate professor of biochemistry, he conducts experiments on the effects of harmful chemicals on DNA.
But now, much of that research may have been destroyed in a real toxic disaster.
Officials at the State University of New York's College in New Paltz said yesterday that the science building where Dr.
Straus works, as well as a theater, would probably be closed for the entire spring semester because of PCB contamination.
On Dec. 29, transformers containing PCB's in those buildings and three dormitories overheated after a car struck a utility pole, causing a power surge.


For Rangers' All-Stars, Three Just Isn't Enough
The Rangers take themselves so seriously this season that there was considerable grumbling today when the National Hockey League announced that center Mark Messier, defenseman Brian Leetch and goaltender Mike Richter were among the 15 players added to the Wales Conference team for the National Hockey League All-Star Game in Philadelphia on Jan. 18
Although this marked the first time since 1977 that the Rangers will dress as many as three players for the game, the players wondered aloud after practice why there could not be more.
Why not four, or five?


Behind the Return of Infectious Diseases Lie Slashed Budgets
To the Editor:
You urge New York City and Albany to increase spending to control tuberculosis, a disease on the wane 15 years ago, but now increasing precipitously, especially drug-resistant strains ("The Tuberculosis Counterattack," editorial, Dec. 4).


Smith Gives UConn 37 Reasons to Win
Jim Calhoun gets paid a lot of money for a lot of things as the basketball coach at the University of Connecticut, but gushing is not one of them.
So when Chris Smith scored a career-high 33 points at Illinois last Saturday, and Calhoun did not start heaping praise, the coach had a mini-controversy on his hands.
Smith made Calhoun's job much easier tonight.
He scored 37 points to lead the undefeated Huskies (11-0) to an 85-76 victory over St.
John's amid the happy noise of Gampel Pavilion.
The senior guard made open jumpers, off-balance jumpers, drives off steals, floaters off fast breaks and an improbable high-rise flip after he stumbled past St.
John's guard David Cain.


A Drink of Premium Wine Is a Twist of the Wrist Away
GLEN ELLEN, California's ninth largest producer of table wines, is experimenting with putting a metal screw cap on a standard-sized bottle of premium red wine that sells for $10.
Such caps have long been found on low-cost jug wines and small bottles, but replacing the cork on expensive wines with caps has been taboo.
"It's a good idea," said Louis P. Martini, a longtime Napa Valley wine producer.
"I was talking with some vintners recently. They said they had no objection to the soda-pop crown seal or screw cap. But the question was, who wants to be first in the general market?"


Personal Health
BEFORE puberty, migraine headaches afflict boys and girls in equal numbers.
But once the adolescent flow of sex hormones begins, migraines start to affect more girls than boys.
By adulthood, at least twice as many women as men are plagued with these life-disrupting headaches, which make them feel sick all over.
For decades, people have tried to account for this difference.
Many lay people and professionals alike mistakenly attributed it to traits like perfectionism or nervous anxiety, to sexual conflicts or to deep-seated emotional problems that they believed were more characteristic of women than of men.
But in recent years as the neurochemistry of sex hormones and migraines has come to be better understood, a rather clear-cut biological explanation for this all-too-common affliction of women has emerged.


A Chilly but Inviting Day


A National Curriculum: Seeking Fairness for All
The 11-year-olds in Richard Nokes's history class are not having an easy time.
They are trying to figure out how ancient Roman roads were built, and their only sources are translations of descriptions by writers of the time.
It is a sophisticated lesson in how to read primary documents, a skill expected of every child now that Britain has a required national curriculum.


Zale, Under Pressure, Revamps Management
The Zale Corporation, a Dallas-based jewelry retailer whose creditors are seeking to force it into bankruptcy, has announced a new management arrangement aimed at making the troubled chain more responsive to its customers.
Irving R. Gerstein, the company's chairman, also said yesterday that Zale was meeting with its banks and bondholders "to discuss the company's business plans." Several large bondholders have already sought to force the company into bankruptcy court, but Zale has not yet indicated if it will seek to resist that process in court.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
A.
L.
Laboratories Inc., Fort Lee, N.J., a pharmaceutical unit of the Norwegian company Apothekernes Laboratorium A.S., named Thomas Darby senior vice president-sales and marketing of its subsidiary Barre-National Inc. *
Alta Gold Co., Salt Lake City, a mining company, announced that Dan S. Bushnell, chairman and chief executive, had retired.
He will be succeeded by Robert N. Pratt, who also continues as president. *
Bessemer Group Inc., New York, a bank holding company, named John F. H. Trott executive vice president-international equity investments. *
Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp., New York, a marketer of business information and related services, named William T. Redgate vice president-business practices. *
First National Supermarkets Inc., Cleveland, a unit of the Netherlands-based food retailer Koninklijke Ahold N.V., named John A. Shields chief executive, succeeding Richard J. Bogomolny, who has retired.
*
Fortis Financial Group, St.
Paul, a unit of Fortis International N.V., named J. William Norton senior vice president and general counsel and Dennis M. Ott senior vice president. *
Goody Products Inc., Kearny, N.J., a maker of hair accessories and other consumer products, named Michael S. Krause senior vice president-operations. *
Pepsi-Cola Co., Somers, N.Y., a division of Pepsico Inc., named Brenda Barnes president of Pepsi-Cola South, the operating company for all Pepsi-Cola manufacturing, sales and distribution in the 13-state southern region. *
Rawlings Sporting Goods Co., St.
Louis, a division of Figgie International Inc., named James R. O'Brien president.


Knicks Look Ahead and Fall Behind
Sooner or later, it had to happen to the Knicks.
They have made a habit this season of falling behind early, only to come back dramatically in the final minutes.
But last night, the Knicks fell behind and it cost them.
There was no miracle 3-point shot, no Hollywood-type finish and no fourth-quarter collapse by the Atlanta Hawks.
Suffering its third home-court loss of the season, New York was beaten by Atlanta, 109-94, before 17,442 fans at Madison Square Garden.


Court Upholds New York Ban On Double Subsidy for Heat Cost
A Federal appeals court panel yesterday upheld New York State's ban on providing home heating allowances for poor people living in Government-subsidized housing where heating costs are already paid for as part of the rent.
In reversing a lower court ruling, a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit said that to force the state to pay the heating costs of poor people whose monthly rent already covers such costs would be a strain on an already overburdened system.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Japanese Government announced a host of incentives to make it easier for American companies to export their goods, seeking to demonstrate its willingness to take concrete steps to reduce its growing trade surplus with the U.S.
The move, parts of which had been announced earlier and some of whose measures merely expanded on existing programs, came on the first day of President Bush's visit.  [ Page A1. ] Markets
A torrent of new corporate debt securities flooded the credit markets, as companies began to react to the drop in rates.  [ D1. ]


First Protests on Food Prices
The first angry protests were reported among Russia's battered consumers as they tried to cope with rising food prices.
Page A8.


Brooklyn Man Slain for Coat, Police Say
A 19-year-old Brooklyn man on his way to buy cigarettes for his mother was shot to death early yesterday near his home during a mugging in which a leather coat he had received for Christmas was stolen, the police said.
The victim, Louis R. Carvajal, was going to buy cigarettes for his mother, Tomasa Lopez, at a grocery at 1136 Flatbush Avenue about 2:30 A.M. when he was shot three times in the head near a gas station at 1142 Flatbush Avenue in East Flatbush, said Sgt.
Michael Paccione of the 70th Precinct Detective Squad.


James F. Simms, 86, An Olympic Official For a Half-Century
James F. Simms, an official of the United States Olympic Committee and the Amateur Athletic Union for more than a half-century, died of heart disease on Monday in Point Pleasant (N.J.) Hospital.
He was 86 years old.
He lived in Manasquan, N.J., until he was confined four years ago to a nursing home.


Alcoa Plans to Take A $217 Million Charge
Alcoa said yesterday that it was taking a $217 million after-tax charge against its earnings for the fourth quarter, primarily to cover the cost of environmental cleanup activities at several operating sites.
Analysts said the charge was certain to result in a quarterly loss for the nation's largest aluminum producer.
Alcoa, based in Pittsburgh, said $160 million of the charge was for environmental matters at a number of plants around the world.
But the largest provision was for the company's smelting and aluminum fabricating plant in Massena, N.Y.


Review/Television; Loss of a Job Summons The Specter of Poverty
Tonight Bill Moyers focuses on people who do not have the luxury of seeing the big picture when it comes to global economics.
For these workers in Milwaukee, the flight of factories to other countries has meant unemployment or jobs that do not pay enough to support a family.
"Minimum Wages," at 9 on Channels 13 and 49, captures anxieties that are spreading across America.
This sober report notes that although 85,000 manufacturing jobs have been lost in Milwaukee in the last few years, the city's unemployment rate remains relatively low.
But the sorts of jobs available do not pay enough to keep up installments on the house or the car or to plan ahead.
Since many of them do not offer health benefits, a serious illness can be devastating.


Marino Says Reform Needed
Following are excerpts of Senate Majority Leader Ralph J. Marino's response to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's State of the State Address, as recorded by The New York Times.
. . .
New York State is in trouble, and we are at a crossroads.
It is the opinion of Republicans that we cannot continue on the same track.
The time to change direction is now.
Since 1982, state spending has virtually doubled while our population has grown by only 3 percent.
Spending growth has outpaced inflation by 56 percent.
. . .
New York's economic problems, fueled by taxes, spending, regulatory controls and fiscal mismanagement, spiraled out of control. . . .
Today, it is the virtually automatic growth of New York's Medicaid and welfare programs that is the chief cause of our budget problems at both the state and local level.


Homeless Man Hurt in Fire
A homeless man, apparently asleep in the entranceway of an East Side apartment building, was severely burned last night when a fire broke out in the hallway around him, the police said.
He was taken to Bellevue Hospital where he was listed in critical condition, with third-degree burns over a large part of his body, a hospital spokesman said.
His name was not released pending a search for relatives; a neighbor said he was known as Richie.
The fire, at 438 Third Avenue, was quickly brought under control.


CHRONICLE
In 1957, EDWARD T. FOOTE 2D became one of the thousands of students to take VINCENT SCULLY JR.'S legendary course in modern architecture at Yale University.
Now Mr.
Foote is about to sit in on Professor Scully's class again, as president of the University of Miami, where Mr.
Scully begins a tour of duty next week as a distinguished visiting professor.
Mr.
Scully, who began teaching at Yale in 1947 and became one of the nation's most eminent professors, was compelled to retire by the university this year after he turned 70.
He is continuing to teach there at the architecture school as a professor emeritus in fall semesters.


Review/Television; New Detective With a Private Side
"Mystery" confronts a puzzle: Can a detective whose most prominent characteristic is that he has no prominent characteristics make the always-treacherous jump from printed page to television drama?
Can the rather colorless Chief Inspector Roderick (Rory) Alleyn find a series niche for himself among such established eccentrics as Sherlock Holmes, Miss Marple, Hercule Poirot and Inspector Morse?
"Artists in Crime," a two-parter starting tonight at 9 on Channel 13, offers tantalizing but inconclusive answers.
Alleyn is the creation of Ngaio Marsh, a New Zealander who settled in London in the late 1920's with an eye toward an acting and directing career, especially in anything having to do with Shakespeare.
She wrote her first mystery novel, "A Man Lay Dead," in 1931.
Some 30 more would follow before her death in 1982 at age 83.
No doubt because the character of Alleyn tended to be so distantly proper, Marsh often wickedly dumped him into bizarre plots, stuffed with enough red herrings to suggest an underlying practical joke.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a United States environmental plan for Asia omitted a nation from a list of eligible countries and territories, because of an omission in a list supplied by the United States Agency for International Development.
China is also eligible.


PRESIDENT'S PLANS FOR MEDICAL CARE OUTLINED TO A.M.A.
President Bush's election-year prescription for the nation's health-care system is likely to include new incentives for people to enroll in prepaid group health plans, tax credits for the purchase of medical insurance and restrictions on medical malpractice lawsuits, the White House chief of staff, Samuel K. Skinner, told doctors this week.
Mr.
Skinner outlined the Administration's ideas at a White House meeting with top executives of the American Medical Association on Tuesday afternoon, as he sampled the doctors' reaction to major proposals being drafted by the Administration for submission to Congress later this month.


Unilever Unit Entering Fat-Substitute Market
Yet another company is jockeying for position in the race to develop a more palatable fat substitute, raising the stakes in that unproven but rapidly developing market.
Yesterday, the National Starch and Chemical Company, a division of the vast consumer products maker Unilever Group, introduced N-Lite, a line of six fake fats that can replace natural fat in different types of processed foods.


Acclaim Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
Danny Moore  The Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South (at Perry Street) Through Sunday
Outside of his own, the trumpeter Danny Moore isn't much of a household name.
Jazz is a fairly constricted field, and for whatever reason, Mr.
Moore has stayed outside the club and recording circuit and the publicity that goes along with it.


Palestinian Delegates Leave for Third Round of Peace Talks in Washington


Vallone Is Re-elected Speaker as New City Council Meets for the First Time


Celtics Have Knicks All Shook Up
Throughout the fourth quarter tonight, the Boston Garden was shaking.
And the Knicks' knees were shaking, too.
To say the Knicks collapsed somewhat tonight would be like saying the stock market collapsed somewhat in 1929.
During the first 9 minutes of the fourth quarter, New York scored 3 points.
Forget about making a shot.
Most of the Knicks were too tentative to even take a shot.


Review/Piano; Hearing A Talented Also-Ran
It is not usual to bill a pianist as a "distinguished loser," as William Wolfram was at the 92d Street Y on Tuesday night.
But Mr.
Wolfram actually is a distinguished loser.
Though he has come close to winning nearly every major piano competition -- the Chopin, the Cliburn, the Leeds, the Tchaikovsky, the Naumburg and the Queen Elisabeth -- he has managed to lose them all.
He is also being presented as part of a series, titled "Goldfingers," featuring three such "failed" pianists (Alexander Shtarkman and Pedro Burmester will be presented later this season, in their New York debuts).
Losing a competition, the series suggests, may be a credential as significant as winning one.
The writer Joseph Horowitz, who organized the series, argues in program notes and in his recent critical book on the Van Cliburn contest, "The Ivory Trade," that the piano competition is a "flawed method for identifying and rewarding young musical talent." The pianists' failures, in fact, may be partly due to their virtues.


Books of The Times; The Roots and Branches of Thought
The Mind's Sky  Human Intelligence in a Cosmic Context  By Timothy Ferris  281 pages.
Bantam Books. $22.50.
What stands out in one's mind after a reading of Timothy Ferris's diverting new book, "The Mind's Sky: Human Intelligence in a Cosmic Context," is its curious bits and pieces.


Neogen Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about the creation of new parks in the New York City area misidentified the group responsible for acquiring a 3,800-acre preserve in Putnam County, N.Y.
It was the Open Space Institute.


MGI Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Dinkins Offers New Plan To Raise Emergency Cash
A week before it is to present its four-year plan for keeping New York City's budget balanced, the Dinkins administration has proposed a new way to raise $1 billion in emergency cash, and is weighing new ways of using that money to shrink the city work force, increase productivity and satisfy fiscal monitors.
Senior mayoral aides say they hope the new plan will help break the political and financial logjams that have stymied earlier proposals for borrowing money to help ease the city's fiscal problems because it will not require the direct approval of the State Legislature or the Municipal Assistance Corporation.
Because the money would be raised in stages, officials said, fiscal monitors would be able to block the effort at any time if the city failed to follow through on its pledges to cut spending.


Asian Flu
"Nothing extraordinary has occurred," Marlin Fitzwater told reporters after President Bush vomited and collapsed in his chair at a state dinner in Tokyo.
In one sense he was right: millions of people suffer from the flu that apparently felled Mr.
Bush.
But in another sense Mr.
Fitzwater had it wrong: when Presidents get sick, however ordinary the illness, the world experiences far-from-ordinary intimations of mortality.
Television flashes frightening images of a man in distress.
Markets shudder.
Potentates wire condolences.
Pundits ruminate on Mr.
Bush's fitness to campaign and Dan Quayle's fitness to succeed him.
What for most people is a moment of private disorientation becomes an occasion for public discussion.


Charter FSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A map on Tuesday showing bond ratings for each state misstated New York's rating.
Moody's Investors Services gives New York's general obligation bonds a rating of A; it is the state's appropriation-backed debt that was lowered on Monday to Baa1.


Some New Drugs Contain Hidden Economies
To the Editor:
"As Costs of New Drugs Rise, Hospitals Stick by Old Ones" (front page, Dec. 18) tells only half the story.
Recently, I had orthopedic surgery, a repeat of an operation I had years ago.
Then I had morphine for pain relief and this time I had Toradol.
Yes, morphine is perhaps 60 cents to the $6 Toradol dose, but the real costs are different.


Accord Reported to End Haiti Crisis
Diplomats seeking a negotiated settlement of Haiti's three-month political crisis say that the country's deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, has endorsed the nomination of a leading political rival as Prime Minister in a compromise arrangement that would eventually bring about his return from exile.
Officials from the Organization of American States, which has sponsored negotiations for Father Aristide's return, said today that after two days of discussions with Haitian parliamentary leaders in Venezuela, the deposed President had accepted the nomination of Rene Theodore, one of two names put forward by the legislators, to be his Prime Minister.


Broke Comptroller
As the head of an accounting firm here that bears his name, Michael J. Maunsell made it his business to oversee the financial affairs of others.
His clients included individuals and more complicated accounts, like that of the neighboring town of Southbury.
Those were the credentials that swept the political newcomer to victory last November when he ran for city comptroller on the Democratic ticket, a ticket that pledged fiscal responsibility for this onetime manufacturing center, which has stumbled badly under the combined effects of municipal scandal and the recession.


Ukraine Seizes Moscow's Army Communications
The central military command said today that its primary communications control over 300,000 troops of the former Soviet Army in Ukraine had been lost to Kiev military officials intent on nationalizing Soviet units in the republic.
The number represents about one-fourth of the former Soviet units in Ukraine.
The unilateral action deepened the political struggle between Ukraine and Russia over control of the military remnants of the defunct Soviet Union.


Edward F. Carpenter, 71, Is Dead; First Headmaster of Harlem Prep
Edward F. Carpenter, who as founding headmaster of Harlem Preparatory School helped transform dropouts into Ivy Leaguers, died on Monday at Englewood Hospital in Engelwood, N.J.
He was 71 years old and lived in Teaneck, N.J.


Snow From Hollywood Hits Manhattan


Abroad at Home; 'J.F.K.'
Oliver Stone's "J.F.K." may well move a generation to believe that a conspiracy lay behind the assassination of President Kennedy.
That is its message, and a film that hits the emotions as skillfully as this one does can have a profound impact.
It is right, therefore, to take the movie seriously.
Its charges could hardly be more serious.
It suggests that Earl Warren, the revered Chief Justice, was party to covering up a murderous conspiracy.
It tells us that our Government cannot be trusted even to give an honest account of a President's assassination.


North Carolina Is Told to Improve Safety Role
Labor Secretary Lynn Martin today gave the State of North Carolina 90 days to beef up its enforcement of job safety and health regulations or, she said, the Federal Government will take it over.
Twenty-five workers died Sept. 3 in a fire at a chicken-processing plant in Hamlet, N.C., in one of the nation's worst industrial accidents.
State officials later said the state had never inspected the plant over the 11 years it operated.
Federal Department of Agriculture investigators had checked the site almost daily for flies and vermin.


Hot-Wiring Overseas Telephone Calls
International Discount Telecommunications, based in a former funeral parlor in the Bronx, is a tiny start-up company that hopes it has a very big idea: allowing callers abroad to telephone the United States at the same low rates Americans pay to call overseas.
The company's 35-year-old founder, Howard Jonas, is as straightforward as the company's name.
An energetic entrepreneur who also runs a larger company that publishes brochures for hotels, Mr.
Jonas believes he has stumbled upon a kind of telecommunications jujitsu, using the weight and strength of the phone giants against them.


Aid, at Last, for the Republics
The republics of the former Soviet Union are struggling to turn decrepit Communism into vibrant capitalism.
Even if successful, the transition will be traumatic.
Ossified factories will close, throwing millions out of work; controls will be lifted, sending prices soaring.
The entire fabric of society will have to be created anew.
The republics will need all the help they can get.
So it is welcome news that the Bush Administration has finally endorsed membership for Russia and five other republics in the International Monetary Fund and World Bank.
Membership allows the two institutions to provide billions of dollars of aid to support economic reform.


Dynamic Classics Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Miscellany
*
Conde Nast Publications has signed an agreement licensing a Japanese publisher, Chuokoron-sha, to publish GQ magazine in Japan.
It is Conde Nast's first such venture in the Far East.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The U.S. and Japan announced a broad commitment to try to lift the world economy from a looming slowdown by adopting budgetary and interest-rate policies that will promote faster growth.
The aim of the new strategy is to focus the domestic policies of the world's two largest economies clearly on expansion rather than on fighting inflation, with the hope that the leading industrial economies of Europe will follow suit.  [ Page A1. ]


Assets Taken In Fraud Case
Federal officials today seized millions of dollars worth of real estate, cars and boats belonging to a jailed investment manager who stands accused of bilking public agencies out of more than $100 million and to his wife.
The property taken from Steven D. Wymer and Ann Marie Wymer included a 1991 Ferrari, a 1986 Mercedes-Benz, homes in Newport Beach, Calif., Sun Valley, Idaho, and New York City, eight other properties in four states, and bank accounts containing an unspecified amount of money.
Seizure warrants were also issued for seven other cars and three power boats, but they have not been located.


Honors
*
Richard E. Cremer, founding president and chief executive of the Signature Group, Montgomery Ward &amp; Company's direct-response subsidiary, has been named the 1992 Charles S. Downs Chicago Direct Marketer of the Year by the Chicago Association of Direct Marketing.


London Journal; For the Straphangers, Poetry Sweetens the Ride
If subway systems are the measure, London is undeniably a much more civilized city than New York.
It is not just the much lower rate of violent crime on the Underground or tube, as the subway here is known, and the color-coded map that is a delight to visiting New Yorkers.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Israeli Aide's Trip Linked to China Ties
Israel and China are expected to establish diplomatic relations for the first time during a trip by Foreign Minister David Levy to Beijing toward the end of the month, senior officials here said today.
The Levy trip has been veiled in secrecy, and the Foreign Ministry declined to confirm either that he would be going to China or that an agreement to create formal ties was imminent.


Steinbrenner Insists He's Not Behind Moves
George Steinbrenner reacted angrily yesterday to speculation that he is again controlling the Yankees and said the team's $30 million plunge into the free-agent market was orchestrated by the partnership, not him, as a way of remaining competitive with the Mets.
In a telephone interview yesterday from his Tampa, Fla., office, Steinbrenner scoffed at reports that suggested that he had been holding back the organization's cash until recently and said it was a partnership decision to remain frugal because the club lost money in 1990 and 1991.


Connoisseur to Be Merged Into a Sister Publication
Abandoning plans to remake Connoisseur magazine from a fine-arts publication into a chronicle of popular culture, Hearst Magazines announced yesterday that it would merge the monthly into another of its titles, Town &amp; Country, after Connoisseur's February issue.
Gael Love, the editor in chief who was brought in to change the 91-year-old magazine, expressed surprise at the decision.


Russian Actor Tells Of Chaotic Freedom In Russian Theater
There are easier things than being an actor in Russia these days, even if you're one of the country's superstars.
Russian film makers go begging for financing.
Theater companies can't locate the essentials for costumes and props.
Finding even a loaf of bread can be difficult.
Audiences dwindle as citizens become increasingly distracted by the hunt for necessities.
And some of the best playwrights, shell-shocked by political and social upheaval, won't write new works until they regain their artistic bearings.
"But there is one wonderful thing -- we are free," said Vitaly Mefodiyevich Solomin, a Russian stage and film star who will perform at the Circle in the Square Theater on Broadway on Saturday night.
"All the constraints and hardships have forced us to be more creative. And at the end of all of this, I think we will have reinvented our theater."


Palestinian Delegates Leave for Third Round of Peace Talks in Washington


Cuomo Offers Plan to Stimulate Recovery in New York Economy
In a State of the State address that mixed exhortation and confrontation, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo pledged today to help lift New York out of the grim hold of the recession and challenged lawmakers to undertake major improvements in the way the state manages its own finances.
The centerpiece of the Governor's recovery program was his call for an $800 million bond act that he said would spur construction projects across the state and create thousands of jobs.
The proposal would not go before the voters until November, a fact bemoaned by some lawmakers today even as they praised the concept.


Review/City Ballet; Balanchine's Laconic Titles and Eloquent Dances
George Balanchine wanted movement to speak more eloquently than words.
No wonder that he was verbally reticent about his choreographic intentions.
His disdain of fancy language even affected his choice of titles.
Take "Symphony in C," which the New York City Ballet presented on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater as part of its first repertory program since "The Nutcracker." When "Symphony in C" received its world premiere by the Paris Opera Ballet in 1947, it was called "Le Palais de Cristal." A year later, however, when Ballet Society, the City Ballet's predecessor, introduced it to New York, its title was changed to that of its score by Bizet.


Teen-Agers' Inner Sanctums, Where Many Worlds Collide
A COUPLE of years ago, a photographer named Adrienne Salinger began studying the faces of teen-agers in shopping malls, movie lines and fast-food restaurants around Syracuse.
"I'd approach interesting-looking kids and ask if I could photograph them in their bedrooms," she said.
"But they had to promise not to clean the rooms."
Funny, said the teen-agers, we were just about to clean our rooms.
Oh well, anything for art.


Graduates March Down Aisle Into Job Nightmare
SAN FRANCISCO, Jan. 8 --
Lauren Bolfango, a recent law school graduate, works 37 1/2 hours a week researching cases, writing pleas and motions and doing other standard tasks of a new associate in a small law firm here.
What sets her apart is that she does the work without charge, after losing hope that her search for employment would ever produce a real job and deciding that volunteering in her chosen profession was better than being unemployed.


Bush Collapses at State Dinner With the Japanese
President Bush fell suddenly ill and collapsed at a state dinner being given for him Wednesday night at the home of the Japanese Prime Minister.Today, Mr.
Bush appeared for photographers, looking tired but cheerful, and apologized for the alarm his collapse had caused.
Mr.
Bush's spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said on Wednesday night, after the attack, that Mr.
Bush had the kind of gastroenteritis commonly known as intestinal flu, but insisted nonetheless that he was "feeling fine." Under questioning, he acknowledged that Mr.
Bush had thrown up at his seat just before collapsing and had been in what he called "a faint condition."


Philharmonic to Dedicate Concerts to AIDS Awareness


American Airlines' New Class
In an effort to extend a concept long familiar on international flights, American Airlines said yesterday that on Feb. 4 it would begin offering business-class service on flights between New York and Los Angeles.
It appeared that the move was made at least partly to make more room in first class and that it would come at the expense of passengers with frequent-flier miles who wished to upgrade their tickets.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
SHE had never felt that close to her father, had never really felt accepted by him.
The last time she visited him in the hospital where he lay dying, he asked her for a drink of water.
When she brought it, he whispered his thanks.
"She feels that the 'thank you' wasn't just for that cup of water," said Dr.
Andrew E. Scharlach, a professor of aging at the University of California at Berkeley who has been studying several hundred middle-aged people, including this woman, who have experienced the death of one or both parents.


Christmas Tree's Fate: Helping Life as Mulch
Tossing out old Christmas trees on garbage day is a waste of potentially rich, fragrant mulch for the garden.
For the last three years, the New York City Department of Sanitation has chipped Christmas trees, but lack of funds canceled this year's program.
The Green Guerillas, a nonprofit group that helps urban gardeners, is helping to fill the void.


In Setback for Administration, Japan Gives No Aid on Supercollider
President Bush will return to the United States this week with no financial commitment from Japan for the giant $8.4 billion superconducting supercollider in Texas, raising new doubts about the project's future.
Obtaining a billion dollars or more for the 52-mile-long particle accelerator, one of the United States' largest and most expensive science experiments, was among the Bush Administration's top priorities for the trip.
The project is designed to hurl protons together at far greater energies than have ever been achieved to answer basic questions about the forces of nature.


McCann Is Awarded Account by Safeway
After a six-month review, Safeway Inc., Oakland, Calif., yesterday awarded its $35 million advertising accounts to McCann-Erickson Worldwide, San Francisco and New York.
The other finalist was J. Walter Thompson, San Francisco and New York.
The company's advertising had previously been handled on a regional basis by McCann and five other agencies: DDB Needham Worldwide, Denver; Ketchum Advertising, San Francisco; Richardson Strang Engl, Portland, Ore.; Stanton Bondo &amp; Company, Seattle, and a McCann affiliate, Philips-Ramsey, Phoenix.


Heavy Snowfall Buries Parts of Colorado


L.I. Man Who Fled Chain Gang Is Told to Go Back to Alabama
A Suffolk County man who fled from an Alabama chain gang 28 years ago will have to return to Alabama and serve the last 19 years of his 21-year sentence for robbery, a New York State judge has ruled.
The lawyer for James Harris, who has been living in Brentwood, L.I., since his escape from Alabama, said he would appeal the ruling as far as he had to.
"This case has an absolute right to be carried to the Supreme Court," said the lawyer, John Ray.
Mr.
Harris is free pending the appeal.


Missimer &amp; Associates Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Democracy Is a System, Not a Man
A sad comedy of role reversals is being played out in Georgia, illustrating how difficult it is going to be to create working democracies in the former Soviet republics, especially with leaders whose pasts give little clue as to whether they will turn out to be democrats or tyrants.


Welcome, Democracy
Finally, 11 years after the New York Civil Liberties Union went to court to force democracy on New York's form of city government, the new City Council is making its debut.
When it met for the first time yesterday it had 51 members instead of 35, more power, more responsibility, more diversity, more independence.
That doesn't mean it will also be more competent.
The Council's record suggests it is far from prepared to play its revised role effectively.


Evidence Grows Stronger for Planets Orbiting an Exploded Star
Astronomers have found what they think will prove to be the first definitive evidence of planets orbiting a star other than the Sun.
By the precise timing of fluctuations in natural radio signals, the American astronomers have inferred that two and possibly three objects are circling the dense spinning remnant of an exploded star, known as a neutron star or pulsar.
Each of the objects appears to have three times the mass of Earth, to be similar in density and composition to Earth or Venus and to be closer to the star than Earth is to the Sun.


Woolworth Cuts Back On Stores
Facing a persistently weak economy, the Woolworth Corporation said yesterday that it planned to close, sell or reformat 900 of its 6,500 stores in the United States during the next 18 months.
Woolworth, which over its 113 years turned to selling clothes, shoes and sporting equipment after starting out as a simple variety store, said that half the closed stores would be reopened as faster-growing types of Woolworth stores.
The company said that less than half of the 10,000 workers at the stores would lose their jobs.


Intech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 6


Mr. Cuomo's Sobering Speech
Even Gov.
Mario Cuomo's soaring rhetorical skills were not enough to lift his State of the State address above the depths of a national recession.
The New York Governor complained about weak national policies, restated his commitment to the needy and proposed limited programs to help the state.
With the economy sagging and a state budget gap that could reach $4.5 billion in the next fiscal year, the speech was inevitably sobering.
Mr.
Cuomo must fill in the blanks when he presents his budget later this month.
He says he will cut Medicaid and welfare by $1 billion.
How?
He also wants to create jobs through an $800 million bond issue for construction.
Would that add too much debt to deficit-ridden New York?


Market Place; S.E.C.'s Analysis Of Nov. 15 Plunge
THE Securities and Exchange Commission, in a preliminary report, has concluded that varieties of program trading played a large role in the abrupt decline of the stock market on Nov. 15, when the Dow Jones industrial average fell 120 points.
The report said a number of Wall Street firms, which were not identified, had in essence bet on higher stock prices, and were forced to scramble for cover when prices began to fall.
In effect, the report pointed the finger at a strategy similar to portfolio insurance, which was a leading factor in worsening the Oct. 19, 1987, market crash, when the Dow fell 508 points.


CHRONICLE
One way to take the temperature of the times is to chart the career of ADRIANA MNUCHIN.
In the 1970's, she established the store Tennis Lady, which became a chain of 21 tennis-fashion stores in the United States and Canada.
In the 1980's, she established Cashmere-Cashmere, a group of four stores that sell cashmere designs.
In March, she and her husband, ROBERT MNUCHIN, will open an inn in Washington, Conn.


Vote Is Stalled On Auto Race
A final vote by New York City on plans for an Indy-car race on the streets of lower Manhattan was delayed yesterday over unresolved details.
The Franchise and Concession Review Committee, meeting at City Hall, delayed a vote because of financial and sponsorship issues.
Of the two, the former appears less troublesome.


At Feel-Good Event, Most Felt Rotten BYL&gt;By CALVIN SIMS
State of the State speeches are usually occasions when legislators smile, shake hands, applaud the Governor wildly or politely depending on their party and otherwise take a bath of good feelings, whether they feel good or not.
But it is a measure of the frayed mood of officials here that the pretense this year not only faded but gave way about 40 minutes into Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's speech to a shouting match between Mr.
Cuomo and an Assemblyman from his own party and hometown.


Snow at Your Fingertips, No Mittens Required
SNOW globes -- souvenirs filled with water and falling "snow" -- seem to be gaining new status as collectibles.
In 1990 they were the subject of "Snowdomes," written by Nancy McMichael and published by Abbeville Press.
Now they're in a show.
"Snowbound: The Enduring Magic of Snow Globes" is an exhibition of 66 old globes and 23 new ones by eight American artists.
It is at the John Michael Kohler Arts Center in Sheboygan, Wis., through Feb. 2.


Grants Open Doors for Nuclear Waste
Lured by lucrative grants, seven communities around the country have notified the Government that they are interested in becoming the site of a multibillion-dollar warehouse to store thousands of tons of high-level nuclear wastes, the Department of Energy said today.
But the notifications by the communities, among them five Indian tribes, have also stirred political dissension and raised questions about whether the Government is taking advantage of hard economic times and rural poverty to gain a site for some of the nation's most dangerous industrial wastes.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Palm Beach, Fla., priced $157.9 million in refunding general obligation bonds through Merrill Lynch to yield 6.25 percent for the 2007 maturity, with a 6.20 percent coupon.
Since the issue is insured, the bonds carry AAA rating.
Ratings  *
Questar Pipeline Co. had its rating on senior unsecured debt rating lowered by Standard &amp; Poor's to A from A+.
The rating service cited the company's aggressive spending aimed at access to new but highly competitive markets in California and the Midwest.


Institutions Inject Cash Into Money Funds
The inflow of cash into tax-exempt and taxable money market funds in the last week was huge, IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report said yesterday.
Walter S. Frank, the publication's chief economist, said the amount of money flowing into the taxables was the highest been since the money funds were begun in the 1970's.


To Skate or Not to Skate Is Question for Eldredge
Todd Eldredge, the leading American male figure skater for the last two years, has been advised by his doctor to withdraw from the national championships this week because of an injury in his lower back.
But in a telephone conversation he had today with Eldredge, his parents and his coach, Dr.
Arthur Pappas of Worcester, Mass., also told the skater that with proper rest, he would probably be sound enough to perform successfully in the Albertville Olympics next month.


For Young Readers, Picasso Not Bunnies
Call me Max.
Max the dreamer.
Max the poet.
Max the dog.
My dream is to live in Paris.
To live in Paris and be a poet . . .
But do you think it is easy for a dog to pack a small brown suitcase, put on a beret, and hop on a plane?
Ha!
Plane tickets cost money.
Mazuma, shekels, semolians.
I have none.
Because no one wants to buy my book.
I'm flat broke.
Bone dry.
But someday, fat families and skinny families around the world will be reading my poems.
And laughing, and crying.
I feel it in my bones.
I want to say, before anything, that dreams are very important. -- "Max Makes a Million," Viking, 1990


Dinkins Plan for Funds
The Dinkins administration has proposed a new way of raising $1 billion in emergency cash from the Municipal Assistance Corporation.
Mayor Dinkins and the corporation's head, Felix G. Rohatyn, discussed the plan and appeared to take a big step toward resolving their fiscal differences.
Article, page B8.


At Long Island Park, Humans + Food = a Crowd of Fowl


Planned Parenthood Chief Resigns to Be TV Host
Faye Wattleton, who moved Planned Parenthood squarely into the center of the abortion debate in her 14 years as president, announced yesterday that she was resigning from the group to become host of a television show.
Ms.
Wattleton, 48 years old, whose impassioned commitment to reproductive freedoms made her the nation's best-known advocate for abortion rights during her 14 years as president of Planned Parenthood, said she planned to be the host of a daytime television talk show dealing with women's issues.


New Crop Of Books For Sundry Obsessions
WITH the outdoor garden now quiet, there's time to fill the indoor bookshelf.
And there are more than enough new volumes to feed nearly every horticultural obsession.
Consider the passion for perennials.
Then consider THE RANDOM HOUSE BOOK OF PERENNIALS (Random House; paper, $25 each).
This two-volume set, with 5,000 color photographs, is part of a series by Roger Phillips and Martyn Rix, two Englishmen determined to show more species than any gardener can hope to encounter in a lifetime.


CSX Plans Job Cuts, Big Charge
The CSX Corporation, the railroad and shipping company, said yesterday that it would take a $755 million charge against its fourth-quarter earnings, largely to cover the costs of an employee-reduction program.
The company, based in Richmond, said it would also take a charge of $318 million in the period to cover the cost of changes in its accounting procedures for retirement benefits.


Adobe Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
2.00
6.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.70
3.74
6.20
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.73
3.78
6.28
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.40.
6.39
8.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.38
7.39
8.45
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.57
8.55
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.65
6.66
7.49
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Lest Terror Be Forgotten
THREE hundred years ago in Salem, Mass., 14 women and 6 men, accused of being witches, were tried, convicted and executed.
Nineteen were hanged.
One was crushed by stones.
Last summer, the Salem Witch Trials Tercentenary Committee sponsored a design competition for a memorial to the 20 that would serve as a cautionary reminder of the hysteria that led to their deaths.
The site is the Charter Street Cemetery in Salem, where some of the judges who presided over the trials are buried, but none of the victims.


At Feel-Good Event, Most Felt Rotten
State of the State speeches are usually occasions when legislators smile, shake hands, applaud the Governor wildly or politely depending on their party and otherwise take a bath of good feelings, whether they feel good or not.
But it is a measure of the frayed mood of officials here that the pretense this year not only faded but gave way about 40 minutes into Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's speech to a shouting match between Mr.
Cuomo and an Assemblyman from his own party and hometown.


Inspiration Is Only a Room Away
FOUR times a year, the fashion designer Donna Karan dispatches her models down the runway wearing jewelry designed by Robert Lee Morris.
The belts and bracelets they wear -- indeed many belts and bracelets that Jodie Foster, Cher, Sonia Braga, Madonna and Axl Rose wear -- are largely inspired by the hinges and handles and sinewy vases in Mr.
Morris's Manhattan home.


Catherine Viviano, 92, Art Dealer and Expert
Catherine Viviano, an art dealer and consultant in Manhattan for many years, died on Tuesday at Hunterdon Medical Center in Flemington, N.J.
She was 92 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Little York, N.J.
She died of a stroke, said her sister Margaret, of Manhattan.


I.B.M. Cuts Some P.C. Prices
I.B.M. announced price reductions yesterday of from 10 to 16 percent on some of its most advanced personal computers.
The reductions appeared to be part of a broader effort by the world's biggest computer manufacturer to make its Personal System-2 computers more competitive with cheaper rivals.


Victim of Bias Attack, 14, Wrestles With His Anger
In the basement apartment of a beige stucco house in the Bronx, a 14-year-old boy has been cloistered away for three days, wrestling with the fear and anger left by four young white men who attacked him and his sister, squirting them with white paint and yelling racial epithets.
The fear is the least of his worries.
He can cope with that, the shy but proud youth said yesterday.
But what weighs in his heart the heaviest, in spite of what his mother and his own mind tell him, is a wave of anger he says he feels toward an entire race of people since the Monday morning attack.


Accounts
*
Illy Caffe S.p.A., Trieste, Italy, to Bozell Testa Pella Rossetti, Milan, for its $6 million Illy Caffe brand of espresso.


Panthers' Morningstar Wows Syracuse Now
Five years ago, Bernie Fine, the Syracuse assistant coach, received a homemade videotape of a tall, semi-awkward player from the state of Washington who wanted to become an Orangeman.
But Syracuse was recruiting the Billy Owenses and Derrick Colemans of the basketball world and figured that if it hadn't heard of Darren Morningstar, it probably didn't need him.
"I was a naive young man and my dad was crazy too," Morningstar recalled this evening.
"He had me as the next coming of Larry Bird. Bernie Fine wrote me a nice friendly letter back saying they didn't think they could use me in their program."


Ana I. Astor, 73, Dies; Worked as a Designer
Ana Inez Astor, the former wife of Sir John Jacob Astor, died Friday at her home in London.
She was 73 years old.
Her family said she had died of natural causes but did not name a specific ailment.


More Corporate Issues Are Offered
New corporate debt securities continued to stream into the credit markets yesterday, with more than $4.5 billion worth of new issues priced.
The heavy volume came just a day after $2.5 billion worth of corporate bonds were priced, and prompted some traders and investment bankers to predict that $10 billion in new issues would be sold this week.


Saints Who Helped Out At Home
IN 19th-century Puerto Rico, folk artists called santeros carved religious images from wood.
An exhibition of 175 of the carvings, "Santos de Palo: The Household Saints of Puerto Rico," opened on Tuesday at the Museum of American Folk Art/ Eva and Morris Feld Gallery at Lincoln Square.
Santos, blessed by priests, were used mainly in rural areas, where there were few churches.
"If they weren't blessed, they couldn't be used to make miracles," said Alan Moss Reveron, a Manhattan dealer of 20th-century decorative arts whose santos make up the show.
He has more than 1,200 of them.


A Nonprofit Book House Outside the Mainstream
Andre Schiffrin, who was removed as managing director and editor in chief of Pantheon two years ago amid a controversy over its financial health and editorial direction, announced yesterday that he was starting an independent, nonprofit publishing house.
The New Press, which Mr.
Schiffrin will head as director and editor in chief, is being financed by more than a dozen philanthropic organizations, including the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, the Rockefeller Brothers Fund and the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts Inc.


BRIEFS
*
Amoco Production Co., Chicago, a unit of Amoco Corp., said its subsidiary, Amoco Trinidad Oil Co., would spend up to $300 million in the next 10 years to meet commitments of a new gas supply contract with National Gas of Trinidad and Tobago. *
California Federal Bank, Los Angeles, a unit of Calfed Inc., agreed to sell the deposits of its two Sacramento, Calif., branches to Sacramento Savings Bank.
Terms were not disclosed.


Review/Television; Reporting That Follows in Many Footsteps
Despite the presence of Ed Bradley, "Street Stories," the latest entry from CBS News, shows none of the ambition and little of the punch of "60 Minutes." It is closer to "48 Hours," which inspired it, but the new program does not try for the many-sided reporting of "48 Hours" at its occasional best.
This judgment, based on the first of four specials, to be shown tonight at 9 on Channel 2, may be premature, but for now that's all there is.
Three of the opening program's four segments were available for review, and all have to do with crime: drunken driving in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., gay-bashing in Houston, and the performance of a tough judge in Chattanooga, Tenn.
If you feel you've been here before, you've been watching too much television.
The reporters are Bernard Goldberg and Harold Dow, "48 Hours" regulars, and Bob McKeown.
Mr.
Bradley's come-on role of host is as undemanding as Dan Rather's on "48 Hours."


Riggs National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


16-Year-Old Amateur To Play in Tour Event
ELDRICK (TIGER) WOODS, the reigning United States Junior Amateur champion, was given a sponsor's exemption yesterday to play in the Nissan Los Angeles Open next month, which would make him the youngest player to compete in a regular PGA Tour event.
Woods, a sophomore at Western High School in Anaheim, Calif., will be 16 years 1 month 28 days old when the Los Angeles tournament begins on Feb. 27.
According to the PGA Tour, the youngest player to have competed in an official tour event was BOB MAY, who was 16 years 3 months 18 days old when he played in the 1985 Los Angeles Open.


Drew Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


New Campaigns
*
In the first change in its advertising in 13 years, Godiva Chocolatier Inc., New York, is introducing a series of print advertisements that pitch its confections as ideal for everyday indulgence, not just for special occasions.
One ad calls the eating of a milk chocolate truffle a way to experience "your own little moment in heaven." Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, New York, created the campaign.


Saved by the Grace of Barbara Bush
The 25th Amendment to the Constitution specifies that the Vice President shall assume the duties of the President whenever the Chief Executive is unable to carry out his duties.
Of course, that was written before Barbara Bush came to the White House.
Mrs.
Bush moved in typically unruffled fashion when her husband, George, fell ill on Wednesday night, and took up his ceremonial duties at a dinner being held in the President's honor by Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.


N.C.A.A. Adopts Tougher Academic Standards for Eligibility
Delegates to the annual National Collegiate Athletic Association Convention continued adopting stronger academic standards on the aging heels of Proposition 48, including a significant and predictably controversial change today that will require incoming athletes to have a higher grade-point average in core academic classes.
Other changes include a toughened requirement that athletes make progress toward a degree and an increase in the number of core-course credits taken by high school students from 11 to 13.
The additional subjects must be in English, mathematics or natural or physical science.


Watchdog Group for Children's TV to Disband
Action for Children's Television, the national watchdog group that promotes quality television programming for children, will disband this year to allow organizations with larger memberships to carry on the cause, the group's president said today.
The leader, Peggy Charren, said ACT was dissolving because its major goal was achieved last year with Congressional passage of the 1990 Children's Television Act.
The group was created in 1968 by three Newton, Mass., housewives.


BBDO Team Moves to Y.&amp; R.
An award-winning creative team at BBDO New York, responsible for campaigns including the Ray Charles "blind" taste test for Diet Pepsi and the mishap-filled ads for Du Pont Stainmaster carpets, has joined Young &amp; Rubicam New York.
David Harner, 32 years old, and David Johnson, 42, have been named executive vice presidents and creative directors at Y. &amp; R. At BBDO, they were, respectively, a vice president-associate creative director and a senior vice president-associate creative director.


Cabot Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Presenting '15 Best Ideas' For Ads That Work Better
A REPORT on how advertisers can make their ads work better -- one of the most discussed issues in the business -- contains several recommendations that are likely to be controversial.
The report, called "The 15 Best Ideas for Improving Media and Marketing Effectiveness in 1992," is to be released next week by Myers Marketing and Research, a Parsippany, N.J., advertising and marketing consulting firm perhaps best known for its annual forecasts of growth in ad spending.
The ideas were contributed by some of the nation's largest advertisers, and an advance copy was made available by the consulting firm's president, Jack Myers.


Chief Warns of Corruption In Drug Unit
Citing two recent cases in which narcotics officers were accused of lying to strengthen cases and to obtain arrest warrants, the New York City Police Department's chief corruption fighter warned yesterday that "there are very serious problems" in a special narcotics bureau.
In an unsolicited report to Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown last month, the Chief of Inspectional Services, Daniel F. Sullivan, urged the Commissioner to tighten supervision at the bureau and to shake up how the bureau supervised drug cases and deters corruption and misconduct.


Head of Minolta in U.S. Gives Up President's Job
After 22 years as the head of the American subsidiary of the Minolta Camera Company, Sadahei Kusumoto is finally going to be able to concentrate on the part of the job he likes best: representing Minolta to the outside world.
Mr.
Kusumoto, who is currently president and chief executive of the Minolta Corporation, will become chairman and chief executive on Jan. 25, turning over the post of president to Osamu Kanaya, who will also be named chief operating officer.


If Unborn Have Rights, Those Must Be Equal; Let It Stand
To the Editor:
Re "The Looming Abortion Showdown," (editorial, Dec. 18): Thanks for calling the 1973 Roe v.
Wade ruling by the Supreme Court "one of the Court's noblest precedents." The justices should remember the judicial principal of "stare decisis," the policy of not disturbing a settled point of law.
Roe has been around almost 19 years.
KATHERINE W. DUBOIS  Gwynedd, Pa., Dec. 21, 1991


Helen of Troy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


People
*
Nicholas F. Maiale has been named president, international, at Medicus Intercon International, New York.
He had previously been executive vice president, international. *
Jack Wheaton has been named to the new position of senior vice president and director of account service at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, New York.
He previously was a senior vice president and group account director at the now-defunct Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver.


Synovus Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Andrew Marton, 83, a Director Of Films Featuring Action Scenes
Andrew Marton, a film director who specialized in action scenes like the chariot race in the 1959 "Ben Hur," died on Tuesday at St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 83 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of pneumonia, said his sister, Elisabeth, of New York City.


Volt Information Sciences Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


The Freshman Is Home. Bi-zarre!
THE way Miryom Kass describes her life these days, her house has suddenly turned into a gigantic refrigerator, and her mission is to shovel food into it as fast as she can.
It is a sure sign that her son, the Freshman, is home for semester break.
"The food," Mrs.
Kass said with a deep sigh.
"And the dishes. You would think he was starving the whole semester."
Nothing unusual is going on in the Kass household in Brooklyn; just the upheaval that accompanies a college student's first extended visit home.
Many have been home since mid-December and are going back to school this week and next.


Presidential Wars Behind Him, Cuomo Attacks His Legislative Foes
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo used his 10th State of the State address today to declare to both the Legislature and the state that he is no longer the political hostage of his Presidential ambitions.
Liberated of any need to position himself toward the right or to coax the Legislature into consensus, Mr.
Cuomo cast himself as a strong protector of the social services safety net and as a populist crusader against legislative intransigence.


Pop and Jazz in Review
David Staller The Algonquin Hotel 59 West 44th Street Through Feb. 15
David Staller belongs to a nearly vanished tradition of American male stage performers who model themselves more on English gentlemen than on American frontiersmen.
But the dandified rogue image he cultivates, which recalls certain roles played by Laurence Olivier and Michael York, fits perfectly the spirit of his ambitious cabaret show, "Noel and Cole." The celebration of the songs of Noel Coward and Cole Porter opened a five-week engagement at the Algonquin Hotel's Oak Room on Tuesday evening.


Making a Wish List, Cutting It Twice
JANUARY for gardeners is, of course, catalogue time.
As postal carriers trudge up to the mailbox daily to unburden themselves of the new crop from mail-order nurseries across the land, people who are yearning for another growing season begin to sharpen their pencils and start making out lists.
The lists generally have to be shortened drastically, as they exceed the capacity of most checking accounts and most gardens.
Here's part of my own list, based not on glowing descriptions in catalogues but on plants that caught my eye last year.


INSIDE
A Step Toward Restoring  Haiti's Ousted Leader
Diplomats say Haiti's deposed President has endorsed the nomination of a leading political rival as Prime Minister in a compromise arrangement that would eventually bring about his return from exile.
Page A3.
Woolworth Closing Stores
The Woolworth Corporation said it planned to close, sell or reformat 900 of its 6,500 stores.
Page D1.
Signs of Distant Planets
Astronomers say they may have the first definitive evidence of planets orbiting a distant star.
Page A14.
Israel-China Ties Expected
Israel and China are expected to establish relations at a meeting in Beijing, Israeli officials said.
Page A3.
Danger Signs of Corruption
A New York police chief says accusations that officers lied indicate trouble in a narcotics unit.
Page B1.
Yes, in Their Backyard
The willingness of some rural communities to become nuclear storage sites has led to bitter strife.
Page A14.


Quayle Opens Battle of New Hampshire
Bumping along in a bus called Victory II, Vice President Dan Quayle stumped through New Hampshire today as point man in the White House's battle to stop the conservative commentator Patrick J. Buchanan from doing well enough in the first Presidential primary to embarrass President Bush.
At shopping malls, factories, schools and civic centers in the first set of 13 cities and towns that he is touring today and Thursday, part of the Vice President's mission was clearly to try to dispel a question that is being weighed by this state's voters and vexing the President's re-election team: who is the true Republican conservative, Mr.
Bush or Mr.
Buchanan?


Sun Television &amp; Appliances Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


30's Styles for 90's Walls
IN the mid-1930's, Adelaide Brandt was a student at the Chicago Art Institute, sketching fashion designs.
In November, her drawings were transformed into "Haute Couture," a hand-printed wallpaper by Schumacher, a New York company that makes fabrics and wallpaper.
The sketches had hung for decades in an office at Brandt's, a Phoenix wallpaper company founded by Mrs.
Brandt's family.
In 1985, they caught the eye of John Quilter, a Schumacher vice president paying a sales call.


F.B.I. to Shift From Cold War to Crime War
In a personnel shake-up that reflects the end of the cold war, the Federal Bureau of Investigation plans to reassign several hundred agents from internal security investigations to combat serious crime and gang violence, officials in the Bush Administration said today.
Although the move is expected to involved fewer than 300 agents in a force of about 10,000, the shift is symbolically dramatic, representing a downgrading of counter-espionage efforts in favor of a more intensive attack on violent crime, particularly gang violence.
"Call it a peace dividend," one official said.


Lions' Fontes Is No Fan of Early Check-In Rule
Having no experience with this stage of the playoffs, the Detroit Lions are learning about some of the unpleasant demands that come with preparing for a National Conference championship game.
One major example is the rule that requires the visiting team in the championship game to be in the home team's city for two nights before the game.
As a result the Lions must arrive in Washington on Friday for Sunday's game against the favored Redskins at R.F.K.
Stadium.


Holyfield-Foreman II: Tyson Is a Snag
Never mind that it's a new year.
For boxing, it's business as usual.
In other words, more confounding organizational politics.
The plans of the promoter, Dan Duva, to have Evander Holyfield defend his undisputed heavyweight title against George Foreman on March 20 at Caesars Palace have hit a snag.


EXECUTIVES
*
Bay View Federal Bank, San Mateo, Calif., a unit of Bay View Capital Corp., named John E. Brubaker senior executive vice president and chief operating officer. *
Bic Corp., Milford, Conn., a maker of pens, razors and lighters, named its chief executive, Bruno Bich, to the additional post of chairman, replacing his father, Marcel Bich.
Raymond F. Winters became president, a title formerly held by Bruno Bich, and chief operating officer.
Marcel Bich remains chairman and president of the parent Societe Bic S.A. of France.


Brothers Held In Man's Death In Brooklyn
A sticker reading "We Go to Sunday School" adorns the scuffed metal door of the housing project apartment where Daniel Velasquez, 13 years old, and his brother Carlos, 15, live with their family.
But last Sunday, according to the police, the teen-age brothers were far from their Bronx home at 2 in the morning.
In fact, the police said, they were in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn, robbing a Soviet immigrant couple before firing a single shot to the husband's head that left him dead on the pavement.


Coltec Planning Initial Offering
Coltec Industries announced a plan to reduce its huge debt with a $500 million initial public stock offering and a $450 million bond sale.
The New York-based concern, a privately owned maker of aerospace, automotive and industrial products and previous owner of Colt Firearms, filed a proposal on Tuesday to sell 38.5 million shares of common stock, a 60 percent stake, for an estimated $14 a share.


Banponce Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


If Unborn Have Rights, Those Must Be Equal; Pro- and Anti-Choice
To the Editor:
The problem I have with "The Looming Abortion Showdown" (editorial, Dec. 18) is your use of the term "pro-life."


Lie Detector for Howe
STEVE HOWE, the Yankee relief pitcher who was arrested on cocaine-related charges last month, took a lie-detector test at his own request from a Federal drug agent in Helena, Mont.
"It's a way of helping everyone in the Government understand who he is," said STEVE NARDI, one of Howe's attorneys.
"He's showing his good-faith effort."


Sports of The Times; The Hall's Mr. Highest Percentage
Tom Seaver was up on a small platform at the New York Sheraton, talking about what the Baseball Hall of Fame meant to him.
"My children," he said, "will be able to take their children to the Hall of Fame and say: 'There's your grandfather. In his time, he was pretty good at what he did.' "


Many Electronics Makers Avoid Recession's Brunt
As the consumer electronics industry meets today at a mammoth semiannual show here, the nation's purveyors of color television sets, videocassette recorders, car stereos and cellular telephones can look back at 1991 as a year in which they escaped the worst effects of the recession.
Sales actually rose.
Figures released this week by the Electronic Industries Association, the consumer electronics trade group, show that factory sales totaled a record $33.9 billion, up 2.9 percent from the year before.
Since electronics prices were virtually unchanged, or in some cases lower than a year earlier, inflation-adjusted sales rose by more than 3 percent.


Police Captain Under Inquiry in Crush
An internal New York City Police Department investigation has been opened into the conduct of the police captain at the fatal City College basketball game after a college administrator said the captain had resisted his appeals for help for more than five minutes before finally calling an ambulance.
Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown announced the investigation by the internal affairs division, which handles charges of misconduct by individual officers, at a news conference yesterday.
He also said he had seen no evidence that the police had acted improperly in not calling the Fire Department for help, as some Fire Department officials have asserted.


If Unborn Have Rights, Those Must Be Equal
To the Editor:
With regard to President Bush and his desire to see the Supreme Court overturn Roe v.
Wade, what is truly amazing about "The Looming Abortion Showdown" (editorial, Dec. 18) is that the President's opposition has not yet exposed the untenable ideology that underlies his position.
I agree with you that women should not wait until Roe is reversed before they "vindicate their rights through the political process." But more important, Mr.
Bush's political fence straddling on this issue should be shown for what it is.


Florio's Education Panel Offers Many Changes, at a Hefty Price
An educational study commission appointed by Gov.
Jim Florio recommended a host of costly changes in the state's school system today, including adding 40 days to the school year and providing preschool to every 3- and 4-year-old in the state.
But the panel offered no suggestions about how to pay for them.
The co-chairmen of the Governor's Quality Education Commission conceded that political and economic realities would make such changes extremely difficult, but dismissed suggestions that the recommendations were too visionary to come to pass.


Politics Reign at Spotted Owl Hearing
For only the third time in history the Cabinet-level committee known as the "God squad" began deliberations today on whether certain economic activities of man are more important than the potential extinction of an animal species.
But the hearings here by the panel, the Endangered Species Committee, concerning the northern spotted owl were only a few minutes old when it became dominated by internal conflicts of the Bush Administration over environmental policies.


Barkley Charges Filed
Philadelphia 76ers forward CHARLES BARKLEY was charged yesterday with misdemeanor battery and disorderly conduct for breaking a Milwaukee man's nose outside a bar last month.
Barkley, who met on Tuesday with MICHAEL STEINHAFEL, a Milwaukee County assistant District Attorney, said he was provoked on Dec. 22 into punching JAMES R. McCARTHY, who needed seven stitches. (AP)


Contributions To Neediest Aid Homeless
"The other day as our 4-year-old was festooning the living room, he suddenly stopped to ask, 'Do homeless people have any Christmas decorations?' " Anna Mayer of Dobbs Ferry wrote in a note with her family's $100 contribution to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"When I told him I thought most homeless people didn't, he thought for a minute. Then he ran to the hallway where he had hung his favorite, most colorful ornament. 'Let's send them this one,' he said. He put it gently into a shoe box. Back in the living room he picked up another ornament to put into the shoe box. 'Maybe they would like to have two,' he said. Our family's donation is in honor of Daniel and his spirit of giving."


Algerian Officials Debating Cancellation of Vote
A heated debate is going on among senior members of the Government over whether President Chadli Benjedid should interrupt the democratic process that has led to a triumph of Islamic fundamentalists in the first free elections for Parliament in this country.
Senior Government officials and some foreign diplomats say debate is taking place just as the Islamic Salvation Front, the main opposition party, reported today that Algerian Army and security forces were being deployed across the country.
The move raised fears of army interference that could prevent fundamentalists from winning a majority of in Parliament in run-off elections scheduled for Jan. 16.


Separating the Taj Mahal From Legend
To the Editor:
You alert the world to the "irreversible toll that may be taking place on this symbol of India," the Taj Mahal, in your "Agra Journal" (Dec. 6).
Unfortunately, you call the building complex "one of the most remarkable monuments of Mogul architecture" and "the tomb of Shah Jahan's beloved Mumtaz Mahal."


Energy Company Executive To Head JWP's Operations
David L. Sokol has been named president and chief operating officer of JWP Inc., the one-time water utility that has developed into a multinational technical services company.
He will report to Andrew T. Dwyer, who relinquishes the title of president but remains chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Sokol, 35, had been chief executive of the California Energy Company, a San Francisco-based developer and operator of geothermal electric energy projects.
Before that he was chief executive of Ogden Projects, a subsidiary of the Ogden Corporation.


Sympathy for the Outsider
Pete Rose, who wasn't on the official ballot, was not ignored in the election for the Baseball Hall of Fame, garnering 41 write-in votes and provoking three blank protest ballots from members of the Baseball Writers Association of America.
And not surprisingly, he was the subject of some discussion at yesterday's news conference introducing Tom Seaver and Rollie Fingers.
"How I feel about Pete Rose and the Hall of Fame depends on which side of the bed I got out of that morning," said Seaver.
"It's that kind of issue. But we live in a country in which we forgive and forget. He's one of the all-time greats, and I hope one day he'll be in Cooperstown, in the spirit of forgiveness."


Ketema Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


'71 Attica Prison Riot Recalled as Jury Prepares to Decide Suit
The 1971 rampage that made the name Attica synonymous with prison violence was vividly recalled today as closing arguments were presented in a landmark case to determine whether state officials were legally responsible for the deaths and injuries.
"The people who were in authority have to be held accountable when things went awry," said Elizabeth Fink, the principal lawyer for 1,281 inmates who filed a civil-liability suit 17 years ago against four New York State officials.
"Throughout the assault, there was a wanton disregard for the rights of the hostages and the prisoners, and the result was that 39 people died and at least 60 others were shot."


Sampras's New Coach
PETE SAMPRAS, the 1990 United States Open champion who is now ranked sixth in the world, has hired TIM GULLIKSON as his full-time coach for 1992.
Sampras split with JOE BRANDI, his coach for the last two years, after his quarterfinal elimination at the 1991 United States Open and originally sought out Gullikson's twin brother, TOM, as Brandi's replacement.
But complications created by Tom Gullikson's coaching contract with the United States Tennis Association precluded an arrangement with Sampras.


Dow falls 0.89 on a Day of Broad Advances
Most stock indexes kept relentlessly setting records yesterday, but blue chips sat this one out, as the Dow Jones industrial average fell a fraction short of Tuesday's high.
The broad rise, in exceptionally heavy trading, came despite weaknesses in some overseas markets and concern over President Bush's health.
The Dow, after trading higher in the afternoon, slipped 0.89 point to finish the session at 3,203.94.


Adding Cedar Luxury
D. W. Woods 61 Greenpoint Avenue, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11222; (212) 694-0250.
A cedar-lined closet may not be considered one of life's necessities.
"But it's a really nice finishing touch," said Marc White, a partner in D. W. Woods, a seven-year-old custom cabinetry company that has installed cedar closets throughout the metropolitan New York area.


Alafirst Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hats Are Off to Blues' Hull As He Extends Scoring Streak
His shots did not seem to travel.
They simply arrived, way ahead of schedule once again, in the rear of the Ranger net.
Brett Hull, the human with an extraterrestrial slap shot, performed his light-speed stick work last night while transporting St.
Louis to a 5-3 victory over the Rangers.
Two slaps and a flick of the wrist meant three Blues' goals, and a Ranger defeat that kept New York locked in a first-place tie with Washington in the Patrick Division.


Critic of Patriot Missile Says It Was 'Almost Total Failure' in War
The most thorough presentation to date of criticism of the Patriot antimissile system's performance in the Persian Gulf war concludes that the system appears to have experienced "an almost total failure to intercept quite primitive attacking missiles."
The charge was immediately and vigorously disputed by Patriot's maker, which said the missile had worked well and cited Army praise of the interceptor's performance.
The Army says the success rate of the Patriot's intercepts was over 80 percent in Saudi Arabia and 50 percent in Israel.


Paine Given $900,000 Fine By Big Board
Paine Webber Inc. was ordered yesterday by the New York Stock Exchange to pay $900,000 in fines for numerous sales and trading violations over several years that led to hundreds of customer complaints and millions of dollars in legal settlements.
Paine Webber, the nation's sixth-largest securities firm, was also censured and asked to complete a thorough review of its sales policies.
The fine was the second largest in the exchange's history, after a $1.3 million penalty against Salomon Brothers last year for diverting customers' funds.


Grammy Short List: Many For a Few
The 34th annual Grammy Awards are shaping up as a battle between Bryan Adams, R.E.M., Bonnie Raitt, Amy Grant and Natalie Cole.
Each was nominated for record of the year and a single, and received between 3 and 6 other nominations in the 78 categories covered by this year's Grammy Awards.
The winners will be named on Feb. 25 during a national CBS telecast.
The nominations were announced yesterday by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences in a news conference at the Apollo Theater.
R.E.M., the band from Athens, Ga., that brought collegiate or alternative rock into the Top 10, received 7 nominations for its 8th album, "Out of Time," and the single "Losing My Religion." The group had never previously been nominated.


Killer Gets Maximum in Death of Gay Man
Standing before the judge's bench in a Queens courtroom yesterday, his shaved head glinting beneath the courtroom lights, Daniel Doyle spoke of the sorrow and regret he said he now felt for stabbing a man to death because he was gay.
But moments later, the brother of Julio Rivera, the 29-year-old Jackson Heights man who was killed by Mr.
Doyle in July 1990, told the judge about to sentence the killer that while he understood Mr.
Doyle's distress, he had no sympathy for him.


At Feel-Good Event, Most Felt Rotten
State of the State speeches are usually occasions when legislators smile, shake hands, applaud the Governor wildly or politely depending on their party and otherwise take a bath of good feelings, whether they feel good or not.
But it is a measure of the frayed mood of officials here that the pretense this year not only faded but gave way about 40 minutes into Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's speech to a shouting match between Mr.
Cuomo and an Assemblyman from his own party and hometown.


Rag Shops Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-10 A PLEDGE IN TOKYO
The United States and Japan pledged to try to lift the world economy from a looming slowdown by adopting budgetary and interest-rate policies to promote faster growth.
It was the first accord to emerge from the meeting between President Bush and Prime Minister Miyazawa in Tokyo.
A1  ILL WITH FLU, BUSH COLLAPSES
President Bush collapsed at a state dinner at the Japanese Prime Minister's residence in Tokyo.
The President's spokesman said he had intestinal flu but that he was "up and about" this morning.
A1  Gastroenteritis often causes sudden and violent stomach upsets.
A8  A wave of sympathy in Japan for the U.S.
President.
A8  SUPERCOLLIDER IN JEOPARDY
President Bush will return home this week with no financial commitment from Japan for an $8.4 billion superconducting supercollider in Texas, raising new doubts about the project's future.
A9  ISRAEL AND CHINA PLAN TIES
Israel and China are expected to establish diplomatic relations during a trip by Foreign Minister David Levy to Beijing toward the end of the month, senior officials said.
A3  ALGERIA WEIGHS CRACKDOWN
Senior members of the Algerian Government are heatedly debating whether President Benjedid should interrupt the democratic process that has led to a triumph of Islamic fundamentalists in the first free elections for Parliament.
A7  OUSTED HAITIAN BACKS RIVAL
Diplomats said Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, had endorsed the nomination of a political rival as Prime Minister, renewing hope for an end to the country's political crisis.
A3  UKRAINE WIDENS CONTROL
The military command in Moscow said its main communications link to 300,000 troops had been lost to Ukrainian military officials who are intent on nationalizing former Soviet units in the republic.
A6  RESIGNATION IN YUGOSLAVIA
The Yugoslav Defense Minister resigned and was temporarily replaced by a more outspoken advocate of the Serbian cause.
The move stirred doubts about the durability of a cease-fire in Croatia.
A6  FAULTING PATRIOT MISSILES
An assessment of the Patriot antimissile system's performance in the Persian Gulf war says that it experienced "an almost total failure to intercept quite primitive attacking missiles." A10  London Journal: Poetry to warm the subway rider's soul.
A4  NATIONAL A14-21, B10-11  THE WHITE HOUSE PRESCRIPTION
The White House chief of staff told a group of A.M.A. executives that the President's election-year proposals to help heal the nation's health care system were likely to include tax credits for the purchase of medical insurance, incentives for people to enroll in group health plans and restrictions on malpractice suits.
A1  WILDER DROPS OUT
The Governor of Virginia withdrew from the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination, citing the demands of running his financially troubled state.
A1  Vice President Quayle stumped in New Hampshire.
B11  THE WHITE-COLLAR BLUES
Many thousands of well-educated young professionals have had the misfortune to begin their working lives in a deteriorating economy that has cut a mean swath through the white-collar work force.
A16  GAIN ON IMPOTENCE REPORTED
Medical reseachers said they had found a physiological explanation for most cases of male impotence.
A1  ANOTHER PLANETARY SYSTEM
Astronomers have found what they think will prove to be the first definitive evidence of planets orbiting a star other than the Sun.
A14  YES, IN THEIR BACKYARD
Lured by the prospect of lucrative grants, seven communities have notified the Government that they are interested in becoming the site of a new warehouse to store thousands of tons of high-level nuclear waste.
But their very willingness has brought accusations that the Government is taking advantage of hard economic times and rural poverty to find a home for some of the nation's most dangerous industrial substances.
A14  Energy Secretary Watkins offered reassurances on Savannah River.
A14  POLITICS AND THE SPOTTED OWL
For only the third time in history, the Cabinet-level Endangered Species Committee began deliberations on whether certain economic activities of man are more important than the potential extinction of an animal species.
But that hearing, concerning the Northern spotted owl, was only a few minutes old when the Administration's internal conflicts on environmental policy took center stage.
A14  Faye Wattleton resigned as president of Planned Parenthood.
A20  A study found growing segregation of Hispanic students.
A15  METROPOLITAN Digest, B1 A BIAS VICTIM'S ANGER
In his Bronx home, a 14-year-old boy has been wrestling with the fear and anger left by four young white men who attacked him and his sister in a racial incident.
The boy says he can cope with fear, but has a harder time with the anger he feels toward all whites since Monday morning.
A1  PLEDGE TO LIFT STATE
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, using a mix of exhortation and confrontation, pledged to lift New York State out of the grim hold of the recession.
A1  Neediest Cases B2  BUSINESS Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-12  The 30's visionary who looked back and saw Santa Fe.
C1  Inspiration only a room away.
C1  A Gardener's World C8  Parent &amp; ChildC12  Arts/Entertainment C13-24  An actor on chaos and freedom in Russia's theater.
C15  Grammy nominations.
C15  NBC and Fox offering their vision of the future.
C15  Dance: City Ballet.
C15  Obituaries D23  Edward F. Carpenter, first headmaster of Harlem Prep  Andrew Marton, film director  Sports B12-18  Baseball: An angry George Steinbrenner.
B13  Basketball: Knicks lose again in Boston.
B13  Nets top Timberwolves.
B14  College: Academic standards toughened.
B13  Column: Anderson on Seaver.
B13  Hockey: Rangers lose to Blues.
B13  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Asian flu.
Cuomo's sobering speech.
Aid, at last, for the republics.
Welcome, democracy.
Letters A22  William Safire: "Strongly condemn." A23  Anthony Lewis: "J.F.K." A23  David K. Shipler: Democracy is a system, not a man.
A23  George H. Smith: God and boy in the Scouts.
A23


A Guest at an Unusual Hotel


Richard Hunt; Puppeteer, 40
Richard Hunt, a puppeteer known for his work on the "Muppet Show," died on Tuesday at Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
He was 40 years old.
He died of H.I.V. complications, his family said.


Lie Detector for Howe
STEVE HOWE, the Yankee relief pitcher who was arrested on cocaine-related charges last month, took a lie-detector test at his own request from a Federal drug agent in Helena, Mont.
"It's a way of helping everyone in the Government understand who he is," said STEVE NARDI, one of Howe's attorneys.
"He's showing his good-faith effort."


Finally, Bucs Rule Out Parcells as No. 1 Man
In a terse statement that sounded like a spanking, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers announced yesterday that Bill Parcells would not be their new coach.
Parcells, who two weeks ago rejected a five-year, $6.5 million offer to coach the Bucs and run their football operation, apparently changed his mind this week, only to have the Bucs reject him.
The statement, saying that Parcells was no longer a candidate for the job, ended, at least for now, the confusing, back-and-forth flirtation Parcells has had in the last few weeks over his coaching future.


Meldrum to Merge With Hesselbart
Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith Inc. of Cleveland announced yesterday that it would acquire another northeastern Ohio advertising company, Hesselbart &amp; Mitten/Arocom of Fairlawn, and combine operations.
Each firm has about $65 million in billings and 100 employees.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.
"I'm excited not so much for what it means immediately, but what it translates into in terms of future potential," said Chris N. Perry, Meldrum's chairman and chief executive.
He will become chairman and chief executive of a new holding company, Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith Communications Inc., as well as chairman and chief executive of the merged ad agencies, which will operate under the name Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith Advertising.


Benign, but Sometimes Scary, Illness
Gastroenteritis, or "intestinal flu," the ailment that the White House said led to President Bush's collapse at a dinner in his honor in Tokyo yesterday, often causes sudden and violent upsets of the stomach and intestines.
Intestinal flu is not influenza, or the respiratory flu that Federal health officials say has spread in many areas of the United States in recent weeks.
Unlike influenza, for which a vaccine offers protection, there is no immunization to protect against the many forms of gastroenteritis.
It is not known if Mr.
Bush had a flu shot.


Boise Cascade Files for Shares
The Boise Cascade Corporation, the large Idaho-based forest products company, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for seven million depository shares.
Each represents one-tenth of a share of conversion preferred stock, series E, and is described as a yield-enhanced stock.


Yugoslav Defense Chief Quits; Monitoring Halted
Yugoslavia's Defense Minister, who helped negotiate the present United Nations cease-fire, unexpectedly resigned today and was temporarily replaced by a more outspoken advocate of the Serbian cause.
The resignation of the Gen.
Veljko Kadijevic, in a letter delivered to the Yugoslav leadership in Belgrade, came a day after a MIG fighter belonging to the Serbian-led Yugoslav Army shot down a European Community helicopter over Novi Marof, Croatia, killing the five truce observers aboard.


Volunteers Unafraid To Talk to Strangers
To the Editors:
Re "Listen New York, This Man Just Wants to Learn English" (front page, Dec. 27):


HOME IMPROVEMENT
HOUSEHOLD electrical emergencies can occur at any time, but they are most likely during winter and summer, when circuits are heavily used.
The most common problem is a tripped circuit breaker or a blown fuse, which shuts off power to one circuit.
Such an event is usually a blessing in disguise.
Circuit breakers and fuses -- safety devices that interrupt power when circuits malfunction -- help prevent electrical fires.


G.P.U.'s Chief Started At the Ground Level
James R. Leva became president and chief executive of the General Public Utlities Corporation yesterday, 40 years after starting there as a ground hand digging holes for utility poles.
Mr.
Leva, 59 years old, had been president and chief operating officer of Jersey Central Power and Light, a subsidiary company based in Morristown, N.J., since 1986.
In taking the helm at the holding company, he succeeds William G. Kuhns, who was brought out of retirement last May to replace Standley H. Hoch.
Mr.
Hoch resigned because of a controversy over his personal relationship with a woman who was then G.P.U.'s vice president for corporate communications.


Cooperative Bank for Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHC Helicopters reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Angels' Harvey Gets Rich Pact
Bryan Harvey, who has played only three full seasons in the major leagues, yesterday became the highest-paid relief pitcher ever.
Eligible for salary arbitration, Harvey instead negotiated a four-year contract with the California Angels for $15.5 million.
Harvey, a 28-year-old right-hander, led the American League last season with a career-high 46 saves, giving him 96 saves in his three full seasons.
He also had a career-low 1.60 earned run average in 67 games.


Stunned Japanese Offer Sympathy As Some Are Struck by Symbolism
President Bush's sudden illness shook Japanese leaders today and spread shock and sympathy throughout a country that had been following his visit with great interest all week.
Television footage of Mr.
Bush's collapse at the banquet at the official residence of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa was played over and over, sidelining the details of the agreements on economic cooperation and mutual security steps that were the focus of attention earlier.


Home Video
In 1991, the small suddenly got big in video stores.
After several years of steady but unspectacular growth, the laser disk broke out to become a significant part of the industry.
"All year we saw new records for disk releases," said John Thrasher, a vice president of Tower Records/Tower Video, which has 65 record and video stores across the country.
"First 'Ghost' sold 100,000 units, then it was over 150,000 for 'Terminator 2,' then over 200,000 for 'Fantasia.' " In 1991, Mr.
Thrasher said, laser disks accounted for 28 percent of Tower's video sales.
Analysts say that the disk will never overtake videotape (currently disk represents roughly 3 percent of video revenues nationwide), but that it is the fastest-growing sector of the business.
Industry figures for 1991 show almost 850,000 disk players in use, up from about 650,000 in 1990.
The number of movies and other titles available on disk has climbed to nearly 7,000.
Because operations are still relatively small, disks usually can't be rented, but they are now sold in some 2,600 stores.


Got to Break Plates To Build Tables
SOME people collect art. For 15 years, Holly Lueders has hoarded shards.
The shards date from the mid-1970's, when Ms.
Lueders was making reproductions of antique majolica in Italy for export to the United States.
In each shipment that arrived in New York, some dishes had been broken.
She stuffed the pieces into bags and boxes and carted them along as she moved from apartment to apartment for more than a decade.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Alcione  The Ballroom 253 West 28th Street Through Jan. 18, except Jan. 11-13
From her imitation of Louis Armstrong's voice to her fluegelhorn solos, Alcione is a samba singer who doesn't limit herself to the samba.
At the Ballroom on Tuesday night, she sang ballads, bossa novas, rock-influenced tropicalia songs and a Stevie Wonder tune.
But it was in the sambas, and the pop songs closest to sambas, where she and her band stopped working at cross-purposes.


This Hostelry Charges Elephants $150 a Night
When a flight is canceled or delayed, human passengers end up in the airport hotel.
But what about eight African oryxes on the way to Oman, or a 500-pound brown bear headed for California or a plain old horse, dog or cat?
At Kennedy International Airport, such stranded animals are kept at Animalport, the largest airport animal hotel in the country.
Run by the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, the port is set on one-and-a-quarter acres just minutes from the passenger and cargo terminals.
There are 24 stalls, 60 kennels, an indoor corral, plenty of bird cages and a special kitchen.


Coleman Suffers Concussion, But Nets Knock Out Wolves
The Nets lost Derrick Coleman 52 seconds into the second half with a concussion tonight, but they managed to beat the Minnesota Timberwolves anyway, 103-97, at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
It was an ugly victory, but Nets Coach Bill Fitch didn't mind the description one bit, especially against the Timberwolves.
They are 5-26 this season, but they battled back from 16-point deficits three times in the third quarter and managed to pull within 4 three times in the final 2 minutes.


TSR Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Wilder Ends Race for Presidency, Citing Virginia's Fiscal Troubles
Unable to come up with a message or an organization that promised success in the 1992 Presidential race, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia came up tonight with the biggest surprise of the youthful campaign: he pulled out of the contest.
Mr.
Wilder, the first black ever elected governor of an American state, said he did not have the time to seek the Democratic nomination for President and also to run the state of Virginia, which faces its worst budget crisis in half a century because of the current recession.


ACCORD ANNOUNCED BY U.S. AND JAPAN TO SPUR ECONOMIES
In the first agreement to emerge from the summit meeting here between President Bush and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, the United States and Japan announced a broad commitment on Wednesday to try to lift the world economy from a looming slowdown by adopting budgetary and interest-rate policies that would promote faster growth.
The aim is to focus the domestic policies of the world's two largest economies clearly on expansion rather than on fighting inflation, with the hope that Europe's leading industrial economies will follow suit and create momentum for a period of healthier growth after an anemic 1991.


Rising Segregation Is Found for Hispanic Students
Segregation of Hispanic students in the nation's public schools has grown over the last two decades while gains in desegregation among blacks in the South have remained largely stable, a study released today has found.
"Hispanics in California and Texas are more segregated than blacks in Alabama or Mississippi in terms of educational experiences," said Dr.
Gary Orfield, an author of "Status of School Desegregation: The Next Generation." The study, which analyzed 20 years of school enrollment data collected by the Department of Education's Office of Civil Rights, was sponsored by the National School Boards Association.


A 1930's Visionary Who Looked Back And Saw Santa Fe
BEFORE the Range Rovers, the howling coyote sculptures and Santa Fe (the fragrance), there was an architect named John Gaw Meem, whose wildly romantic Spanish Pueblo revival houses, built primarily in the 1930's, set the stage for it all.
Mr.
Meem arrived in this luminous landscape of pinon and juniper in 1920.
From 1924 until his death in 1983, he designed houses and churches, municipal and university buildings that married the spirit of native pueblo architecture with the necessities of the modern world.


Excerpts from Address: A Plan to Fix the State
Following are excerpts from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's State of the State Address to the Legislature yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times.
. . .
New York State, like other states, is struggling with a powerful force it cannot control, a national recession.
As a result of a decade of excesses and omissions and bad choices, the nation has lost its grip on the world economy and that is hurting us in the most fundamental ways.
Businesses are closing.
Millions of Americans have lost their jobs.
. . .
Reviving the Economy
Together, the projects in that new New York plan will generate more than 100,000 jobs, more than $9 billion in economic opportunity for the state by the new millenium.


Yeltsin Goes on the Defensive


CHEMICAL A FACTOR IN MALE IMPOTENCE
Researchers say they have found the physiological explanation for the vast majority of cases of male impotence, a failure to produce a simple chemical that controls a wide variety of biological functions.
The chemical, nitric oxide, initiates a series of events that cause the penis to become engorged with blood and remain erect, said Dr.
Jacob Rajfer, a professor of urology at the University of California at Los Angeles who made the discovery.


Talking Deals; Small Companies Try a Partnership
WHEN science-rich but cash-poor biotechnology companies go looking for a savior with deep pockets, they usually turn to one of the giant drug concerns.
Cortex Pharmaceuticals Inc., a start-up company focusing on products for treating brain diseases, tried that route at first, but found a better match with a company its own size.
This week Cortex, based in Irvine, Calif., announced a collaborative agreement with Alkermes Inc., a four-year-old company in Cambridge, Mass., that is developing technology to enable drugs to enter the brain more easily.
The two companies will co-develop compounds that Cortex is now working on that are believed to counteract the destruction of nerve cells that accompanies strokes.
Alkermes will also make a series of investments in Cortex, which could ultimately total as much as $26.5 million.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING  Strike the Gold Loses 8th Straight


Quotation Of The Day
"The doctors are certain that there is no other illness or any other problems related to this, that it's a simple case of the flu. The President is human; he gets sick." -- MARLIN FITZWATER, President Bush's spokesman.  [ A1:4. ]


U.S. Will Not Seek Retrial In Securities-Scandal Case
The United States Attorney in Manhattan said yesterday that he would not seek to retry several defendants whose convictions on Federal racketeering charges in the Wall Street insider-trading scandals of the 1980's were overturned.
The decision, by Roger S. Hayes, the Acting United States Attorney, was quickly approved by Federal Judge Robert L. Carter.
The move ended one of the secondary chapters in the Wall Street scandals that involved Michael R. Milken, head of the junk bond department at Drexel Burnam Lambert Inc., and Ivan F. Boesky, a former arbitrager.


A Coach Shows How Not to Win Friends
If his work with Paul Wylie pays off this week at the national figure skating championships, Evy Scotvold will have earned himself a trip to the Albertville Olympics next month as Wylie's coach.
But he might not find himself entirely welcome by his French hosts.
In a dramatic break from the long-standing figure skating tradition of never saying anything derogatory in public about anyone else, Scotvold today criticized the ability of the leading French skater, Surya Bonaly.


Chill Persists Between U.S. Car Makers and Japan
As trade negotiators argued all day and then froze for a moment after President Bush's collapse, the heads of America's three largest auto makers came face to face for the first time Wednesday with the commitment from Japan for the giant $8.4 billion superconducting supercollider in Texas, raising neand the Japanese agree on virtually nothing -- certainly not on how the American auto industry was driven to the brink, or on whose responsibility it is to fix it.
As the auto executives simmered, however, negotiators for the United States and Japanese Governments appeared close to an agreement on Japanese purchases of American-made autos and auto parts.
While the Japanese Foreign Ministry announced at midday today that a basic agreement had been reached, American officials were not yet confirming that.
There was still considerable contention over the wording of the final agreement, and many key details have not yet been disclosed.
Unimpressed Executives
The auto executives who accompanied Mr.
Bush have been unimpressed by a blitz of concessions and new import-purchase plans announced in recent days and they spent much of Wednesday warning the Japanese that failing to lower the trade deficit quickly would bring a hail of protectionist legislation from Congress.


METRO DIGEST
STATE OF THE STATE  RESCUING NEW YORK: THE CUOMO PLAN


NBC and Fox Offer Their Visions of the Future
In the space of 24 hours, 2 national television networks -- Fox Broadcasting and NBC -- offered conflicting visions of the future for reporters assembled at a hotel here for a semiannual series of interview sessions on the television industry.
The message from Fox, which came across in everything from programmers bragging about increased ratings to uniformed public-relations aides swarming over the hotel communicating through a network of walkie-talkies to a party thrown on the 20th Century Fox lot complete with volleyball games and test-your-speed pitching machines, was: "Look at us: we're growing."


Vallone Asserts Control as Expanded Council Convenes
Speaker Peter F. Vallone left little doubt who was in control of the newly expanded City Council at its first meeting yesterday as he overwhelmingly won re-election as Speaker and nipped in the bud an insurgent attempt to curb his influence through rules changes.
On a day of pomp, adulatory speeches, cheers, mutual back-slapping and frequent applause for 21 new Council members, Mr.
Vallone delivered a 25-minute speech outlining ambitious proposals to speed the letting of city contracts and to earmark residential property taxes for the city school system.
He also urged dramatic cuts in the size of government.


A Pledge of Homes For the Mentally Ill
After his administration had given mixed signals on whether it would fulfill its promise to open new group homes for the mentally ill in New York City, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday promised that he would follow through on his personal pledge to the city to develop 1,616 more apartments for the mentally ill.
But his ability to fulfill that commitment will still depend on the outcome of budget negotiations with Senate Republicans, whose majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, strongly favors a moratorium on opening new homes for the mentally ill over the next year to help close the state's $5 billion budget gap.


Calendar: Brides and Gardens
Patterns  Tiffany &amp; Company, 727 Fifth Avenue at 57th Street; (212) 755-8000.
A bridal-table setting show featuring china, crystal and silver, starts Tuesday and runs through Feb. 29.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Monday through Saturday.
Free.
Indoor Greenery  Cornell Cooperative Extension of Westchester County, Education Center, 214 Central Avenue (near Tarrytown Road), White Plains; (914) 682-3072.
Thomas Ching, the director of horticulture for the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation, will give an illustrated lecture on house plants at 7 P.M. on Wednesday.
Fee, $5.
Grain and Form  Newark Museum, 49 Washington Street at Central Avenue, Newark, N.J.; (201) 596-6550.
A show by Bob Stocksdale of turned-wood bowls starts Wednesday and runs through March 22.
Museum hours: noon to 5 P.M.
Wednesday through Sunday.
Free.
East End Gardens  Horticultural Alliance of the Hamptons, Bridgehampton Community House, Main Street off School Road, Bridgehampton, L.I.; (516) 537-2223.
Ellen R. Samuels, a garden historian, will talk about three centuries of garden design and landscape architecture in the Hamptons, at 2:30 P.M. on Sunday.
Admission, $5; members, free.
Design Meets Environment  Katie Murphy Amphitheater, Fashion Institute of Technology, 227 West 27th Street; (212) 246-7063.
A panel discussion on environmentally safe products, like recycled paper and soy-based inks, and their impact on graphic design will be Tuesday from 6:30 to 8:30 P.M.
The program, sponsored by the New York chapter of the American Institute of Graphic Arts, will feature the designers Eva Anderson and Joe Duffy and Carol Ash, the regional director of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
Admission: $10 ($5 for chapter members); students, free.
Ceramics Classes  Artworks Pottery Studio at the West Side Y.M.C.A., 5 West 63d Street; (212) 875-4129.
Wheel-throwing and hand-building workshops of 11 to 13 sessions, including ones for children ages 5 to 12, start Monday.
Tuition ranges from $179 to $221.
Registration required.  150 Dealers  Garden State Convention and Exhibition Center, 50 Atrium Drive off Davidson Avenue, Somerset, N.J.; (201) 384-0010.
An antiques show and sale featuring Mission furniture, quilts, pottery,silver services and toys will be held from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. on Saturday and Sunday.
Ongoing talks will be held both days, and restorers of jewelry, dolls, textiles, metals and watches will be available for questions.
Admission: $5; children age 15 and under, free.


International Airline Support Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Lie Dectector for Howe
STEVE HOWE, the Yankee relief pitcher who was arrested on cocaine-related charges last month, took a lie-detector test at his own request from a Federal drug agent in Helena, Mont.
"It's a way of helping everyone in the Government understand who he is," said STEVE NARDI, one of Howe's attorneys.
"He's showing his good-faith effort."


Bridge
Among the most popular and hotly contested events in the New York metropolitan area are the Double Knockout Team Championships.
There are five of them -- in New York City, Nassau-Suffolk, Westchester and northern and southern New Jersey -- and they normally take between 9 and 12 months to complete.
Winning back-to-back titles is very rare, and winning three straight is virtually unknown.
But this record has just been set in Nassau-Suffolk, with the honors going to Peter Bisgeier and Robert Gordon, both of Northport, L.I., Bob Sherman of Dix Hills, L.I., and Jim Beery of Huntington, L.I.
In the final, played Monday at the New 110 Club in Farmingdale, L.I., they won by the convincing margin of 51 imps against a strong foursome headed by Mitchell Pollenz of Wantagh, L.I.


Seaver Marvels at His Latest Stat: 98.8
Tom Seaver said he thought he was past the point where statistics could take his breath away.
As a pitcher, after all, he had compiled some fairly incredible numbers of his own.
As a student of baseball, he had researched all the relevant and remarkable numbers posted by others.
As a television broadcaster, he had kept current with the stupefying salary figures awarded players in recent seasons.
Still, when the number 98.8 was spoken to him over the telephone line on Tuesday night, Seaver lost his breath and his bearings.


Fast Food Fills Menu For Many Hotel Chains
Guests who feel the urge for pizza at many Marriott hotels now find their call for room service answered with a Pizza Hut pizza, made in the Marriott kitchen.
At the Day's Inn in downtown Atlanta, guests can satisfy their craving for a hamburger merely by stepping through a lobby door into the adjoining Wendy's.


Essay; 'Strongly Condemn'
At 11:30 A.M. on Friday, Jan. 3, in the State Department office of Assistant Secretary Edward Djerejian, at the instigation of Director of Policy Planning Dennis Ross and with the concurrence of Richard Haass, a national security aide, the decision was made to unload on Israel as never before.
P.L.O. hit men had murdered four Israeli settlers in the past 10 weeks, provoking Israel to expel a dozen Palestinian inciters to violence -- a measured and bloodless retaliation to deter further killing.
Now Yasir Arafat was sending word that Arabs would boycott the peace talks unless the U.S. voted in the U.N. to "strongly deplore" the deportations.


Democrats In Trenton Call Recess
Speaker Joseph V. Doria Jr. huddled with Assembly Democrats for a second straight day today, trying to cajole them into supporting a long-shot bid to roll back the $2.8 billion in taxes they voted in 19 months ago.
But after a two-hour Democratic caucus, Mr.
Doria returned to the floor and called for a recess until Thursday, when he said he would try again to bring the tax plan up for a vote.


Intel Moves To Cut Price Of 386 Chip
The Intel Corporation said today that it would cut the price of its 386 microprocessors by up to 35 percent starting in April, a move that could intensify its bitter microprocessor battle with Advanced Micro Devices Inc.
Intel officials said a 386-DX chip operating at a frequency of 25 megahertz, or millions of cycles a second, would drop to $99, from $152, and a 386-SX, operating at 20 megahertz, would drop to $59, from $82.50.


Caldwell Partners International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Knox to Coach Rams
What goes around comes around these days in the National Football League.
CHUCK KNOX, the once and former head coach of the Los Angeles Rams, yesterday returned to the Rams as head coach and vice president, and BILL WALSH is almost certain to go back to the San Franciso 49ers, not as the head coach but as a consultant.
Knox returned to the Rams yesterday, nearly 20 years after the club named him to his first N.F.L. head-coaching job.
According to published reports, Knox, 59 years old, agreed to a four-year contract with the Rams worth between $2.4 million and $2.8 million.


Despite U.S. Export Rules, Israel Buys Supercomputers
After failing in its effort to buy an American supercomputer because of stiff United States Government export controls, Israel's leading scientific university has purchased two supercomputers from a British manufacturer.
The machines are at the lower end of the supercomputer speed scale, but the deal marks the first time that such machines have been sold for export without the tight restrictions on their use that the United States and Japan require for supercomputer sales.


Don't Blame Ukraine for Sins of Others
To the Editor:
"Gory Anti-Semitism Fills Ukraine's History" (letter, Dec. 20), Bradford Trebach's recitation of pogroms, is highly prejudicial and lacks historical objectivity.


The Art Market
Assets and Debts
For months now, art dealers have been talking about Christie's negotiations with the Frederick Roos estate over the sale of his extensive holdings of contemporary art.
Mr.
Roos, a Swedish businessman and art collector, who died last May at the age of 40, left behind about 2,000 works of contemporary art, along with debts that are believed to amount to as much as $20 million.


Sports of The Times; Ted Turner: A Prophet Is Honored
Guffaws have emanated from the sports pages ever since Ted Turner was named Time magazine's Man of the Year.
That drunken sailor, lurching around the America's Cup?
That buffoon of a baseball owner, out-braying Finley, out-bullying Steinbrenner?
That maximum leader of the TBS sports network, whose staff members would caution, sotto voce, that, ahem, it is always a good idea to reach Ted before noon?


Nintendo Cuts Retail Prices
Nintendo of America Inc. said today that it would reduce prices and start an aggressive marketing campaign aimed at increasing sales by 39 percent in 1992, to about $4.8 billion.
Nintendo has come under increasing pressure this year from Sega Enterprises Ltd., whose Genesis video game system, at $150, has been priced $50 lower than Nintendo's competing system, Super Nintendo.


Safeway to Take $71 Million Charge
Safeway Inc., a supermarket chain based in Oakland, Calif., said it would take an after-tax charge of about $71 million on its 1991 earnings to recognize estimated lease liabilities associated with its former Houston division.
While the charge will have a material effect on Safeway's earnings, it will not have a significant effect on the company's cash flow or financial position, the company said.


Economic Scene; Potential Tragedy Of a Global Slump
THE agreement between President Bush and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan to try to accelerate world economic growth gives flesh to Mr.
Bush's assertion that his mission to Japan was really about "jobs, jobs, jobs."
This bilateral macroeconomic commitment, if Germany and the rest of Europe can be brought aboard, makes far more sense than efforts by the President and his entourage of business executives to squeeze orders out of Japan for more American autos, auto parts, computers, glass, paper, financial services and other goods.


Stunned, Georgians Reckon the Cost of Independence
Thousands of Georgians converged on Rustaveli Prospekt from early morning today, some to begin clearing the tangled debris of their two-week civil war, most simply to gaze in hushed awe at the charred ruin of their most cherished boulevard.
Bands of students gathered up shattered trees and twisted metal from the square in front of the monumental Government house where President Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia holed up until forced to flee by opposition forces on Monday.
The building stood blackened and battered, two of its massive columns reduced to twisted reinforcing rods.


Art in Review
Michael Chandler  Salvatore Ala Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Feb. 1
Michael Chandler's art is becoming more assured and persuasive.
The latest abstractions by this American painter are rendered in the somber, sometimes murky palette he favors, but many of them are shot through with flashes of vivid color.
Broad, looping, widely spaced brushstrokes, which recall the very different styles of Willem de Kooning and Gerhard Richter, crisscross the canvases.
They often evoke thick grasses through which a viewer peers at ground level.
Landscapes of one kind or another are implicit in almost all of the 15 works in the show.


BUSH IN JAPAN: Bush's Painful Trip; Japanese Feel the Talks Will Not Help U.S. Economy or Rapport With Tokyo
As President Bush's grueling trade mission in Asia ended this morning on a note of confusion and discord, perhaps the reason was that without realizing it, the participants in Japan had given birth to the first summit meeting between rival superpowers in the post-cold-war era.
All the old trappings of past confrontations between the Soviet Union and the United States were in Tokyo this week -- talks that churned past midnight, fact sheets, briefing sessions, dueling news conferences and a chorus of angry assertions and counterassertions of deception and bad faith.


Critic's Notebook; Political Premonitions Born of 30's Despair
THE Archangel Gabriel is said to have foretold the birth of John the Baptist and, a little later, to have made the Annunciation to the Virgin Mary.
It is the gospel according to Gregory LaCava, in his astonishing 1933 film, "Gabriel Over the White House," that, a couple of milleniums later, Gabriel takes command of the United States during the darkest months of the Great Depression.
The conceit of this woozily prescient neo-fascist Hollywood movie is that God, funneling His wishes through an off-screen Gabriel, transforms the fictitious Judd Hammond (Walter Huston), the party hack just elected President, into an iron-fisted if benevolent dictator who saves America from the worst economic crisis in its history.


Art in Review
'From the Studio: Artists in Residence 1990-1991'  Studio Museum in Harlem 144 West 125th Street Through March 1
In this annual show -- the 22d of its kind at the Studio Museum -- two of the three artists in residence favor a crafts-based esthetic.
Eve Sandler's unstretched paintings and wall hangings use a rich set of ingredients, including ground glass, powdered metals and glitter on muslin, to create a crackled, iridescent skin.
The titles imply that some of these hangings are meant to represent empty garments: shrouds in one case, regal attire in another.
The results have a certain material splendor, although the work relies a little too heavily on gorgeousness for its effect.


Review/Art; Abstraction: A Trend That May Be Coming Back
The art world does not move in mysterious ways; its attention jumps predictably from one trend to the next.
It should surprise no one that, after several years in which sculpture, installation art and various forms of political art have dominated the contemporary scene, a supposed resurgence of abstract painting has become a fashionable notion in this sluggish art season.
A genuinely new painting movement would be a great thing right now, giving to the scene a focus and maybe even perking up the market, although it is curious that contemporary painting is forever being described as either dying or undergoing a revival.
Its persistence is rarely acknowledged, even though thousands of artists pursue the medium year in and year out.


In Florida Courts, 'Rebates' Can Follow Acquittals
One month after William K. Smith was acquitted of rape charges, officials of Palm Beach County, Fla., are waiting for his lawyers to send them a bill for some of his defense costs.
That would not happen if Mr.
Smith had been tried in some other state.
Only Florida, apparently, allows defendants who have been acquitted to apply for recovery of expenses like the hiring of expert witnesses.
Such a right of reimbursement has existed there since 1846, the year after Florida entered the Union.


Barring Gangs From Park Raises Some Legal Issues
The young woman took her two children for a quick stroll through Las Palmas Park today, an act that, not long ago, would have been unthinkable, she said.
She looked about nervously, as if fearing the imminent return of the gangs and their turf war.
She also refused to give her full name, explaining that while the gangs had abandoned the park, they had not left town.


Tourists, the Peacetime Target Of a Shipful of Military Magic
PERHAPS the most comical sight at the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum is the people lined up in front of a ring about three times the size of a toilet seat.
Some stand and stare at the ring as if it were Mike Tyson wearing light gloves and a sneer.
The task before them is to wriggle through it.
If they succeed -- and even most chubbies seem to -- they will be admitted to what is billed as "the world's only guided missile submarine open to the public." Inside, there will be hatches of roughly the same size to squirm through.


How to Buy 20 Tokens
To the Editor:
In "Let Bridge Commuters Buy 20 Tokens at a Time" (letter, Dec. 20), Josh Stern laments not being able to buy a 20-pack of tokens at a Triborough Bridge Authority crossing.
He tells of a $2.10 "penalty" for buying two rolls of nine tokens each.


Judge's Racial Remarks Leave Town in Turmoil
Inflammatory remarks by the top state judge here have provoked racial tensions that local officials and community leaders are trying to ease, with only limited success so far.
Demonstrators opposing Chief Judge John E. Santora Jr. of the Fourth Judicial Circuit, with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson at their head last weekend, have taken to the streets and are picketing daily outside the Duval County Courthouse.
So are those who say the judge was merely exercising his constitutional right of free speech.
Civic organizations and the local government have developed internal splits over how best to handle the matter.


U.S. Fills Post on Missing From Vietnam War
The Bush Administration today named the nation's first Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs, according to a Congressional announcement.
The nominee, Alan C. Ptak, is deputy staff director of a Senate Select Committee set up last year to reopen investigations into the issue of Americans missing since the Vietnam War.
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney announced the creation of the Pentagon post in September, citing new information becoming available to help resolve the fate of the 2,267 Americans still unaccounted for in Southeast Asia.
For more than a year, there has been rising public pressure to re-examine the issue, on which progress must be made before the Administration will lift an economic embargo on Vietnam and move toward the establishment of diplomatic relations.


Eavesdropping: A Sly, Secret Sport in a Wide Open City
HE ordered carrot cake and a cappuccino.
He asked for a small pot of tea.
They squabbled briefly over who would call the baby sitter.
By the time he got back to their table -- two, at most three, feet from mine -- she had already begun to cry.
"You are not going to do this, David," she said softly, more as a question than an edict.
"The girls need a father. You need to grow up."


Lost in Tokyo
Personal diplomacy is one of George Bush's great strengths as President.
Car salesmanship obviously is not.
His three-and-a-half-day visit to Japan, interrupted by a frightening bout of stomach flu, was a fiasco.
For domestic political reasons, Mr.
Bush recast the goals of this trip from designing a new "global partnership" to demanding that the Japanese quickly lower import barriers to bring America "jobs, jobs, jobs."


CHRONICLE
His creditors have lined up against him and his social life has attracted a good deal of publicity in recent months, but DONALD J. TRUMP'S luck changed for the better yesterday.
A Manhattan judge ordered some well-known tenants to pay him $751,000 in back rent at Trump Tower.
Not only did Mr.
Trump win the back rent, but his lawyer, Richard Golub, said he would now seek to force the tenants, MESHULAM RIKLIS, a businessman, and his wife, PIA ZADORA, the entertainer, to pay the remaining money Mr.
Trump said was owed on the $9 million lease for two luxurious floors which have views of Central Park.
They vacated the premises last year.


Apple's Chief Sees Future In Electronics
Apple Computer Inc. plans a big entry into the consumer electronics business over the next two years, selling inexpensive Macintosh computers and other tiny gadgets called "personal digital assistants" through audio and video stores and other mass merchandisers, John Sculley, the chairman and chief executive, said today.
Apple has long indicated its desire to move into consumer electronics.
But, in a speech opening the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, Nev., today, the text of which was made available here, Mr.
Sculley added details about the products and timetables.


'J.F.K.' Is Only Latest History a la Hollywood
To the Editor:
In "Hollywood: History by Default" (Editorial Notebook, Dec. 25), Brent Staples disparages Oliver Stone for his ahistorical representation of John F. Kennedy's assassination in the movie "J.F.K." Mr.
Staples is concerned about what he decries as a trend to present film as history.
He cites Alan Parker's "Mississippi Burning," as well as other films by Mr.
Stone, as evidence of the threat to our understanding of events when "Hollywood becomes the culture's historian by default."


Newspaper Union Under Investigation
Law enforcement agencies are investigating the activities of the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers' Union of New York and Vicinity, an investigator said yesterday.
The investigation, first reported in New York Newsday yesterday, concerns abuses including selling union cards and the theft of thousands of papers each day, the newspaper reported.
The union delivers papers for The New York Times, The Daily News, The New York Post and a number of retailers.


Poll Shows Price Bush Pays For Tough Economic Times
Eight of 10 Americans say the economy is in bad shape, and President Bush is paying a clear political price for their discontent, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
But voters know little about the Democrats who would challenge him.
The telephone survey, conducted Monday through Wednesday, shows an unpredictable terrain at the start of this election year: The President's approval rating is down to 48 percent, and voters are evenly divided when offered a choice between re-electing Mr.
Bush or replacing him with a unspecified Democrat.
But the real Democratic field has barely penetrated their consciousness, according to the telephone survey of 1,376 adults.


'Oz' Author Never Championed Populism
To the Editor:
In "No Mysticism in Oz, Just the Populist Credo" (letter, Dec. 20), Saul Rosen states that "The Wizard of Oz" is no more than "a secular political tract firmly based in history and ideology." In researching my biography of L. Frank Baum, I found no evidence that Baum's story is in any way a Populist allegory.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Enserch Corp., Dallas, a diversified energy concern, and Tejas Gas Corp., a unit of Hamilton Oil Corp., said that effective Jan. 1, Enserch conveyed all of the assets and business activities of its wholly owned natural gas pipeline subsidiary, Enserch Gas Transmission Company, to a new general partnership formed with Tejas. *
International Paper Co., Purchase, N.Y., said its French subsidiary, Aussedat Ray, had acquired from Stora Feldmuehle the 40 percent share it did not already own in Iridium, a joint venture between the two companies.


In Florida Courts, 'Rebates' Can Follow Acquittals
One month after William K. Smith was acquitted of rape charges, officials of Palm Beach County, Fla., are waiting for his lawyers to send them a bill for some of his defense costs.
That would not happen if Mr.
Smith had been tried in some other state.
Only Florida, apparently, allows defendants who have been acquitted to apply for recovery of expenses like the hiring of expert witnesses.
Such a right of reimbursement has existed there since 1846, the year after Florida entered the Union.


Review/Film; Help Wanted: A Nanny, Duplicity &amp; Malice Req'd
The title of Curtis Hanson's "Hand That Rocks the Cradle" evokes memories of Lillian Gish and "Intolerance," while the movie itself aspires to a tradition of cinema thrills even older than D. W. Griffith's mad 1916 masterpiece.
"The Hand That Rocks the Cradle" is meant to scare audiences more or less in the way that the patrons of the early nickelodeons were frightened when they saw the image of a train rushing at them.
Audiences aren't asked to think, only to react.
"The Hand That Rocks the Cradle" proves again that not thinking isn't especially easy even today.


J.P. Morgan Earnings Rise 41%
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company, one of the nation's most prosperous banking companies, reported yesterday that its quarterly profits had risen 41 percent from the period a year earlier.
The newly merged Chemical Banking Corporation also reported earnings yesterday, showing a loss for the fourth quarter but a profit for the year.
The figures reflected the fourth-quarter merger of Chemical with the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation, which resulted in a fourth-quarter restructuring charge of $625 million.


Georgians Face the Cost of Their Civil War


TV Weekend; A Mother Is Dying, With Her Daughter to Help
Suffering from ovarian cancer, the 76-year-old woman decides that there is no point in dying slowly -- none -- and she asks her daughter to help her "end this." The subject is suicide, a subject that has been leaping out of headlines and best-seller lists in recent years as the national right-to-die debate intensifies.
"Last Wish," Sunday's television movie on ABC at 9 P.M., supports that right, offering an impassioned and dignified argument based on fact and made all the more persuasive by the powerful performances of Maureen Stapleton and Patty Duke as the mother and daughter.
"Last Wish" was adapted by Jerome Kass ("Queen of the Stardust Ballroom") from the book of the same name by Betty Rollin, the television journalist.
At 74, her mother, Ida, is an active, vibrant widow, attending exercise classes, watching her diet and everyone else's and even being courted by a new boyfriend seven years younger.
Suddenly, stomach pains develop, and Ida must undergo surgery.


City College Takes Action On Official
In the first punishment stemming from the nine deaths at a City College basketball game, the administrator responsible for overseeing the students staging the event has been stripped of such authority.
Charles DeCicco, a spokesman for the college, confirmed the action, but would not otherwise comment.


A Trade Mission Ends in Tension As the 'Big Eight' of Autos Meet
President Bush's hopes of returning home with what he called an "action plan" to help Detroit began to unwind late this afternoon, in one of the most unlikely business meetings in the history of Japanese-American industrial rivalries.
The chief executives of the world's eight largest auto makers -- three American, five Japanese -- gathered face to face in a hotel room in downtown Tokyo, with everyone in the room clearly understanding, and no one saying, that the American industry will probably never gain back the ground it has lost to Japanese imports and to Japanese cars made in American plants.
A Tense Hour
It was apparently the first time executives of General Motors, Ford and Chrysler met directly with their counterparts at Toyota, Nissan, Honda, Mitsubishi, and Mazda, which together now control more than a third of the American auto market.
After a tense hour, during which the Japanese told their guests that American industry needed to transform itself radically, and the Americans warned that the time was long past when "mere declarations of intent" to open markets would suffice, Lee A. Iacocca, the fiery head of the ailing Chrysler Corporation, finally spoke up.


Ex-Premier Advances in French Race
Just eight months after Michel Rocard lost his job as France's Prime Minister, a shake-up today in the governing Socialist Party has suddenly turned him into the front-runner in the race for the party's nomination to succeed President Francois Mitterrand in 1995.
Mr.
Rocard was not officially affected by the party leadership's election of Laurent Fabius, the President of the National Assembly, to succeed Pierre Mauroy as the party's powerful first secretary.


Advanced Micro's Silicon Cash Cow
Saying it has experienced a "virtual stampede of customers," Advanced Micro Devices Inc. reported today that it had captured more than 30 percent of the market for the 386 microprocessor in the fourth quarter of 1991, leading to record quarterly revenues and its highest profit margins since 1984.
The semiconductor company, based in Sunnyvale, Calif., said it had sold more than $145 million in 386 processors, many more than under the company's most optimistic projections.
The sales signal that the monopoly the Intel Corporation has enjoyed on this silicon cash cow, the central chip in millions of personal computers, has been shattered.


Big Exchange Withdraws From Joint Futures Project
The board of the New York Mercantile Exchange has withdrawn from a plan to build a joint headquarters with four other futures exchanges, a decision that has stunted the project and may kill it.
As a result, the city is reassessing its commitment to the project, while officials for the consortium of exchanges say they plan to proceed with a smaller building on the same site in TriBeCa.


Charisma Gets Bumped Into Boards
On Fun Day this week, Joe Kocur, the New York Rangers' designated hitter, wheedled a coach into letting him take extra practice throws at a garbage can with a little rubber football, and during the hand-eye contests on a flickering light board, he turned the room dark to give his teammates better contrast.
In this Platinum Age of Sport, there was something fetching about a so-called "goon" working so hard to cut corners for bragging rights and a $50 cash prize.
Was this standard hard-core jock competitiveness, or something special to this not quite mainstream game?
Five hundred years after Columbus discovered America, Lipsyte sets out to discover ice hockey.
All great explorers are presumptuous.
And the historical parallels will eventually be seen: Both were funded by pre-eminent, expansionist institutions and both were lured by the promise of an underdeveloped frontier.
Lipsyte is convinced that ice hockey is not only the most interesting major sport played within walking distance of his home, but the sport that will also define the end of the American century as surely as pro basketball defined the 1980's, pro football the 70's and baseball the dreamy past.
Ice hockey will offer final closure to the conflict with the Evil Empire because it will be about white Americans and Russians.


Reporter's Notebook; Uncommon Effort Aids Quayle's Common Touch
He ate milk and cookies by the fire.
He dropped his suit coat for a green high school varsity jacket.
He ate breakfast at a diner.
He shook hands with what seemed like every schoolchild between Littleton and Laconia.
Just in case anyone missed the point after two days of trying to make it, he even dropped into a restaurant called The Common Man this afternoon.


Prodigy Picks Successor To Retiring President
Theodore C. Papes Jr., 64 years old, the founding president of the Prodigy Services Company, the nation's largest information and home-shopping service for personal computer users, plans to retire in March.
He will be succeeded by Ross S. Glatzer, 45, Prodigy's executive vice president of operations, the company said yesterday.
Offering everything from banking services to restaurant tips by telephone to personal computers, Prodigy is a partnership of the International Business Machines Corporation and Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, two giants that are currently slimming down.
Some analysts say Prodigy, which they estimate lost more than $60 million last year, should follow the example of its corporate parents.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Computerland Corp., Pleasanton, Calif., a computer retailer, named Richard F. Vitkus senior vice president, general counsel and director of development. *
Frito Lay Inc., Plano, Tex., a Pepsico subsidiary, named Ron Tidmore senior vice president for national sales and channel marketing.


Bowman Takes Center Stage Off the Ice
The United States Figure Skating Association grew so disturbed over recent reports about Christopher Bowman's personal life that senior association officials confronted Bowman last month in an attempt to separate fact from fiction, then today issued a statement of support.
In a sport routinely drenched with gossip and innuendo, these are highly unusual actions.
Today, as the national championships continued, the association president, Franklin Nelson, distributed a statement, saying that discussions with Bowman produced no evidence that would prevent the skater from competing in the championships, which determine the 1992 Albertville Olympic team.


Quake Jolts New Jersey and Staten Island
Residents of central New Jersey and parts of Staten Island were jolted awake early this morning by an earthquake that caused a loud boom and lots of shaking but no reports of damage or injury.
Lights went on all over Middlesex and Monmouth Counties shortly before 4 A.M., and police switchboards were flooded with calls.
But by daybreak it was clear that whatever had gone bump in the night had cleared out fast and left seismic fingerprints visible only to someone like Dr.
William Menke.


Cable Company Adds Hidden Cost to the Bill
To the Editor:
As of Dec. 1, Manhattan Cable Television increased its standard service by $2, bringing the cost to $20.95.
The increase was supposedly justified by adding scrambled channels, which can be unscrambled by installation of an "addressable channel selector," provided free by Manhattan Cable.


Why Governor Wilder Failed
The withdrawal by Gov.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia from the Presidential campaign has elicited the standard responses.
The other Democratic hopefuls express admiration for their departed colleague even as they angle to rake in his constituency.
But this failed campaign will be only a preview of difficult times ahead for these same Democrats unless they absorb its chief lesson.
Mr.
Wilder's campaign failed because he spoke more in slogans than in substance and never articulated a vision that voters could grasp.
That could continue to happen unless the Democratic candidates develop clearer themes than they have so far sounded.


Moody's Is Reviewing Sears's Rating
Moody's Investors Service said yesterday that it was reviewing the credit rating of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company for a possible downgrade.
Moody's said the review had been "prompted by the company's ongoing difficulty in improving the returns in its merchandising group, by continued concerns about Sears's increased use of leverage, and longer-term trends which may potentially result in declines in earnings from the company's credit-card portfolio and its Allstate insurance business."
Moody's said that $11.2 billion worth of Sears securities and $15 billion worth of commercial paper would be affected by the review.


December Producer Prices Fell
Prices received by American producers fell two-tenths of 1 percent in December, another sign that the economy remained weak, Labor Department figures showed today.
Prices also eased, although by the slenderest of margins -- one-tenth of 1 percent -- for 1991 as a whole, the first full-year decline in the Producer Price Index for Finished Goods since 1986, when oil prices collapsed.


Test Hints at Cystic Fibrosis Therapy
Advancing smoothly and swiftly toward human gene therapy for cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal genetic disease, scientists have delivered healthy copies of the gene whose defect causes the disease into the lungs of experimental animals, where they blazed to life and stayed robust for six weeks.
Should the new method prove safe in further tests, the scientists said they could begin human trials within the next 12 to 18 months, thus offering cystic fibrosis patients the most promising treatment yet for their disorder.


Last Chance
Here is a listing of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region and Washington that will be closing soon.
Closing This Weekend
"THE GHOSTS OF VERSAILLES," by John Corigliano, Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance of the season tonight at 8.
Some standing-room tickets, at $9 and $12, may be available.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
"LA TRAVIATA," by Verdi, Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance of the season tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Some partial-view and standing-room tickets may be available.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
"AMERICAN LIFE IN AMERICAN ART," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
The 20th-century American experience as seen in paintings and sculptures from the Whitney Museum's permanent collection.
Through Sunday.
Today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Admission: $5 ($3 for students and the elderly; free for children under age 12).
Information: (212) 570-3676.
"CIRCA 1492: ART IN THE AGE OF EXPLORATION," National Gallery of Art, 600 Constitution Avenue N.W., Washington.
More than 600 works from Europe, Africa, Asia and the Americas representing the world's art at the time of Columbus.
Through Sunday.
Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Sunday, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (202) 737-4215 or (202) 842-6690.
"FORBIDDEN BROADWAY'S FORBIDDEN CHRISTMAS," a satirical musical written and directed by Gerard Alessandrini.
Theater East, 211 East 60th Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Today, 8:30 P.M.; tomorrow, 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday, 3:30 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $35 (today and tomorrow); $32.50 (Sunday).
Information: (212) 838-9090.
"THE MIKADO," operetta by Gilbert and Sullivan, Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street, Manhattan.
Presented by the New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players.
Through Sunday.
Today, 8 P.M.; tomorrow, 3 and 8 P.M., and Sunday, 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $35.
Information: (212) 864-5400.
"NICOLAS LANCRET, 1690-1743," the Frick Collection, 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan.
The first retrospective devoted to this follower of Watteau and master of rococo anecdote features 29 paintings and 16 drawings, including "Blind Man's Buff." Through Sunday.
Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 6 P.M.
Admission: $3 ($1.50 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 288-0700.
"NO CURE FOR CANCER," one-man sketches by Denis Leary.
Actors' Playhouse, 100 Seventh Avenue South, at Fourth Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Today and tomorrow, 8:30 P.M., and Sunday, 7 P.M.
Tickets, $18 (today and tomorrow); $15 (Sunday).
Information: (212) 564-8038.
"RAFT OF THE MEDUSA," a drama by Joe Pintauro.
Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Tonight at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M., and Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $25 and $30.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"SEURAT, 1859-1891," Metropolitan Museum of Art.
This show traces the development of Georges Seurat's meticulous pointillist technique.
Also at the Met: "NEO-IMPRESSIONISM: FRIENDS AND FOLLOWERS OF SEURAT." Ancillary to the Seurat exhibition, this display of 70 works from the museum's collection indicates some of the immediate and the more distant repercussions of Neo-Impressionism's Pointillist technique and saturated color.
Both through Sunday.
Today and tomorrow, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; Sunday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Suggested admission: $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 879-5500.
Closing Next Weekend
"CITY OF ANGELS," by Larry Gelbart, music by Cy Coleman and lyrics by David Zippel, at the Virginia Theater, 245 West 52d Street, Manhattan.
Through Jan. 19.
Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M., and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $40 to $60.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"PENN AND TELLER ROT IN HELL," John Houseman Theater, 450 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
Through Jan. 19.
Wednesday through Friday, 8 P.M.; Saturday, 3, 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday, 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 564-8038.


Citicorp Sells Portion Of Stake in Saudi Bank
Citicorp said yesterday that it had sold 10 percent of the highly profitable Saudi American Bank, in a move that helps strengthen Citicorp's financial condition.
The deal, which reduces Citicorp's stake in the bank to 30 percent, is one of a dozen or more sales that Citicorp officials have said they are arranging, without identifying the specific companies involved.


Health Care Battle Flares, Now Over a Disputed Study
Two members of President Bush's Cabinet held a news conference today intended to show conclusively, with a major new study, that Democratic efforts to revamp the nation's health care system would increase taxes and unemployment and saddle employers with huge new costs.
But the chief author of the study, which was performed under Government contract, accused the Secretary of Labor, Lynn Martin, and the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Louis W. Sullivan, of misrepresenting the results of her research.


Review/Art; The Video Collage as a Commentator on Its Time
Given video art's family ties to television, it's no surprise that collage has become one of the most popular forms for artists working in the medium.
The zippy editing and bizarre juxtapositions of images that are standard fare on television, whether encountered in commercials or in random channel-flipping, fit neatly with the esthetic concerns of a generation that grew up on the disjunctive montages of Stan Brakhage, Bruce Conner and Robert Rauschenberg.
In a show now at the Jack Shainman Gallery in SoHo, the German artist Marcel Odenbach makes good use of video collage in works that provide smart and timely commentaries on Germany since the collapse of Communism.
In "Vicious Dogs" (1991), the central work here, Mr.
Odenbach sets up an imagined scene of judgment and retribution.
On one monitor, a neatly dressed man is seen being interviewed and then, suddenly, breaking down and weeping into a handkerchief.
The man, Werner Lotze, is a former terrorist leader in West Germany who fled to the East, only to be arrested after reunification; the tape of him is taken from a television appearance in which he apologized for his actions and renounced his past.


'J.F.K.' Is Only Latest History a la Hollywood; Recoil From Bullet
To the Editor:
Oliver Stone, director of "J.F.K.," and other advocates of conspiracy in the assassination of President Kennedy rely on a flawed and discredited interpretation of the laws of physics.
The basic idea, first published by Mark Lane in 1966, asserts that the backward recoil of Kennedy's head, as recorded in the Zapruder film, is positive proof, according to armchair physics buffs, that a gunman must have fired from the front, hence someone other than Lee Harvey Oswald.
This faulty physics is used to make the grassy knoll plot credible.


Devils Stop Hull's Streak to Beat Blues
Craig Billington's goaltending and Claude Lemieux's shadowing helped the Devils bring Brett Hull's goal-scoring streak to an end and keep New Jersey's winning streak going tonight.
The St.
Louis Blues rarely come out winners when Hull fails to score a goal and they didn't tonight as the Devils made it four straight victories with a 4-3 triumph at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Hull was stopped after getting goals in 10 straight games.


Art in Review
'Artists of Conscience: 16 Years of Social and Political Commentary'  Alternative Museum 594 Broadway (near Houston treet) SoHo Through Jan. 25
This crowded, rambunctious exhibition inaugurates the Alternative Museum's new SoHo quarters while celebrating its 16th anniversary.
Functioning as something of a parade of greatest hits, it includes works by more than 70 artists, all of whom have figured in previous exhibitions at the Alternative Museum, which is well known for its focus on political art.


Islanders Become Futility's Children
After 41 games of the 80-game season, the Islanders are near the bottom of the 22-team National Hockey League.
Barely holding fifth place in the Patrick Division, they are 12 points behind the Devils, who hold the fourth and final playoff berth.
The Islanders are 3 points better than they were last season at this time, but most of the teams in their division have improved much more.
With injuries to several key performers on the forward lines, on the defense and in goal, the Islanders have a plausible excuse for their lowly status.
Few teams have more medical problems and only six teams had fewer than their 36 points after last night's 2-1 victory over Hartford.


Islanders' Victory Doesn't Go By Book
In the final period, when the Islanders stopped playing textbook defense, it was Steve Weeks, a goaltender who has never been accused of having textbook form, who saved the night.
"The main thing is stopping the puck, and as long as he does that, I don't care what style he uses," said Coach Al Arbour after Weeks and his teammates squeaked out a 2-1 victory over the Hartford Whalers at Nassau Coliseum.


On Stage, and Off
Big Deal for Nichols
Whenever Mike Nichols is back in town working on a show, all anyone can talk about is his paycheck.
Superstar directors are rare commodities in the theater, especially in the non-musical theater.
No star is bigger than Mr.
Nichols, and no deal is sweeter than his.
He is now directing "Death and the Maiden," a new play by Ariel Dorfman, starring Glenn Close, Gene Hackman and Richard Dreyfuss, which is to open in late March.
And the deal helps to explain the ticket price of $50, the premium for non-musicals on Broadway.


New U.S.-Israel Dispute on Eve of Talks
Palestinian and Jordanian negotiators finally arrived in Washington today for the next round of Middle East peace talks.
At the same time, the Bush Administration sought to defuse a dispute brewing over its recent backing of a United Nations resolution that appeared to support Palestinian claims to the West Bank and Jerusalem.
Israeli negotiators, who have been in Washington since Sunday, say they are ready to resume the negotiations immediately because they intend to leave Washington by Jan. 15.
Arab delegates have been saying that they don't expect to begin before Sunday.


Conoco Tanker
ConocoDu Pont+ Inc. has christened its first double-hulled oil tanker, the Patriot, as part of the company's plan, announced in April 1990, to replace all four of its tankers with double-hulled ships.
The other three will follow by the end of 1993, the company said.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 588 money market mutual funds increased by $31.02 billion, to $490.12 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 219 institutional funds increased by $24.67 billion, to $169 billion.
Assets of the 280 general-purpose funds were up by $2.48 billion, to $176.29 billion.
The 89 broker-dealer funds increased by $3.87 billion, to $144.83 billion, the institute said.


No Gaps or Static From These Cordless Phones
For people who find cordless telephones appealing in theory but appalling in practice, new models being shown here at the Consumer Electronics Show, the industry's mammoth semiannual trade show, offer hope.
A new generation of cordless telephones has extended ranges of up to half a mile, not only beyond most consumers' backyards, but beyond those of their neighbors down the block.
Users now are often frustrated when the signal dies out in the bathroom or the bedroom.


Chamber Symphony
The New York Chamber Symphony is to present two concerts this weekend, tomorrow at 8 and Sunday at 3 P.M., at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue in Manhattan.
Hans Vonk is to conduct Mozart's "Impresario" Overture and Piano Concerto No. 19 with the soloist Jeffrey Siegel, and Shostakovich's Symphony No. 14 with the soprano Elizabeth Knighton Printy and the bass-baritone Terry Cook.
Tickets are $25 and $30.
Information: (212) 415-5440.


GOLF HEADLINE&gt;McCallister Brushes Off Cobwebs and Takes Lead
Blaine McCallister came out of a self-imposed hibernation to shoot the best round of the first official day of the golf season today at the Infiniti Tournament of Champions.
McCallister shot a 65 over a wet and generally difficult La Costa Course.
He had seven birdies, no bogeys and four saves from sand traps.
His closest pursuers were Tom Purtzer, who shot a 66, and Paul Azinger at 67.


Herschel Walker Considering C.F.L.
He has played with three teams in two leagues and now HERSCHEL WALKER may have an opportunity to take his pro career to Canada.
The Vikings' running back, who is reportedly unhappy in Minnesota, has been added to the negotiation list of the Ottawa Rough Riders of the Canadian Football League.
To get the 29-year-old Walker, who becomes a free agent this spring, Ottawa would presumably have to make an offer in the range of the reported $1.3 million he made this season.
Although DAN RAMBO, the Ottawa general manager, is trying to cut his payroll by $800,000 to get the team back under a $3 million salary ceiling, C.F.L. rules allow each team to have one player under a personal services contract exempt from the ceiling. (AP)


Building a Consumer Economy Amid Communism's Ruins
AN actor dressed as a dentist, complete with white coat, holds up a package of toothpaste and slowly explains how toothpaste works to make teeth stronger.
An American television commercial of the 1950's?
No.
A 1992 Hungarian television commercial.
A stylishly dressed woman matter-of-factly discusses feminine hygiene.


One Contract and Plenty of Ifs
Unless Bill Parcells accepts an offer to coach Boris Yeltsin's Russian biathlon team, he will replace Bill Walsh as the lead analyst for NBC's National Football League coverage.
Well, probably.


Bills Look At Playoff Without Fanfare
Maybe it's because they practically waltzed through the season with a 14-2 record or perhaps because they were in the Super Bowl last year, but the atmosphere around the Bills' locker room leading to Sunday's American Football Conference championship game against Denver is decidedly ho-hum.
The usual buzz that surrounds a team going into a championship game is missing.
There's little loud chatter among the players, who are taking a low-key, businesslike approach to the game.


Lebanon Demands Party Militias Yield Broadcast Stations
After stripping them of their fire power, the Government embarked on a plan today to muzzle the private militias by taking away their radio and television stations.
The Cabinet met in a special session to review new measures intended to check an unparalleled burst of new broadcasting stations that Omar Karami, the Prime Minister, described as "a weapon that can be more lethal than a machine gun and a serious threat to our morals and social fiber."


Mayor Gets Court Order Over Ouster
A Superior Court judge today ordered Mayor Gerald McCann of Jersey City to appear before him on Feb. 7 to show why he should not be removed from office following his conviction last month on Federal fraud and tax-evasion charges.
Judge Arthur N. D'Italia signed the order at the request of Robert J. Del Tufo, the State Attorney General, who said that because Mr.
McCann was convicted of a crime of dishonesty, "forfeit of the office is mandated."


NETWORKS TO SAVE IN NEW HAMPSHIRE
The three major television networks and CNN have agreed on a money-saving innovation for covering the New Hampshire Presidential primary.
Starting Jan. 27, each of them will start sharing some of its videotape with the rest.
"Each of us will donate a crew each day to contribute material to the pool," said Tom Hannon, the political director of CNN.
"It's an experiment we're trying for the first time in a primary, although it's not any sort of radical departure. It's the same sort of pool arrangement that we routinely use for covering hearings and other events in Washington."


Teacher Shot In Crossfire In the Bronx
A 53-year-old New York City public school teacher was shot and critically wounded by the stray bullets of two gunmen yesterday when she stopped her car for a red light at a Bronx intersection and was caught in the blazing crossfire of a shootout, the police said.
As the gunfire erupted on East Mount Eden Avenue near Walton Avenue in the Morris Heights section just before 3 P.M., bullets crashed through both sides of the car, and the victim, Audrey Chasen, of 445 East 86th Street in Manhattan, slumped in the driver's seat, shot in the right cheek and the left side of the neck.


Europeans Ready to Protest if Trade Accord Leaves Them Out
European officials and auto executives here reacted with concern to a Japanese agreement to increase sharply purchases of American-made autos and auto parts, saying that the accord was unacceptable if it did not open the way for the purchase of more European-made products, too.
If the trade deal hammered out in a week of tough trade talks merely opens Japanese markets to all by removing barriers to imports, European officials said, they would then welcome the measures as an opportunity to compete on equal terms.


Editors' Note
An article on Tuesday about Germany's new assertiveness in its policy toward Croatia placed great stress on an assertion by an unidentified State Department official that Chancellor Helmut Kohl had used the German word "Sieg," instead of "Erfolg," to mean "success." As the article explained, the word "Sieg" has come to be associated with declarations of the Nazi Government.


Books of The Times; Just Why Do People Like to Feel Good?
The Pursuit of Pleasure By Lionel Tiger 330 pages. Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95.
Pleasure -- the subject of the latest book by the anthropologist and social critic Lionel Tiger -- is one of those huge, sprawling topics that can easily elude systematic examination.
Indeed, "The Pursuit of Pleasure" bounces erratically around the map of human experience like a ball in a pinball machine, touching, fleetingly, on such varied phenomena as sex, food, drugs, art, music, sports, conversation and the enjoyment people get from gardening, pets, cooking and travel.
"I have tried to find a link," writes Mr.
Tiger, "between campfires, Judy Garland, the Place Vendome, playing patty-cake with a baby, the scent of gardenias, kisses and a good read. I've sought a law of pleasure that might unite such an array of phenomena and more besides."


Fraud Case Bail Is Set
A judge today set bail at $600,000 for Steven D. Wymer, the investment adviser accused of bilking public agencies out of more than $100 million, and Mr.
Wymer is now expected to be released Friday.
Federal District Judge Richard A. Gadbois granted bail over the objections of Federal prosecutors, who argued that Mr.
Wymer might flee.
Mr.
Wymer's assets were seized by the Government on Wednesday, and his lawyers said today that some of his relatives would use their homes to secure a bond.
Mr.
Wymer, of Newport Beach, Calif., has been in jail since his arrest on Dec. 17.
He was indicted last week on 30 counts of mail fraud, securities fraud, money laundering, obstruction of justice and lying to investigators.


Quotation of the Day
"There is no agreement. The proposals on the table as far as the auto industry is concerned are inadequate." -- HAROLD POLING, Chairman of Ford Motor Company.  [ A11:3. ]


INSIDE
A Key Price Measure Falls
With the economy still weak, prices received by producers fell two-tenths of 1 percent in December and one-tenth of 1 percent for 1991.
Page D1.
Health Care and Politics
The Administration cited a new study to attack Democratic health care proposals.
But the study's author said it was being misrepresented.
Page A12.
Gain on Cystic Fibrosis
Scientists reported a major advance toward human gene therapy for cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal hereditary disease.
Page A16.
New Marching Orders
Mayor Dinkins has taken the St.
Patrick's Day march from its traditional organizers, as the controversy over gay marchers continues.
Page B1.


The Spoken Word
SLIDE SHOW AND LECTURE, Queens Museum of Art, New York City Building, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Flushing.
"Queens: A Photographer's View," a lecture and slide presentation by Audrey Gottlieb, a photographer.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Admission, $1.
Museum admission, $2 ($1 for students, the elderly and those over 5; free for those under 5).
Information: (718) 592-9700.
LECTURES AND PLAYS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Family Matters: An Immigrant Memoir," a dramatization of the lives of immigrant children, Sunday at noon, followed at 1 P.M. by "House of Heritage," a lecture on the history of the museum's building and at 2 P.M. by "La Dolce Via," a walking tour of Little Italy.
Separate admission is required for each event.
Tickets for the drama are $10 ($8 for the elderly; $5 for students); tickets to the lecture are $4 and walking tour tickets are $12 ($10 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 431-0233.


Bailout Agency Gets New Chief
The Resolution Trust Corporation said today that its new head, Albert V. Casey, was given a recess appointment by President Bush.
Under a law passed in November that provides $25 billion for the savings and loan bailout, Mr.
Casey was required to be confirmed by the Senate before assuming the new position of chairman and chief executive of the trust corporation.


On My Mind; 10 Choices, 10 Errors
One year ago next week George Bush took one of the most important, risk-filled and courageous steps ever ventured by a President of the United States -- to do battle against an aggressor who had not directly attacked the United States.
In the last half-century two other Presidents had gone to war against marauding dictatorships -- President Roosevelt against Japan and President Truman against North Korea.
But in both cases American armed forces or a dependent ally had already been attacked.
And at the time there were few who mounted protest.


Donations To Neediest Are for Life
Scores of donations to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund come in not the usual round numbers of $10, $50 or $100, but in multiples of 18 for chai, the Hebrew word for "life."
"Last year I celebrated six young members of a new generation in our family by multiplying the symbolic chai (for life) -- that's 18 times 6 -- and contributing $108 to your fund," wrote Marcia Nasatir of Los Angeles.
"The six are all well and thriving, as are all the aunts, uncles, parents and grandparents. It's been a good year for us, and so I found it possible to double last year's contribution with the hope that it makes a better year for those not so lucky."


Officer's Trial Will Test Teaneck's Racial Healing
The marches and strident voices that gripped Teaneck for weeks after a white police officer fatally shot a black teen-ager in April 1990 are gone, dissipated by months of work for racial healing and renewed harmony.
Now, on the eve of the officer's trial on manslaughter charges in neighboring Hackensack, Teaneck's mood is marked by wariness, by a yearning for a friendlier time and by an uneasy confidence that the rebuilding process will prevent new unrest and survive the trial.


Fed by More Than Slump, Welfare Caseload Soars
After showing little growth for almost two decades, the nation's welfare rolls now surge to record levels with each passing month.
The initial hope was that the increase in the number of welfare recipients was merely a byproduct of the recession that would disappear when the economy improved.
But analysts increasingly suspect that other factors, more enduring than the current economic slump, are adding to the sharp increase.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Talking Deals column in Business Day yesterday, about a partnership between biotechnology companies, misstated the Wednesday stock performance of Alkermes Inc. in some editions.
The stock closed up $4.75, to $27 a share, in over-the-counter trading.
The column also ended with an incomplete sentence in some editions.
It should have read: " 'The check that we write today is very, very manageable, given our balance sheet,' Mr. Pops said, noting that Alkermes has about $56 million in cash."


Murray Shiff, 74, Dies; Construction Manager
Murray J. Shiff, a retired construction manager for Tishman Realty and Construction of Manhattan who worked on several major building projects, died on Dec. 31 at his home in Healdsburg, Calif.
He was 74 years old.
He had been hospitalized for heart illness and apparently died of natural causes, but a specific diagnosis was not released, his family said.


Gabor Csordas, 71, of Hungarian Church
The Rev.
Gabor Csordas, a retired leader of Hungarian Protestants in America and a spokesman for Hungarian religious and political causes, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan with a second home in New City, N.Y.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Review/Film; A Party Is Crashed By a Stranger
Jiri Menzel's satirical comedy "The End of Old Times" offers some of the more sumptuous images of wining and dining to be found in a film in recent years.
Set on a sprawling estate in southern Bohemia shortly after the 1918 Communist revolution in Czechoslovakia, it follows the skirmishes and intrigues of a lavish weekend hunting party given by Josef Stoklasa (Marian Labuda), a wealthy boor who has been appointed the property's official caretaker.
Stoklasa is desperate to buy the estate, but has been thwarted by political rules that he hopes can be bent.
One purpose of his bash is to impress the condescending neighborhood gentry.
No sooner has the celebration begun than it is crashed by an elegant bearded stranger with twinkling eyes (Josef Abrham) who claims to be an aristocrat.
At once grandiose and impudent, he patronizes the men, seduces the women and wins over the children by sliding down banisters with them.
Suspicious of his lineage and envious of his charm, the men band against him and force him into a climactic duel.


BUSINESS DIGEST
TRADE TALKS IN JAPAN
Bush left for home with a Japanese offer to buy more American cars and $10 billion more in auto parts, but the car makers he brought with him denounced Japan's pledges.  [ Page A1. ]
The chief executives of the world's eight largest auto makers gathered face to face, all clearly understanding that the American industry is likely never to gain back lost ground.  [ A1. ]


Injured Coleman Misses Practice
DERRICK COLEMAN missed his second shoot-around of the week yesterday at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, but this time it didn't cost the 6-foot-10 New Jersey Nets forward a $250 fine.
That was what he paid for missing an appointment for an ankle X-ray on Sunday and for being absent from Monday's practice.
Yesterday's absence, stemmed from a concussion he suffered Wednesday night after being elbowed in the eye by Minnesota's TONY CAMPBELL in the Nets' 103-97 victory over the Timberwolves.
"I'm going to play it by eye," said Nets Coach BILL FITCH, when asked about Coleman's status for tonight's home game against the Milwaukee Bucks.


METRO DIGEST
QUESTION OF CASH
It is common in the business world for people to talk about profits and the infamous "bottom line." But slowly and with little fanfare, as customers fail to pay their bills on time, many small and medium-sized businesses in the New York City area are being strangled by a simple lack of cash, raising the prospect that still more companies could succumb to bankruptcy before this recession is over.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY
WALL ST. PROJECT IN JEOPARDY


Cone Is Likely to Hit Jackpot in Mets' New Proposal
For the Mets, the negotiations lack the drama that surrounded last spring's dealings on a contract extension for Dwight Gooden.
The negotiations also lack the mutual mistrust that characterized last spring's bargaining with Frank Viola.
The negotiations on a long-term deal for David Cone, though, won't lack for impact or dollars.
The Mets, eager and determined to sign the right-hander to a multiyear contract and thus avoid the chance of losing him to free agency at the end of the 1992 season, will extend Cone a formal contract proposal early next week.
The offer in all probability will be for three years and is expected to approach $12 million.


In the New York Area, Businesses Are Stifled by Cash-Flow Worries
Slowly and with little fanfare, many businesses in the New York City area are being strangled by a lack of cash, raising the prospect that still more companies could succumb to bankruptcy before this recession is over.
Although it is common in the business world for people to talk about profits and the infamous "bottom line," it is cash that dictates the fortunes of many small and medium-sized businesses.
Ripple Effect
Companies can die for lack of sufficient demand for their services, as many in the New York area have discovered during this lengthy and painful recession.
But even those that still have a reasonable amount of business can also expire if their customers do not pay promptly and they get caught in a cash stranglehold from which they cannot escape.
That appears to be the more common problem now.


New York City Irish Group Loses Parade Permit
City Hall has taken away the permit to run the St.
Patrick's Day Parade from the Manhattan group that has sponsored the grand march up Fifth Avenue for the past 150 years but has barred a gay Irish contingent from participating.
The permit has been turned over to the group's statewide parent organization.
But the city's decision does not guarantee that the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization will be invited to participate in the 231st parade on March 17.


Campbell Is Given New Cigarette Work
The Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation has named Campbell-Mithun-Esty, New York, to replace Geer, DuBois Inc., New York, on an estimated $30 million worth of business that the cigarette marketer unexpectedly withdrew from Geer, DuBois on Tuesday.


Another Marbury Hits Nothing but Net
Oh, how Dexter Wooten wanted to rip the cast from his right arm, slip quickly into a red Lafayette uniform and take a shot at the baby-faced kid with the hop in his feet and the rhythm to his dribble.
If only he could magically heal for this one afternoon, for this trip to the lair of the best team in New York City.
"Let me at him," Wooten said, figdeting on the bench, his eyes fixed on Lincoln's 14-year-old Stephon Marbury, already being hailed as the next Kenny Anderson.
"I could stop him."


Coalition Rule in Ethiopia Is Facing Growing Fears of Collapse
Six months after winning control of this war-weary, impoverished nation, the new Ethiopian Government is struggling to keep its people together despite ethnic conflicts, a rock-bottom economy and a dispirited bureaucracy.
There is growing apprehension here in the capital that an experiment to dismantle the traditionally autocratic central government into self-governing regions based on ethnicity will result in the disintegration of the country.
This danger is accentuated, Ethiopians and Western donors say, as President Meles Zenawi refuses to shed the Marxist economic ideas of his insurgency movement and pushes the peasants and urban dwellers into even deeper poverty.


Bronx School Board Yields to Chancellor's Orders
A defiant Bronx community school board has backed down in a confrontation with the city's Schools Chancellor and agreed to stay the appointment of six elementary and middle school principals pending an investigation of charges of anti-Semitism and other irregularities in the selection of candidates.
Facing possible full suspension in the confrontation, the board of Community School District 12, which had been partly superceded by the Chancellor last month, also agreed Wednesday night to withdraw tenure it had granted to four supervisors who had not completed probation, as required by union contracts.


Talks on Yugoslavia Resume With New Cooperative Tone
The European Community peace conference on Yugoslavia resumed here today after a two-month hiatus, and the participants displayed a new spirit of grudging conciliation.
Lord Carrington, chairman of the conference, said after today's one-hour meeting with the leaders of Yugoslavia's six republics that he had perceived a "more constructive" attitude.
The former British Foreign Secretary, who has seen more than a dozen of his cease-fires between Serbs and Croats broken moments after they were announced, said the present cease-fire arranged by Cyrus R. Vance, the former United States Secretary of State, under United Nations auspices, had made it possible for the peace conference to resume.


Borough Park Woman Is Sentenced in the Fatal Beating of Her Son, 8
In a calm, unemotional voice, Shulamis Riegler admitted yesterday in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn that she killed her 8-year-old mentally retarded son Yaakov, twisting his leg so violently that she heard the bone crack.
She then pleaded guilty to manslaughter for his fatal beating.
Mrs.
Riegler and Assistant District Attorney Sheryl Hirsh agreed to a prison sentence of 7 1/2 to 15 years for a killing that raised troubling questions about the city's system of protecting abused children.
Judge Francis X. Egitto, who accepted Mrs.
Riegler's guilty plea, will formally impose the sentence on Feb. 6.
She is free on $250,000 bond.
Her three other children are in foster care.


When the Law and Music Clash, Uproar Follows
A uniformed police officer walked into the Records 'N Such store here two days ago and, delivering a letter signed by the Police Chief, told Donna M. Smith that a number of the records she sold might get her into trouble with the law.
The letter, also sent to two other record stores here, warned against the "illegal selling" of recordings marked with "Parental Advisory: Explicit Lyrics" labels, citing New York's laws on obscenity.


Yelstin, in Rebuff to Ukraine, Lays Claim to Black Sea Fleet
In the latest twist in the dispute over the future of the Soviet military, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia flatly declared today that the Black Sea fleet belongs to Russia, not Ukraine.
Disposition of the fleet is a crucial issue because it is one of the most valuable assets of the disintegrating Soviet military.
Mr.
Yeltsin's assertion underscores Russian sensitivity about the legendary fleet, which was the core of the Russian Imperial Navy beginning in the 18th century, and about its home port, Sevastopol, a historically Russian city that was besieged by the Turks and their allies in the Crimean War in the 19th century.
The Crimea was made part of the Ukrainian republic less than 40 years ago.


A Look at the City; Call Me Juror
Two thousand two hundred twenty-four potential jurors trudged into the courthouses of lower Manhattan on Monday.
I, armed with bagel and low expectations, was one of them.
There was no disappointment for those who expected filth in every room (part of the city's master plan to cut working hours without reducing costs), three armed guards dozing in each courtroom (part of the state's employment plan), and endless hours of waiting (a specialty of all governments).


At the Movies
Exploring Class Tensions
What Jonathan Kaplan found interesting about "Fatal Attraction" was that "the Glenn Close character, though clearly off her rocker, gave voice to a certain rage that women felt." Similarly, he said, his new film expresses "a genuine, palpable tension between the classes."


U.S. Sees Months of Talks Needed for World Trade Pact
The Bush Administration said today that weeks or months of negotiations would be required before it could accept a proposed GATT agreement to pull down international trade barriers.
With the European Community already unhappy about reductions in agricultural subsidies called for by the proposal, the Administration reaction today insured that the five-year-old talks known as the Uruguay Round, for the country in which they began, will drag into the spring on a wide range of issues.
There are 108 countries in the negotiations, which seek to reduce obstacles to trade and broaden the authority of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the Geneva-based organization that sets rules for international trade.


Sadness and Shame in the Bronx
I feel a certain way about white people right now. . . .
I don't want to feel this way, but that's how I feel: angry, angry that this had to happen. . . .
The words were spoken earlier this week by a 14-year-old black youth.
They convey confusion, despair, bitterness.
Little wonder; he and his 12-year-old sister were the victims of a particularly cruel and unforgivable racial attack.


Transamerica Taking Charges
The Transamerica Corporation said today that it would take special charges totaling $180 million after tax, which will result in a fourth-quarter loss of about $80 million.
The charges are related to a change in accounting standards and to a decision to discontinue some operations.
The company said the Trans america Commercial Finance Corporation, a Chicago-based subsidiary, would substantially reduce its lending to certain industries and types of businesses and liquidate the receivables remaining from previously sold businesses.
Accordingly, it will take a special charge of $130 million after tax, which will result in a fourth-quarter after-tax operating loss of about $150 million for the unit.


Review/Film; Chinese Boy Under a Spell
"Life on a String" was shown as part of the 1991 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 29.
The film, in Chinese with English subtitles, opens today at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street in Manhattan.
In the imposingly beautiful but slow and cryptic Chinese film "Life on a String," a young boy is enveloped by his tutor in a magical spell.
The boy is instructed to devote his life to music and told that he will be blind until the 1,000th string on his banjo breaks, an event that does not occur until the boy is a very old man.


Report Finds X-Ray Machines Behind Schedule in Inspections
The New York City Comptroller charged yesterday that the city's X-ray machines were not being inspected according to a state-mandated schedule, but the city and state said that the Comptroller's report was based on an outdated schedule.
According to the report by the Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, nearly 40 percent of the city's X-ray machines were not being inspected, with some machines not being checked in more than a decade.
While the report did not document any injuries caused by the inadequate inspections, it did raise concerns over possible injuries to patients.


Israel M. Labovitz, 84, Retired Budget Official
Israel M. Labovitz, a retired Federal budget official and expert on aid to state and local governments, died on Jan. 1 at George Washington University Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in Mitchellville, Md.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Art in Review
'Working'  Artists Space 223 West Broadway (near White Street) TriBeCa Through tomorrow
This exhibition of seven installation pieces on the subject of labor is long on sobering social documentary and statistics and a bit short on art.
But virtue has its own rewards, up to a point, and these pieces are always informative, often disturbing and sometimes rather moving.
The best parts are when ordinary people speak, usually on video.


DNA Fingerprinting Has Value as Evidence
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 20 news article on the debate over DNA fingerprinting:


Trenton Democrats Delay Vote on Tax Repeal Again
After a day of negotiations that stretched late into the night, Assembly Speaker Joseph V. Doria Jr. postponed for a third time a vote on repealing the Democratic tax package, after it became clear that he was still short of the 41 Democratic votes needed for the repeal.
Mr.
Doria had promised a "go-for-broke" vote on a five-bill package that would allow the entire $2.8 billion tax package, which was passed in 1990 at the behest of Gov.
Jim Florio, to lapse.


In Fair Weather or Foul
Ricky Ervins was describing his slippery but solid running on the rain-soaked field against the Atlanta Falcons last Saturday.
Ervins just as easily might have been summarizing much of his football past and his entire rookie season, one in which he vaulted from obscurity to provide the Redskins' versatile offense with another wicked weapon.
"There were a lot of times where I slipped," Ervins said of his 104 rushing yards in the playoff victory against the Falcons, "but luckily I stayed up."


Sounds Around Town
The Parker Legacy
Jesse Davis, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Manhattan, (212) 228-6440.
Jesse Davis is a burning, intense alto saxophonist who has completely absorbed the message of Charlie Parker.
What Mr.
Davis really flaunts is Parker's phrasing, liquid and relaxed at all tempos.
Mr.
Davis is one of the finest young musicians to arrive in jazz recently, and Bradley's is a good place to hear him stretch out.
Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.
There is a $12 cover, plus an $8 minimum.
Jazz's Jester
Sun Ra, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, Manhattan, (212) 219-3055.
Sun Ra, the court jester of jazz, has a seemingly endless supply of material with which to send an audience on an intergalactic trip.
Tunes by Fletcher Henderson mix with free improvisation, rhythm-and-blues backbeats and just about anything else.
Hearing Sun Ra's Arkestra, disheveled and loose, is one of jazz's great experiences.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 9 and midnight.
Tickets are $9 in advance or $11 at the door.
Coleman Plus 3
George Coleman, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7902.
Half of George Coleman's regular working band is playing with the trumpeter Danny Moore at the Village Vanguard this week, so this show is an opportunity to hear one of jazz's more brutal and prolix players in the company of other musicians.
Mr.
Coleman will be joined by the young pianist Benny Green, the bassist David Williams and the drummer Lewis Nash.
Mr.
Coleman never has an off night, but a different group just might push him further in the direction in which he's already going, which is brilliance.
Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 8 P.M., 10 P.M. and midnight; there is no third set on Sunday.
The cover is $15, and the minimum is $7.50.


Expressway's Good Samaritan Loves His Work
Here's a job description for you: Up at 5 A.M. to drive off by 5:45.
Spend four hours seeking trouble on the expressway.
Inhabit traffic jams of grumpy motorists reading, telephoning, fuming, shaving or applying makeup.
Find stubborn stalls, fires, accidents, hysterical drivers, women in labor, startled children, men in fistfights.
With luck, crawl under a disabled car in the rain with a flashlight in your mouth.
Fix a transmission leak.
Accept no payments.
Perhaps be thanked.
In spare time, monitor six radios and two telephones.
Every 30 minutes go on the air to chat smoothly about traffic for miles around.


Autopsy Is Said to Show Maxwell Was Bruised
The French weekly Paris Match reported today that the second and final autopsy on the body of Robert Maxwell showed numerous bruises, indicating that the British publisher was probably beaten before his death.
But that conclusion was disputed by one of the pathologists who conducted the autopsy in Israel.


Critic's Choice/Music; Back With the Brooklyn
The Brooklyn Philharmonic played exceptionally well in its final seasons with Lukas Foss.
This year, Dennis Russell Davies has taken over as the orchestra's music director and is starting to make his own mark.
But Mr.
Foss is keeping up his ties with the ensemble as its conductor laureate.
Tonight and tomorrow at 8, and on Sunday at 3 P.M., Mr.
Foss is appearing with his old orchestra as composer, conductor, arranger and pianist at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, in the Fort Greene section.
The centerpiece of the program is the New York premiere of Mr.
Foss's Clarinet Concerto, actually an arrangement of an attractive four-movement chamber work, called "Tashi" after the ensemble for which it was composed.
That group's clarinetist, Richard Stoltzman, is to be the soloist in the Brooklyn performance.
Like many of Mr.
Foss's other works, "Tashi" ranges freely across stylistic barriers, with moments of mysterious angularity butting up against Minimalist references, eerie sustained tones and sections in sliding pitches.
And the work's clarinet line -- particularly the series of fleet cadenzas in its third movement -- is tailor-made to Mr.
Stoltzman's colorful style.


Excerpts From Bush-Miyazawa Remarks: 'Promoting Prosperity' in Pacific
Following are excerpts from the text of the joint declaration released yesterday by President Bush and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan, provided by The Associated Press, and excerpts from their joint news conference, provided by Reuters: Cooperation to Promote World Peace and Prosperity
The U.S.-Japan alliance provides the foundation for our global partnership.
Together both nations pledge to: work together to maintain world peace and security, promote development of the world economy, support the worldwide trend toward democratization and market-oriented economies and meet new transnational challenges.
To achieve these goals, the two countries will cooperate to strengthen the GATT multilateral trading system, reinvigorate the U.N. organization, advance arms control and the nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction, assist the developing world to promote growth and stability, and protect and improve the global environment.


I.R.S. Rules on Estate Of Stolen Treasures
The heirs of Joe Tom Meador, the United States Army lieutenant who stole a collection of medieval treasures from Quedlinburg in central Germany in the final days of World War II, must pay estate tax on the objects they acquired at his death in 1980, according to a memorandum of the Internal Revenue Service just made public.
The next step in the case will be for the I.R.S. to determine the value of the gold, silver and jewel-encrusted artworks as of 1980, a sum which art experts have said may exceed $100 million.


CHRONICLE
ROBERT F. WAGNER JR. and LOUIS HARRIS have joined forces in a new public-opinion and market-research concern, LH Research, which is to open on Monday.
"I always wanted to own my own firm, and in 1956 I achieved that," Mr.
Harris said yesterday as he bid farewell to his colleagues at Louis Harris &amp; Associates, which is now owned by the Gannett Company but which will continue to bear the Harris name.


U.S. SETS OFF BLAST IN ANTARCTIC DUMP
Technicians at America's McMurdo Station in Antarctica have set off a powerful explosion to destroy a chemical dump, and the conservation organization Greenpeace yesterday accused the United States of endangering the Antarctic environment.
The blast, in which some 400 pounds of explosives were used to destroy a stockpile of discarded chemicals, took place on Ross Island near McMurdo Station on Dec. 30.
The explosion left a crater about 40 feet wide and 10 feet deep and was felt up to 10 miles away.


Art in Review
Milton Avery  Snyder Fine Art 588 Broadway (near Houston Street) SoHo Through tomorrow Grace Borgenicht 724 Fifth Avenue (near 57th Street) Through Feb. 1
The 1950's, from which most of the work in these shows dates, were personally difficult years for Milton Avery, though his painting never looked more relaxed.
The watercolors at Snyder have forest, marsh and sea as their subjects, and the whole show seems soaked in a plangent turquoise-green.


Restaurants
Maxim's
Since it opened in late 1985, Maxim's has been a baffling place, with jarring chef changes, style revisions and more ups and downs than a Wall Street commodities trader.
The current script is among the best in a long time, perhaps ever.
With its crack service team and compelling food by David Ruggerio, the chef, Maxim's is riding high.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.  Another Cavalier Victory


Pop/Jazz; From Chicago, Authentic Blues Guitar
At 9 o'clock on a weeknight, all is quiet at Chicago Blues.
The speaker system pipes in electric blues at whisper volume; the sudden laughter of a bartender can be heard all the way from the back of the club.
The ceiling fans aren't even turning.
Only a dozen or so people have shown up for the opening night of Lefty Dizz, a 56-year-old Chicago blues guitarist.
Mr.
Dizz stands at the back of the bar.
He wears a shiny silver suit and a white hat with a feather in it.
He throws back a shot of Wild Turkey and snubs out a Pall Mall.
"Well," he says, "here goes nothing."
Unlike some of his guitar-playing contemporaries -- Buddy Guy, Son Seals, Otis Rush -- Mr.
Dizz has never advanced beyond relative obscurity in Chicago into the blues mainstream.
Although he has been leading his own bands on and off since 1965, he has never had a solo recording contract in the United States.
Over the years, he has backed blues giants like Muddy Waters, Jimmy Reed, Johnny Shines and Sonny Boy Williamson; yet he has never managed to translate his sideman status into name recognition.
He didn't invent the duckwalk or the Bo Diddley beat.
He is seldom mentioned in blues reference books, even under his real name, Walter Williams.


Pepitone in Scuffle at Hotel Lounge
He hasn't played a major league game since he retired 19 years ago, but JOE PEPITONE still has his pride, and, perhaps, a bit of a temper.
The way the police in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y., are telling it, the 51-year-old former Yankee first baseman was talking with a friend in a Catskills hotel lounge when five men, including 21-year-old JOHN CAPURSO, began pestering Pepitone.
The confrontation remained at the verbal level, the police said, until Capurso mentioned that Pepitone was a "has-been." During the ensuing scuffle, everybody but Pepitone suffered minor cuts and bruises, according to the police, who charged Pepitone with misdemeanor assault and lodged various assault and disorderly conduct charges against Capurso and his companions.
Pepitone was released after posting $75 bail. (AP)


Promotion Executive Joins Backer Unit
William H. Maynard Jr., one of the first top creative executives to move from advertising to sales promotion, is returning to the field where he made his name.


Denver Airport Rating Raised
Standard &amp; Poor's has upgraded Denver's airport revenue bonds and lifted them from its review list.
The bonds, which had been under review since Dec. 12, 1990, are now rated BBB, up from BBB-.
The rating service said the action reflected ratification of two agreements with United Airlines, which accounts for about 45 percent of the traffic at the existing airport.
The city has been building a new airport to meet growing demand.
S.&amp; P. called the agreement with United "a major stabilizing credit factor."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  TOO FEW SOUVENIRS FROM TOKYO
President Bush headed home with a suitcase of concessions that car makers pronounced inadequate.
Even Administration officials admitted the trip fell short of U.S. goals.
A1  AUTOMOTIVE SUMMIT
The heads of the world's largest automakers, Japanese and American, met for the first time in a Tokyo hotel, and everyone walked away dissatisfied.
A1  GREAT EXPECTATIONS FIZZLE
Contrary to expectations that the President's visit to Tokyo would jump-start relations, the trip may have exacerbated antagonism.
A11  Europe wants equal treatment after U.S.-Tokyo auto accords.
A11  'THE FLEET IS RUSSIA'S'
President Boris N. Yeltsin bridled at Ukraine's claim on the Black Sea Fleet, and, invoking history to back him up, declared it the property of Russia.
A1  UKRAINE HOLDS ITS GROUND
President Leonid M. Kravchuk debated for four hours with senior military commanders on the future of armed forces in independent Ukraine.
A8  A CASUALTY OF WAR
Rustaveli Prospekt was the heart of the Georgian capital of Tbilisi, and one of the most tragic victims of the fighting there.
A9  YUGOSLAVIA SPLINTERS AGAIN
The Serbian minority in Bosnia and Herzegovina has proclaimed a sector of the republic as an autonomous region.
A2  PEACE DELEGATIONS ARRIVE
The Palestinian and Jordanian delegations arrived in Washington for peace talks, but the path is paved with questions.
A3  ETHIOPIA 6 MONTHS LATER
The prognosis is not promising six months after Ethiopia's new Government took over.
A6  Michel Rocard, ex-French Prime Minister, makes a comeback.
A3  NEW ATTENTION FOR P.O.W.
ISSUE
Alan C. Ptak will be the nation's first Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs.
A5  Daqiuzhuang Journal: Where capitalism and Communism meet.
A4  Beirut sets out to silence the militias it has disarmed.
A6  National A12-16, A28  WHY WELFARE ROLLS KEEP RISING
After showing little growth for almost two decades, the nation's welfare rolls now routinely reach a record level with each passing month.
And there is a growing belief among analysts that factors more enduring than the current recession will keep the number of caseloads high well into the future.
A1  BUSH'S RATING SLIPS FURTHER
At the dawn of the election year, a New York Times/CBS News Poll found that the President's approval rating had dipped to 48 percent.
But the poll also found that voters knew little about the Democrats who would challenge him.
A1  Reporter's Notebook: The Vice President on the stump.
A15  Four networks agreed to pool resources in New Hampshire.
A14  The drug policy chief acknowledged a campaign finance impropriety.
A14  THE POLITICS OF HEALTH CARE
Two Cabinet members held a news conference intended to show conclusively, with a major new study, that Democratic efforts to revamp the nation's health care system would saddle employers with huge new costs and increase unemployment.
But the chief author of the study immediately charged that the Administration was misrepresenting the results of her research.
A12  A JUDGE'S COMMENTS, A CITY TORN
Inflammatory remarks by the top state judge in Jacksonville, Fla., have brought racial tensions that local officials and community leaders are trying to ease, with only limited success so far.
A12  FURTHER CURBS ON POLLUTION
Taking aim at ever-smaller sources of air pollution, California adopted regulations controlling the ingredients in aerosol disinfectants, household adhesives, fragrances and other consumer products.
A12  GAIN ON CYSTIC FIBROSIS
Scientists delivered healthy copies of a gene whose defect causes cystic fibrosis into the lungs of animals, where they blazed to life and stayed robust for six weeks.
That success was another step toward human gene therapy for the most common lethal hereditary disease.
A16  NEW FINDING ON HEART RISKS
Researchers said people with normal cholesterol levels but high amounts of blood fats might be four times as likely as others to suffer a heart attack, and could be wrongly given a clean bill of health.
A16  Congress and the Administration settle a census dispute.
A14  Law Page B16  How a defendant in Florida can get a rebate if he is acquitted.
At the Bar  Metropolitan Digest, B1 VICTIMS OF CASH CRUNCH
Business that are surviving the recession are being strangled by cash shortages, as their customers, also strapped for cash, drag their feet when paying their bills.
The vicious cycle has raised the prospect of even more bankruptcies.
A1  Neediest Cases B2  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-28, B14-15  Touring the Intrepid.
C1  Films from the Depression.
C1  Eavesdropping: urban sport.
C1  For Children C5  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  Film: At the Movies C10  "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle." C8  Music: A Chicago blues legend.
C3  Dance: By Randy Warshaw.
C3  Restaurants C24  Art: Here comes Abstraction.
C28  The Art Market C19  Video collages by Marcel Odenbach.
C21  Word and Image: "The Pursuit of Pleasure." C23  TV Weekend B14  Obituaries B6  Peter Gray Meek, executive of National Health Council.
Sports B7-12  Baseball: Who's on third for Yankees?
B7  Basketball: Rattled Knicks need to roll now.
B9  Lafayette High up against tough competition.
B9  Column: Lipsyte on hockey.
B7  Football: Redskins' Ervins finds his footing.
B7  Hockey: Devils win; stop Hull.
B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials A26  Lost in Tokyo.
Why Governor Wilder failed.
Women at work.
Sadness, shame in the Bronx.
Letters A26  A. M. Rosenthal: 10 choices, 10 errors.
A27  Leslie H. Gelb: Call me juror.
A27  M. J. Akbar: At the center of the world.
A27  Jessica Litwak: Pregnant?
Stick to the rules and relax.
A27


Shaken and Rattled, Knicks Need to Roll
Having time to regroup before tomorrow night's rematch against the Boston Celtics may be a blessing for the Knicks.
In an 82-game season, it is dangerous to draw too many conclusions from one game.
But the Knicks' fourth-quarter collapse during Wednesday's 99-95 loss to the Celtics at Boston Garden raises some interesting questions as New York continues its first season in the Pat Riley era.


Peter Gray Meek, 80, Executive of National Health Council
Peter Gray Meek, a retired executive for health and voluntary agencies, died Tuesday at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 80 years old and lived in Wyckoff, N.J.
He died of heart failure, his doctor, Dr. Bradley Kaufman, said.


Comforted at Scene of the Death of His Mother


Times Revamping Its Business Operations
A reorganization of business operations at The New York Times was announced yesterday by Lance R. Primis, president and general manager of the newspaper.
Mr.
Primis said the new organization, to take effect on Monday, would enable The Times's business staffs to increase client contacts, discover and develop business opportunities, redeploy people to enhance growth and create efficiencies.


Winter Weather Makes a Brief Appearance


BUSH REACHES PACT WITH JAPAN, BUT AUTO MAKERS DENOUNCE IT
President Bush left for home today with a Japanese agreement to buy more American cars and $10 billion more in auto parts, but the car makers he brought with him denounced the Japanese pledges as woefully inadequate.
Even Bush Administration officials were saying the arrangements, worked out in the long and often bitter negotiations, fell far short of meeting the goals set by the White House for improving American exports to Japan and thus creating more jobs in the United States.


For Children
'Botch: Adventures in the Land Below'  Tada Theater 120 West 28th Street Manhattan (212) 627-1732 Recommended ages: 3 and up Through Jan. 19
Any child who has ever traveled on New York City subways has probably wondered what's lurking in the long black tunnels at night, long after everyone's gone home.
The newest production of Tada, the children's theater ensemble, provides a few subway scenarios, enough to confirm a child's most vivid imaginings.
The hourlong musical, which is spun together with a wonderful collection of songs and heartfelt acting, is written by Jon Agee, the author of, among other books, "The Incredible Painting of Felix Clousseau." Beginning with a mysterious and evocative song (and accompanied by a felicitous jazz ensemble), this modern play introduces two young, well-off Upper East Siders; a trio of young Buffalo tourists, and a pair of young streetwise but friendly New Yorkers.
The most interesting character to watch is Madeline, the Upper East Sider whose Bergdorf Goodman shopping bag and way of walking spell supercilious.
She also has the best lines, like "We'll sit up in first class" on the train.
All the children become lost (it's never quite clear why), and in their meanderings come upon a rat who paints soulful still lifes of cheeses; mummies from Egypt who tap dance, and an organization, run by children, called Botch, the Bureau of Turmoil, Chaos and Headaches.
The bureau is responsible for disasters like floods and power failures; for example, the sassy dispatcher takes a call to short-circuit a water main.
All in a day's work.
The lost travelers eventually find their way above ground, but you get the feeling they may never again think of the subway as simply a means of transportation.


Corrections
Three pictures in the Metro Section yesterday appeared without captions in some copies.
The picture of a monkey on page B1 was about Kennedy International Airport's Animalport, a cross reference to the "J.F.K. Journal" article on page B3.
The picture at the top of page B3 in some editions showed Ted Rivera talking to reporters about the gay-bashing attack that resulted 18 months ago in the death of his brother, Julio.
The caption should have said that Daniel Doyle, who had pleaded guilty to manslaughter in the attack, was sentenced to 8 1/3 to 25 years in prison.


Borg-Warner Names New Chief Executive
The Borg-Warner Corporation has named Donald C. Trauscht as its chief executive, the company said yesterday.
Mr.
Trauscht, 59 years old, ho had been president and chief operating officer since September, replaces James F. Bere, Borg-Warner's longtime leader, who died after a heart attack last Friday at age 69.


You Call That a Foul? More Often, Referees Are
"THIS IS THE BIG EAST!!! LET 'EM PLAY!!!"
Art Hyland sits between the court and the stands, between the officials he supervises for the Big East Conference and the fans who offer instant critical analyses.


In Florida Courts, 'Rebates' Can Follow Acquittals
One month after William K. Smith was acquitted of rape charges, officials of Palm Beach County, Fla., are waiting for his lawyers to send them a bill for some of his defense costs.
That would not happen if Mr.
Smith had been tried in some other state.
Only Florida, apparently, allows defendants who have been acquitted to apply for recovery of expenses like the hiring of expert witnesses.
Such a right of reimbursement has existed there since 1846, the year after Florida entered the Union.


At the Bar
It has been a difficult few months for Edward M. Ricci, a personal-injury lawyer in West Palm Beach, Fla.
First his wife, Judge Mary E. Lupo, presided over the hyper-publicized rape trial of William K. Smith.
Now Mr.
Ricci, along with four other prominent local lawyers, has been sanctioned by the Florida Bar for improperly hawking their services.
Their ordeal marks but the latest chapter in the bar's agonizing entry into advertising.
It is also among the most bizarre, since what these lawyers set out to do, they say, is be a light unto the nations -- to show there are better ways for lawyers to sell themselves than by painting their names on park benches or plastering them on billboards.


Royall Victor, 75, Retired Law Partner of Cravath, Swaine
Royall Victor Jr., the retired presiding partner of a prominent Manhattan law firm, died Wednesday at Concord Hospital in Concord, N.H.
He was 75 years old and lived in Hopkinton, N.H., and Webster, N.H., and previously was a longtime resident of Glen Head, L.I.
He died of complications from pneumonia and kidney failure, his family said.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about a protest against the absence of a homeless person on Mayor David N. Dinkins's Commission on the Homeless described the situation incompletely.
In fact, unknown to the protesters, a homeless man had been appointed and was taking part in the hearing at which the protest took place.


New Ratings For Insurers Are Disputed
A.
M.
Best, the nation's leading insurance-rating agency, has loosened its disclosure policy to no longer require life insurance companies to report the negative footnotes that Best often attaches to its safety ratings.
Best has been criticized recently by consumer advocates and by policyholders of failed insurance companies, who say the company is too lenient in its grading of insurers.
The change on disclosures, which took effect last summer but is only now becoming widely known, has brought new criticism of Best.


Daqiuzhuang Journal; A Chinese Village Discovers the Road to Riches
Yang Yanru, a middle-aged woman who keeps her 11-room house spotless, could have been standing on a typical street in an affluent American suburb, bidding her guests goodbye after a luncheon.
Except for her crooked teeth, and a collar that suggested her man-tailored shirt was made in the 1960's, there was little to suggest that Ms.
Yang was once a peasant who got her eggs from the chicken coop in the backyard.
Now she is one of China's new rich, a woman who says she doesn't have to hold down a job because her husband makes so much money.
She can spend her afternoons entertaining visitors, she said, or playing mah-jongg with friends.


Dow Up 5.59; Small Issues Set the Pace
Stocks rose in choppy trading yesterday, with a number of indexes repeating their almost daily feat of reaching new highs.
Shrinking interest rates still leave investors with few alternatives to shifting money into equities.l
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 5.59 points, to a new closing high of 3,209.53.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange remained heavy at 292.4 million shares, up from 290.8 million on Wednesday.


Yankees, in Whispers, Replay Who's-on-3d Act
The Yankees introduced Danny Tartabull and Mike Gallego to the news media at Yankee Stadium yesterday, but the attention quickly swayed from the newest Yankees to speculation over who might follow them as even newer Yankees.
Even though the Yankees lavished a total of $30.6 million on free agents Tartabull and Gallego in the last few days and displayed them before dozens of cameras and notebooks, the name Charlie Hayes was being whispered in corners of the Stadium Club because he appears to be the most recent answer to New York's problem at third base.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with the Home Video column misidentified the actor at the left in a scene from "Dr. Strangelove." He was Peter Bull.


Prices of Treasury Securities Fall
Prices of Treasury securities fell in heavy, rumor-driven trading yesterday.
Rumors that President Bush had died, and that today's employment report would portray much more strength in the economy than is currently recognized, began to circulate around midday.


Pepsi-Cola's Plans For the Super Bowl
The Pepsi-Cola Company will use the commercial time it has purchased during CBS's telecast of Super Bowl XXVI on Jan. 26 to introduce the first change in the advertising slogan for its flagship Pepsi-Cola brand since 1984.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.00
6.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.75
3.70
6.26
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.80
3.73
6.32
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.45
6.40
7.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.41
7.38
8.32
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.60
8.57
9.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.65
6.65
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Guards Patrol at Bronx School in Racial Attack


Sounds Around Town
La Mama Turns 30
Mega Cabaret, La Mama E.T.C., 74A East Fourth Street, Manhattan, (212) 475-7710.
The venerable downtown theater's 30th-anniversary marathon benefit features a wide range of performance artists, musicians and dancers, each doing one or two numbers.
Penny Arcade is the host, and some of the bigger names include John Moran, Andre De Shields, John Kelly, Jeffrey Essmann, John Epperson, Dancenoise and David Cale.
There are dance breaks between acts, with Lori Seid serving as disk jockey.
Festivities begin at 7 P.M. tomorrow and continue indefinitely.
Tickets are $25 to $100.
Jazz Piano at Rainbow
Billy Stritch, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th Floor, (212) 632-5000.
Billy Stritch, who is 29 years old and from Texas, is one of New York City's most promising younger male cabaret performers.
A swinging crooner whose style suggests a hybrid of Michael Feinstein and Mel Torme, he is an adept jazz pianist and arranger of standards in a conservative pop-jazz idiom.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11:15.
There is a $35 cover charge and a dinner minimum for the early show (no minimum for the late show).


Dykstra Accepted into Offender Program
LENNY DYKSTRA of the Philadelphia Phillies has been admitted to a first-time offender program that could erase a drunken-driving arrest from his record, Delaware (Pa.) County's chief prosecutor said Thursday.
District Attorney WILLIAM RYAN said Dykstra would be formally accepted into the program at a hearing next month.
Dykstra will not be required to admit or deny guilt, Ryan said, but a judge will suspend Dykstra's driver's license for three months and order him to attend a 12-hour safe driving course.


Official Admits Impropriety in Use of White House Stationery
Former Gov.
Bob Martinez of Florida, director of the Federal Office of National Drug Control Policy, acknowledged today that he improperly used White House stationery to solicit refunds owed his unsuccessful 1990 re-election campaign and made the money available for the Bush-Quayle re-election effort in Florida.
The Governor routed more than $63,000 to the Florida Republican Party for the Bush-Quayle re-election campaign, The Washington Post said today.
The account reported Mr.
Martinez's use of White House stationery, as well as telephone calls made by Graham R. Gillette, his special assistant, soliciting the refunds from television stations that had overcharged him for campaign advertising.


Mara and Guy Among 15 Hall Prospects
With as few as four and as many as seven niches to be filled in the Pro Football Hall of Fame, a list of 66 nominees has been pared to 15 prospects, four of them first-time finalists, including the Giants' owner, WELLINGTON MARA, and the former Raiders punter RAY GUY.
If they pass muster of 31 media selectors who meet the day before the Super Bowl, Guy would be the first full-time punter selected for the Hall of Fame, and Mara, whose father, TIM MARA, was a charter inductee in 1963, would complete the first father-son combination.
The other first-time finalists are the former 49ers coach BILL WALSH and CHARLIE JOINER, a wide receiver.


Diner's Journal
From Theater to Club
One of the more popular new dining and dancing spots in Manhattan during the holiday season was the Supper Club, in the Edison Hotel, at 240 West 47th Street.
This cavernous space, in a former Broadway theater, is the brainchild of Jean de Noyer, the owner of Le Comptoir, and Wayne Nish, the chef and owner of March, both in Manhattan.


CHRONICLE
ABE LEBEWOHL, owner of the Second Avenue Kosher Deli, wanted to express his gratitude to MIKHAIL GORBACHEV, so he commissioned an eight-foot-high statue of the former President of the Soviet Union and yesterday had it placed atop the canopy of the deli, which is at Second Avenue and 10th Street.
The wooden sculpture by Robert Grossman, who once fashioned a nude in chopped liver for Mr.
Lebewohl, is not an exact likeness of the former leader.
It has two faces, one looking north on Second Avenue, the other south, so it can be seen from either approach.
On the bottom is a sign reading, "Thank you, Mr. Gorbachev."


Ukraine Woos Soviet Troops' Loyalty
In an open meeting in the marble columned Parliament building, President Leonid M. Kravchuk debated for four hours today with top former Soviet military officers on the future of Ukraine's armed forces.
More than 100 generals, dozens of colonels, and one admiral took turns telling Mr.
Kravchuk what was bothering them, as commanders of the 1.3 million troops of the former Soviet Union who now found themselves in Ukraine, an independent country of 52 million.


To Buy or Not to Buy, or to Wait Till the Rain Ends


F.B.I. Says Los Angeles Gang Has Drug Cartel Ties
A two-year Federal investigation has led to the breakup of a cocaine distribution ring and established for the first time that the Crips, one of this city's major street gangs, has direct ties to the Medellin drug cartel in Colombia, the Federal Bureau of Investigation says.
Seven people, including two Colombian nationals, have been charged with importing about 50 tons of cocaine from the cartel over a 10-year period and distributing it to dealer networks here and in Anchorage, Detroit, Dallas, Houston, Seattle and Honolulu, officials said.
According to the bureau, the ringleaders were two members of the Crips street gang, Stacey Harper, 33 years old, and Ernest Bronson, 27 years old.


Review/Dance; The Geometric Shapes Of Randy Warshaw
After several name changes since it was started in 1986, the Joyce Theater's mini-festival of modern-dance choreographers has settled on the umbrella title of Altogether Different.
This year's edition opened on Tuesday night with the Randy Warshaw Dance Company.
Like Mr.
Warshaw, the six other choreographers who have been invited to present their work are not unknown to followers of the experimental dance scene.


Serbs Proclaim Autonomy In Another Yugoslav Region
Leaders of the Serbian minority in Bosnia and Herzegovina proclaimed their autonomy over a part of the republic today, adding another voice to a Serbian nationalist debate that is threatening the quest for a peaceful resolution to Yugoslavia's violent unraveling.
The decision brought the formation of another center of Serbian politics beyond Serbia itself and Krajina, the region of Croatia where Serb forces have established control.


Internal Battle at News on Union Adviser
An internal struggle among the leaders of the 10 unions representing workers at The Daily News could be the first crisis in the effort to save the bankrupt paper.
A leader of one of the paper's unions, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that leaders of the three largest unions are seeking to replace Theodore W. Kheel as a representative of union interests on the committee planning a restructuring of The News.


A Lonely Table for America's Cup
Few yachtsmen have better reason than Dennis Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes team to see the America's Cup trial races begin.
It has been a lonely ocean out there for Conner's crew, which has been training without a sailing partner for more than a year.
"I can't wait," said John Barnitt, the team's 30-year-old mastman during a practice sail on Tuesday in the ocean off San Diego Bay.
"We have seven days until we tee off. We're pretty enthusiastic. You can practice and practice forever. But you really don't know how things will go until you see someone one on one."


To Clean Air, California Curbs Personal Products
Taking aim at ever-smaller sources of pollution, a California agency yesterday adopted regulations controlling the ingredients in household adhesives, laundry starch, perfumes, dusting aids and other types of consumer products.
The action by the agency, Air Resources Board, applies only to California, but historically other states with air pollution problems have adopted California's regulations.


Narcotics Supervision Tightened After Report Warns of Problems
Supervision of a special narcotics unit is being tightened after a report has warned of "serious problems," New York City Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said yesterday.
But he added that there was no evidence of systemic corruption in the unit.
Mr.
Brown said he had also received a proposal to team uniformed beat officers with undercover narcotics officers from the unit in question, the Organized Crime Control Bureau.
The effort would be to bring drug enforcement under his community policing philosophy.


Francis M. Pipkin, 66, Harvard Physics Chief
Francis M. Pipkin, a former associate dean and physics department chairman at Harvard University, died Sunday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 66 years old and lived in Belmont, Mass.
The cause of death was a heart ailment, his family said.


Art in Review
Rob Pruitt and Jack Early 'Red, Black, Green, Red, White and Blue'  Leo Castelli Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Prince Street) Through Jan. 25
Whatever Rob Pruitt and Jack Early may have intended by this installation, they have concocted something at the least muddled and at the worst degrading.
In a room covered in gold foil and splattered with paint, a la Jackson Pollock, these two young white artists display posters of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., Queen Latifah, Action Jackson, Michael Jordan and other prominent American blacks, mounted on obelisk-shaped posts either hung on, or propped against, the walls.
Some of the posters are the sort of psychedelic images of naked women sold in the 1960's.
Music blares from a stereo.


Bridge Authority Makes a Habit of Chaos
To the Editor:
It is not the failure of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority to sell 20-trip tokens, as Josh Stern writes (letter, Dec. 20), that causes tie-ups, but the authority's refusal to separate automatic exact change and token lanes from slower-moving attended lanes.


Women at Work
Much as they might wish the best for Faye Wattleton in her new job as host of a television talk show, many women will wish she were staying in her old one.
As president of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, Ms.
Wattleton has been a fierce and articulate fighter for abortion rights.
As the Supreme Court appears to be moving ever closer to reconsidering those rights, so the need for battlers with her passion and commitment becomes ever clearer.


Market Place; Rival Stock Indexes Set for Biotechnology
Biotechnology stocks have caught the imagination of both individual and institutional investors, allowing dozens of companies to go public and see their share prices soar on little more than dim hopes for new drugs.
Now two exchanges are engaged in a battle to see which one can come up with a biotech industry option contract that can win it a share of the excitement.
The first salvos were fired this week when both the American Stock Exchange and the Chicago Board Options Exchange announced proposed contracts.
The Amex got the first press release out, but the Chicago exchange was the first one to file with the Securities and Exchange Commission for permission to trade the options.
S.E.C.
Approval Seen
It appears likely that the S.E.C. will approve them simultaneously, probably in two or three months, setting up a battle over market share in a market that may not be big enough to support even one index.
Some options contracts intended to match the performance of the entire stock market have been big successes, but those on individual industries, among them computers and precious metals, have been moderate successes at most.


Reviews/Film; Heartthrob Learning Maturity
Sometimes the best thing a movie maker can do is just go ahead and let Christian Slater smirk.
Millions of teen-age girls will feel they're in heaven, and the rest of us at least won't be bored; he does smirk well.
But "Kuffs" carries this to a desperate extreme.
Every now and then Mr.
Slater turns away from the story in this comic police-action movie and talks directly into the camera.
It's no joke to say that this is the most engaging part of the film.
It takes about two seconds to figure out the target audience.
At the start Mr.
Slater and Milla Jovovich (last seen in "Return to the Blue Lagoon") dance around their living room to a bouncy rock-and-roll hit of a few years back, "The Future's So Bright I Gotta Wear Shades." He is wearing only sweat pants, and she is in stylish bright-colored underwear.
"By the way, my name is George Kuffs," Mr.
Slater tells the camera, asking that we not be too hard on him when he dumps her because she is (quite inconspicuously) pregnant.


Yanks, Continued: Sax Is Dealt for Melido Perez
The Yankees, dormant for most of the off season, capped a stunning week of activity yesterday by finally trading second baseman Steve Sax to the Chicago White Sox for pitcher Melido Perez and two minor league pitchers.
The Yankees agreed to pay $1.6 million of Sax's four-year, $10.9 million contract as part of the trade.
Unlike the free-agent signings of Danny Tartabull early Monday and Mike Gallego on Tuesday and the apparent acquisition of Charlie Hayes from the Philadelphia Phillies on Wednesday, the Sax-for-Perez deal is one transaction that may take years to produce dividends for the Yankees.


RUSSIA BARS EXIT OF ITS BASIC GOODS
Protecting its shaky first step toward the free market, Russia introduced border embargoes on most basic consumer goods today to prevent a raid on its limited retail supplies by neighboring republics.
From now on, a full array of products from meat, butter and vodka to televisions and samovars will not be permitted to move from the republic, and travelers are to be scrutinized to prevent them from leaving with anything more than subsistence rations.


Hovnanian Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Chancellor Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Flu Sweeps New York Region, Causing Crowding in Hospitals
The flu season has descended on the New York region like an unpredictable blizzard, creating shortages of hospital beds, closing schools and making its victims generally feel as if they are 102 years old.
Across the nation, flu-associated deaths have reached epidemic levels for the first time since 1989, the Federal Centers for Disease Control said yesterday.


Olympia &amp; York Puts Off Plans for Moscow Building
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the troubled real estate company owned by the Reichmann brothers, has deferred plans to build what was to be the tallest structure in Moscow, a 60-story office and hotel complex, and has announced a more modest project that would change the skyline of Budapest.
The giant Toronto-based company in a statement made no reference to the squeeze on its resources from depressed real estate values, but noted that its activities in Europe and North America reflected a "diverse, cautious market."


Tax-Repeal Effort by New Jersey Democrats Fails
A nine-week campaign by Democratic Assembly members to repeal a $2.8 billion tax package that they passed 19 months ago at Gov.
Jim Florio's urging ended in defeat today.
The five-bill package failed when its Democratic backers fell 6 votes short of the 41 needed.


Language of 'Crucible'
To the Editor:
Your stage review of Arthur Miller's "Crucible" (Dec. 11) characterizes "the work's one conspicuous flaw" as "the characters who may talk in clotted Puritanese." This is echoed, by the way, in Mimi Kramer's review in The New Yorker for Dec. 23, as "Miller's addled notion of how 17th-century America talked."


Bi0-Logic Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Rates Move Up on U.S. Jobs Report
Prices of Treasury securities fell and interest rates moved higher yesterday after the Government reported a modest improvement in payroll jobs in December.
The 31,000 increase in non-farm payrolls came as something of a surprise to most analysts.
Many had expected a decline of about 75,000.


First Federal S&amp;L-Ft. Myers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kohl Seeks to Fend Off Criticism Of His Assertive German Policies
Chancellor Helmut Kohl sought today to defuse accusations of a fresh assertiveness on the part of reunited Germany, arguing that Germany is now a nation of 80 million in the heart of Europe and its leading economic power, and has had to shoulder fresh responsibilities, particularly toward its neighbors in Eastern Europe.
He also dismissed suggestions that Bonn would seek changes in the United Nations structure allowing it a permanent Security Council seat.


Japan Pact Computer Gains Seen
A trade agreement reached during President Bush's Asian trip could result in as much as $2 billion a year in extra sales of American computers in Japan, computer executives said today.
The agreement between Japan and the United States, overshadowed by a confrontation over automobiles, aims to increase sales of non-Japanese computers to Japanese Government agencies and state-owned companies.
The agreement for the computer industry stands in contrast to the outcome of the talks over autos, which are widely viewed as having disappointed the American companies.


The Chief at Ratners Resigns as Chairman
Gerald I. Ratner, who built Ratners Group P.L.C. into the largest jewelry retailer in Britain and No. 2 in the United States, resigned yesterday as chairman but remained chief executive.
The new chairman is James McAdam, 61 years old, who retired in June as deputy chairman and chief operating officer of Coats Viyella P.L.C., a textile and apparel manufacturer and retailer.
Described by one banker as "a down-to-earth Scot," Mr.
McAdam has broad experience in finance and retailing.


Yes, Christmas, Hanukkah and Sun God Myths Are Connected; As Times Change
To the Editor:
In "Whose Tree Is It Anyway" (Op-Ed, Dec. 24), Simon Schama gives a historian's account of the origins of Christmas, saying that it was superimposed over ancient pagan festivals that celebrated the winter solstice.


Barkley, Not Acting His Age, Knocks Out Van Horn
Iran (The Blade) Barkley entered the ring last night at the Paramount as a challenger considered past his fighting prime.
He left as a champion.
Barkley, 31 years old, knocked out Darrin Van Horn at 1 minute 33 seconds of the second round of a scheduled 12-round fight to win the International Boxing Federation super middleweight title.


'J.F.K.' MAY ELICIT ACTION ON FILES
Angered by the Oliver Stone film suggesting a coverup in the killing of President John F. Kennedy, the Congressman who headed the House inquiry into the assassination says he is now willing to consider recommending that the panel's secret files be opened.
In an interview on Thursday, the lawmaker, Representative Louis Stokes, said the movie, "J.F.K.," had attacked the integrity of House investigators and thereby offended him.


Carroll Staying With Jets
Jets defensive coordinator Pete Carroll is now 0-2 against Dennis Green in head-to-head competition for coaching jobs.
Green, who was named head coach of the Minnesota Vikings yesterday, and Carroll were both candidates for the coaching job at Stanford two years ago and Green won the job.
Earlier this week, Carroll and Green were the two top candidates for the Minnesota job, before it was given to Green.
"I don't want this to be a two-out-of-three deal; I want to go four out of seven with this guy," Carroll quipped.


Selection of Communist Stirs Confusion in Haiti
When diplomats announced an agreement Wednesday between the deposed President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and legislators over the choice of a Prime Minister who would form a new government and pave the way for the President's return, many who supported the deal described the man chosen, Rene Theodore, a longtime Communist, as a level-headed moderate.
But for many others from the conservative elite to rank-and-file soldiers who have been steeped in the cold war, a greater sense of confusion rather than conclusion hung in the air over Haiti's three-month-old political crisis.


New Arts School for Bard
Bard College is growing beyond its campus at Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The institution has announced plans for a new graduate program in the decorative arts based in Manhattan at 18 West 86th Street.
The Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts, scheduled to open in the fall of 1993, will offer a master of arts degree, which will take about two years to earn.
The center will also offer adult education courses and will hold exhibitions.


Canandaigua Wine Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sears Chief Will Share Some Duties
In a management change that will give Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company's chief executive, Edward A. Brennan, more time to focus on the company's troubled retail operations, Sears said yesterday that it was promoting James M. Denny, 59 years old, the senior vice president and chief financial officer, to the new position of vice chairman.
When the change takes effect on Feb. 1, Sears's Allstate Insurance Group and Coldwell Banker Real Estate Group will report to Mr.
Denny, while the Sears Merchandise Group and the Dean Witter Financial Services Group will continue to report to Mr.
Brennan, who is 58.


Sports of The Times; N.C.A.A.'s Smoke and Mirrors
It's amazing how two college presidents sitting in the same room at the same time can arrive at dramatically different interpretations of the same event.
This week, delegates to the National Collegiate Athletic Association convention passed a package of controversial academic measures that would raise admission standards for incoming freshman athletes and set strict guidelines for academic progression.


Lonrho's Heir Apparent Leaves to Take New Job
Lonrho P.L.C., the British mining and industrial conglomerate, announced this week that Terry Robinson had resigned as an executive director to become chief executive of Union International P.L.C., the troubled subsidiary of the Vestey Group, a privately held British meat importing company.
Mr.
Robinson's departure has been viewed as a setback for Lonhro.
He was considered the most likely successor to Lonrho's chief executive, Roland (Tiny) Rowland, who is 74 years old.


Gencorp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Halfway to Infiniti, Two Share the Lead
Brad Faxon and Tom Purtzer shared a one-shot lead over a tightly bunched field today in the second round of the Infiniti Tournament of Champions.
Faxon shot a three-under-par 69 and Purtzer an even-par 72 to tie at six-under-par 138 and lead the 32 golfers from the regular PGA Tour who qualified for this event by winning at least one tournament in 1991.
One shot back were Jay Don Blake and Billy Andrade, while a group of four golfers trailed by two shots.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
4.25
6.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.80
3.75
6.16
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.86
3.80
6.26
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.35
6.45
8.04
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.45
7.41
8.35
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.60
9.39
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.65
6.65
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Music in Review
Song in Music Merkin Concert Hall
As concert series titles go, Song in Music is one of the more peculiar, if not downright awkward.
Its point is that Zaidee Parkinson, the pianist who started the series in 1980, has an abiding interest in the vocal literature and likes to present programs that include songs side by side with instrumental works in which the singing impulse is strong.


Bill Naughton, 81, a British Playwright Who Created 'Alfie'
Bill Naughton, who drew a memorable portrait of a woman-chasing Cockney in his 1964 play "Alfie," died on Thursday at his home on the Isle of Man.
He was 81 years old.
His family did not disclose the cause of death, The Associated Press reported.


First Security Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Surgery for Conacher
PAT CONACHER of the Devils underwent surgery for a hernia in Montreal on Thursday and he will be out for at least a month.
Conacher's ailment was originally diagnosed as a groin injury and later as a torn muscle in his stomach.
The hernia was discovered after he was sent to a stomach specialist in Montreal.


High Court to Weigh Trial Of Suspect Abducted to U.S.
In a case fraught with implications for international relations as well as criminal law, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the Federal Government may put on trial a suspect kidnapped from a foreign country in violation of an extradition treaty.
The Court agreed to hear an appeal by the Bush Administration in the case of Dr.
Humberto Alvarez Machain, a Mexian gynecologist who is a suspect in the 1985 murder of an American drug agent in Guadalajara, Mexico.


A Tree Grows in Brooklyn, but Maybe Not for Long
They hide acorns from squirrels.
They plant spindly little tulip trees next to Norway maples (and later cut the maples down).
They chain saw groves of ailanthus trees of "A Tree Grows in Brooklyn" fame and eradicate jungles of porcelainberry and oriental bittersweet.
It looks like destruction, but it's restoration.
Over the years, New York City's forests -- yes, 5,000 acres still exist -- have become home to exotic species that in many cases have overwhelmed the native ones.
City foresters are now trying to bring the native ones back.


Sparkling Performance Puts Bowman in First
Skating as if he were insulated from the world and impervious to the suggestions of problems in his personal life, Christopher Bowman delivered a typically radiant performance today to finish first in the men's original program at the national figure skating championships.
Later, the same three who swept the medals at the 1991 nationals and world championships led the women's competition, although the order was slightly -- and surprisingly -- different.
Kristi Yamaguchi, who won the world title last year after Tonya Harding beat her at the nationals, held the lead on the strength of an elegant performance not at all unexpected.
But Nancy Kerrigan, who was third in both the nationals and worlds, held second as Harding managed only third after injuring her ankle earlier in the day and botching a triple-axel jump she normally lands.


Letter: On Mozart; A German, Not Austrian, Composer
To the Editor:
The "Imperfect Pitch" (Topics item, Dec. 26) attributed to The (London) Observer because of its 1791 obituary notice calling Mozart a "German composer" was more in tune with reality than its 1991 editors (who now call him an "Austrian composer") seem to realize.
This is because Salzburg did not become part of Austria until years after Mozart's death, and the city had been bound by historical and ecclesiastical connections to Bavaria (in what we now call Germany) since the ninth century.


2 Girls Are Target of Bias Attack, the Police Say
In an incident the police said was bias-related, two 14-year-old girls, one black and the other white, were attacked yesterday by a group of as many 30 black youths in Brooklyn.
And in the Bronx last night, the police charged a 15-year-old black girl with participating in two bias attacks last Wednesday.


Collective Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Harleysville National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dow Off by 10.07 for Day and 2.02 in Week
Stock prices fell moderately across the market yesterday, canceling out the small gains that had nudged blue chips to two records this week.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 10.07 points, to 3,199.46, ending the week 2.02 short of where it began.
The drop followed a stronger-than-expected rise in the non-farm payroll numbers for last month.
This was seen by investors as bad for the market, because it dimmed hopes of further interest-rate cuts by the Federal Reserve.
Low rates have done much to fuel the recent rally, because they give investors few good alternatives to putting their cash into equities.


Dinkins Postpones Presentation of Preliminary Budget for City
The Dinkins administration will postpone presenting New York City's preliminary budget for the coming fiscal year until Jan. 30, from next Thursday, in order to have more time to craft details and better judge the effects of the state budget to be proposed on Jan. 21.
Besides outlining the deep spending cuts needed to balance the budget for the fiscal year that starts July 1, the Mayor's plan will also show how he proposes to close projected gaps between revenues and expenses of at least $7 billion over the next four years, and has been eagerly awaited by fiscal monitors and community groups.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The U.S. unemployment rate climbed to a 5 1/2-year high of 7.1 percent in December, with the bulk of the rise among people discharged from their latest job with little prospect of recall, the Labor Dept. said.
Long-term unemployment also rose substantially as the ranks of those out of work swelled by 289,000, to 8.9 million, the highest in nearly eight years.
As discouraging as much of the report was, many private analysts said it did not point to significant fresh deterioration in the economy last month, but mainly reflected a continued lack of growth.  [ Page 1. ]


INSIDE
Justices to Weigh Trial Of Suspect Abducted to U.S.
In a case fraught with implications for foreign affairs, the Supreme Court agreed to decide whether the Government may try a suspect kidnapped from another country in violation of an extradition treaty.
Page 6.
Calling for a Volga Republic
Hoping to forestall migration, Germany is asking Russia to re-create an autonomous republic for ethnic Germans that would be similar to the old Volga republic.
Page 4.


Link Economic Aid to Military Limits
When some 60 countries meet here later this month to discuss aid for the former Soviet republics, they should link long-term economic and technical assistance to progress in shifting priorities from the military to economic development.
This demand would not be unprecedented: lenders to some third-world countries have started to put such conditions on their aid.
Although 11 of the new republics agreed last month as members of the Commonwealth of Independent States to a unified nuclear command and a timetable for destroying or removing nuclear weapons from Belarus (the former Byelorussia) and Ukraine, substantial uncertainties remain.


Prison Said to Transfer Barry After a Hearing
Marion S. Barry Jr., the former Washington Mayor, was transferred tonight from a minimum-security prison after a hearing into accusations that a female visitor performed a sex act on him, his lawyer said.
The lawyer, Sa'Ad El-Amin, said the transfer, which took place shortly after 9 p.m., indicated prison officials had found a basis for the accusations.
Officials at the Federal Bureau of Prisons could not be reached for comment.


N.F.L. Gets 2d Black Head Coach
Dennis Green of Stanford, a football coach with a flair for inspiring his teams to play over their heads, was named head coach of the Minnesota Vikings yesterday, replacing the retiring Jerry Burns and becoming only the second black head coach in the National Football League.
Other teams also moved to fill coaching vacancies: Sam Wyche, the recently departed Cincinnati Bengals coach, was named head coach of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
Green Bay officials continued negotiations to obtain the 49ers' offensive coordinator, Mike Holmgren, as the Packers' head coach.
And the Indianapolis Colts were reportedly on the verge of naming Buddy Ryan, former head coach of the Philadelphia Eagles, to replace Rick Venturi.


In the End, Wilder Realized The Numbers All Fell Short
As is almost always the case in failed Presidential campaigns, in the end the numbers were not there for Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia.
He did not have enough money.
His staff was too small.
And worst of all for a politician, he did not have enough votes.


First of Long Island Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sue Seton, Vocal Coach, 85
Sue Seton, a vocal coach for many stage and film stars, died on Dec. 30 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 85 years old.
She died of natural causes, said her son, Joseph Seton, of New York City.


Appeals Court Eases Rules on Genetic Evidence
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan yesterday made it easier to admit evidence based on human genetic material in criminal trials, holding that more restrictive rules on the use of such evidence imposed by other state and Federal courts were not necessary.
The unanimous ruling by three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit was described by some legal experts as the first clear-cut guidance from the Federal appellate bench on the use of DNA "fingerprinting," as the new procedure is called.


Proposed Arts Complex Gets $2.5 Million
The New Jersey Performing Arts Center has received a $2.5 million donation for its proposed arts complex in Newark.
The gift, from the Victoria Foundation of Montclair, N.J., is the largest single commitment ever made by the foundation.
The donation, which the center announced on Thursday, is the sixth of $1 million or more the project has received.
Among the other donors have been the Samuel I. Newhouse Foundation, A.T.&amp;T. in Basking Ridge, N.J., the Matsushita Electric Corporation of America in Rutherford, N.J., the Prudential Insurance Company of Newark and the Merck Company Foundation, the philanthropic arm of Merck &amp; Company of Rahway, N.J.


Makeshift Operating Room for Refugees


EXECUTIVES
*
Bausch &amp; Lomb, Rochester, named James C. Foster corporate vice president.
He remains president and chief operating officer of its Charles River Laboratories unit. *
Hardin's-Sysco Food Services Inc., Memphis, a unit of Sysco Corp., named Bill R. Bowden executive vice president.


First Chicago Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yes, Christmas, Hanukkah and Sun God Myths Are Connected; Why These Symbols?
To the Editor:
Simon Schama's "Whose Tree Is It Anyway? (Op-Ed, Dec. 24) is a comforting Christmas carol, but in no way an accurate account of Christmas symbolism. Professor Schama would have us believe that the tree and lights are a "stubborn survival through the millennia of pagan rituals of winter light and rebirth," that they "stem essentially from the same eternal craving for the pyramid of light to herald the return of the sun" as has forever moved humankind.


'Moynihan Report' Sounded a Call for Help
To the Editor:
Most of us who read the so-called "Moynihan Report," which is discussed in "A Misogynist Work" (letter, Dec. 26), when it was issued saw in it a call for society to show both compassion and self-interest, by addressing the needs of a growing segment of black society.


Teacher Near Death as School Surveys the Violence Around It
As a Bronx teacher wounded in a city gunfight tottered perilously close to death yesterday, her students and colleagues at Junior High School 22 appeared shocked and angry that the violence that surrounds them had claimed one of their most stubborn advocates.
Audrey Chasen, the 53-year-old teacher who was caught in the crossfire between two men who had been arguing over a woman, was surviving on a life support system, said Dr.
William Stahl, the chief of surgery at Lincoln Hospital, who had operated on Ms.
Chasen.


Venezuela in Step to Raise Oil Price
Reacting to the recent tumble in oil prices, Venezuela cut its production by about 2 percent yesterday and said it hoped others would follow.
The move pushed the price of oil up slightly on the New York Mercantile Exchange, but analysts said that the price in coming weeks would depend on two bigger factors: the outcome of negotiations between the United Nations and Iraq on conditions for Iraq to resume exports, and the position of Saudi Arabia at a meeting next month of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.


Ad Drop Forces Closing of New York Woman
New York Woman, a lively life-style magazine for young urban sophisticates, ceased publication yesterday, a victim of the decline in local retail advertising.
"It breaks my heart," said Thomas Ryder, president of the American Express Publishing Corporation, the magazine's parent.
"It's one of the best magazines I have ever been associated with."


How to Learn From the Best
Bob Beattie has been watching top-level ski racers for more than 30 years, first at the collegiate level, then as coach of the United States team and, most recently, as a sports commentator for ABC-TV and ESPN.
He certainly knows what good ski racing looks like, but when asked what recreational skiers could learn from watching elite-level racers on television, he was skeptical.
"From downhill you won't learn much," he said.
"Those guys are doing something very different from recreational skiing. It's thrilling to watch, but I wouldn't do it. Besides, many recreational skiers are already going too fast. They can't stop or turn and they are dangerous to themselves and others on the slopes."


Hytek Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Certron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Youth Arrested In the Shooting of His Cousin
A 15-year-old boy showing his younger cousin a handgun that he had found accidentally pulled the trigger and killed the 14-year-old on Thursday, the police said today.
The shooting saddened neighbors in the Millbrook Gables section of town, but did not surprise them.


Charter Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. UNEMPLOYMENT INCREASES TO 7.1%, WORST IN 5 1/2 YEARS
The nation's unemployment rate climbed to a five-and-a-half-year high of 7.1 percent in December, with the bulk of the rise occurring among people discharged from their latest job with little prospect of recall, the Labor Department reported today.
Long-term unemployment also rose substantially as the ranks of those out of work swelled by 289,000, to 8.9 million, the highest in nearly eight years.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on Jan. 1 about a lawsuit against New Jersey's Chief Justice, Robert Wilentz, referred incorrectly to a Federal appeals court ruling.
The suit, which contended that Justice Wilentz violated the First Amendment by barring the filming of a scene from "The Bonfire of the Vanities" in the Essex County courthouse in Newark, was dismissed on procedural grounds.
There was no finding on whether Justice Wilentz had acted properly.


Give the City's Riders a Break
The choice the Metropolitan Transportation Authority board faced on Dec. 31 -- to raise subway and bus fares from $1.15 to $1.25 or risk serious financial and operating difficulties for the Transit Authority -- highlights the need for long-term changes in how our mass-transit system is financed.
The Transit Authority's continuing financial difficulties can be substantially solved by a more equitable distribution of the surplus toll revenues of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, which, like the Transit Authority, is a division of the M.T.A.
The Triborough Authority operates seven toll bridges and two tunnels in New York City, and a portion of the toll revenues from them have supported mass transit since 1967.


Corrections
A restaurant review in Weekend on Dec. 13 about San Domenico on Central Park South in Manhattan misstated the nationality of the chef, Theo Schoenegger.
He was born in the town of San Candido, in Italy, not in Germany.


Computer Data Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK After 17 Years, the Attica Trial Lives
An almost palpable sense of expectation and weariness has gripped the courtroom here where one of the final chapters in the story of the 1971 Attica prison insurrection is being played out.
Many of the major legal players have spent most of their professional lives involved with this case, which went to the jury on Thursday and which will determine whether four New York State officials are liable for deaths and injuries that occurred during and after the uprising.


AIDS Crisis Prompts Gifts to Neediest
"A year ago my friend and piano teacher Mark Kyrkostas died of AIDS at the age of 38," Teresa Kreuzer of Manhattan said in a letter accompanying her $25 donation to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"On this rainy day, I remember him by practicing the piano and with this check in the hope that his presence in the world will not be forgotten.
"Mark lived a generous and loving life," she wrote.
"The last words he ever said to me were 'I promise you that I won't die.' I look for ways, this donation among them, to make sure that he never will."


Observer; That Stands for Car
We are adapting Meredith Willson's splendid show "The Music Man" for modern audiences.
As you remember, it starts something like this:
Ever hear about a salesman name of Bush?


Millions of Elvis Sightings Certain in '93
Maybe you thought you saw him this morning, sliding past in that low-slung pink Cadillac, spangled collar turned up, hair greased down, lip curled meaner than a surfer's wave.
Wrong.


Nightmare of Vietnam: Can You Ever Awaken?
I can still see the color snapshot.
It showed the smiling face of a young man I had known since kindergarten.
We'd gone through school, Cub Scouts, football seasons together.
The photo showed my friend wearing an Army helmet and holding a human ear in each hand.
That was more than 20 years ago, and my friend sort of got on with his life.
Fitfully.
He has attributed his alcoholism, drug addiction, family problems to what happened in Southeast Asia long ago.
Exposure to Agent Orange, the defoliant used in the war, is a particular culprit.


Leadership: Issue Faced By 9 Unions
A meeting of newspaper union leaders on Tuesday is expected to be a showdown in what is taking shape as a struggle over leadership of the unions during the struggle to save -- and probably sell -- The Daily News.
A union leader who spoke on condition of anonymity said on Thursday that leaders of the three largest unions -- the pressmen, the drivers and the Newspaper Guild -- are seeking to remove Theodore W. Kheel, a lawyer who has served as the longtime unpaid adviser to the unions, representing them on a reorganization committee to rebuild the bankrupt Daily News.


A Meeting for Magic
PRESIDENT BUSH will meet with MAGIC JOHNSON on Tuesday to discuss Johnson's role in educating the public about AIDS, the White House said yesterday.
Bush appointed Johnson to the National Commission on AIDS after Johnson announced last fall that he had contracted the virus that causes AIDS and planned to become a spokesman about the disease.(AP)


A Bike Horn That Wails in the City and Chimes in the Country
Riding a bicycle in traffic can be a harrowing experience, for motorists and pedestrians as well as for the cyclist.
Bicycle bells and hand-squeezed bulb horns can signal danger, but neither may be loud enough to prevent a collision.


Fuller (H.B.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


First National Bancorp-Ga.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rangers Break the Ice On a Deal for Lindros
The stalemate between Eric Lindros and the Quebec Nordiques continues, but there are signs that the Nordiques may soon be willing to trade their reluctant top draft choice.
Pierre Page, coach and general manager of the Nordiques, said today that he had several conversations about Lindros this week with Neil Smith, general manager of the Rangers, when the two were in Florida for league meetings.
Page said the Rangers made an offer that Page considered inadequate.
Their two teams are to play here Saturday night, although Smith isn't expected to make the trip.


New Pact for Fiore
TED FIORE, who has had four 20-victory seasons in five years as basketball coach at St.
Peter's College, has signed a new five-year contract.
Fiore's teams posted a 106-51 mark in his first five seasons and three times he has been selected as the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference coach of the year by his peers.
Last season, he took the Peacocks to the N.C.A.A. tournament for the first time. (AP)


Joseph J. Linhart, 72, a Recording Executive
Joseph J. Linhart, a recording industry executive, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 72 years old.
He died of heart failure, said his son, Peter Hirshberg, of Palo Alto, Calif.


Review/Dance; In Solo to 'Sacre,' Pain, Guilt and a Stripped-Down Finale
Because of its complexity, Stravinsky's "Sacre du Printemps" usually inspires dances for large casts.
Yet a few choreographers have taken what could be called a minimalist approach to this music.
In 1988, Molissa Fenley created a solo to "Sacre." And on Thursday night at the Dia Center for the Arts in SoHo, Javier De Frutos used the score for his own new solo, "Consecration."


Regulators Sell Washington Bank
Federal regulators said they had closed a large local bank, Perpetual SavingsBank, and sold it to another institution with a strong presence in Washington, the Crestar Financial Corporation of Richmond.


Where Coach Is Comfortable
Wayne Fontes was one of the National Football League coaches who entered this season on the hot seat.
Eight coaches have since been fired or have resigned, but after the Detroit Lions got off to a 5-1 start, Fontes slipped off the hot seat and into the driver's seat.
Sunday afternoon, Fontes will be on the sideline at R.F.K.
Stadium in Washington coaching the Lions in the National Football Conference championship game, one step from the Super Bowl.
For his effort, Fontes was voted N.F.L. coach of the year by writers who cover professional football.


Bonn Urges Russia to Restore Land for Its Ethnic Germans
Germany is pressing Russia for the restoration of an autonomous republic for two million ethnic Germans in an apparent effort to forestall any migration to Germany by descendants of people who first came to Russia more than 200 years ago.
German officials said a joint Russian-German commission would meet in Moscow this month, after Bonn demanded that restoration of the republic in the "traditional settlement regions of the Germans" be "brought forward at an accelerated pace."


METRO DIGEST
THE MEAN SEASON, THE FLU SEASON
The flu has descended on the New York region like an unpredictable blizzard, creating shortages of hospital beds, closing schools and making its victims generally feel as if they are 102 years old.
Nationwide, the outbreak has become so virulent that the Centers for Disease Control said flu-associated deaths had reached epidemic levels for the first time since 1989.
Page 1.
TOP COURT TO HEAR AIRPORT CASE


Family Dollar Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


American Abdication in Europe
Given the collapse of the Soviet Union, Washington is right to withdraw most of its military might from Western Europe.
But Washington is wrong to walk away from its political and economic role in Europe, especially in Eastern Europe and the Balkans.
The U.S. is largely conceding the urgent responsibility of Eastern European economic reconstruction to Germany.
That's a mistake.
It allows a fear of German domination to spread among anxious neighbors.
And even the robust German economy will not be able to meet the vast development needs.
Washington needs to provide more economic assistance and spur greater private investment, in cooperation with Germany.


Cleaning Up the Sanitation Contract
The Dinkins administration has an opportunity to right an expensive wrong that will get more costly as time goes on.
The city is obligated, under its labor contract, to pay sanitation workers full salaries for working partial days.
Some collection workers put in as little as three to four hours -- though they are paid for eight -- and the average worker finishes 90 minutes early.
Now that the contract is in negotiation, Deputy Mayor Milton Mollen, who oversees the labor talks, has an obligation to insist on a change.
The problem could have been confronted in 1989, when the city was about to introduce recycling.
Because the Koch administration wanted to get the program under way, it began recycling without getting changes in work rules that define a crew's work by its route: once a crew finishes a route, it has done a day's work even if that takes only a few hours.


Blunt Talk by Iacocca, Just Back From Japan
Lee A. Iacocca, the outspoken chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, in an address before Detroit's business elite, unleashed his most vitriolic attack yet on Japan yesterday, predicting that President Bush's trade mission would not budge the trade deficit or salve the auto industry's wounds.
Other executives said yesterday that while the President's trip might eventually help narrow the trade deficit, Mr.
Bush focused too much attention on the conflict between Japan and America's auto makers, who, they said, have only themselves to blame for their woes.


Russia Cuts Gas Deliveries to Poland in Half
Just as Poland faces token strikes to protest an increase in energy prices that will double the cost of home heating, Russia has cut its daily deliveries of natural gas to Poland in half, less than two weeks after it agreed in a barter deal to increase supplies in 1992.
Mieczyslaw Ratajewicz, an official in the Foreign Ministry, said on Thursday that Moscow had told him that the Russian Government had failed to inform the state gas exporting firm about the new deal.
Mr.
Ratajewicz said Moscow had promised to resume full deliveries in accordance with terms of the new deal soon.


U.S. Cool to China Proposal; Dispute on Piracy Continues
A Chinese negotiating team made a new proposal today as a final round of bilateral talks began here on patents, copyrights and trademarks, but a senior United States trade official said the proposal did not go far enough toward meeting American concerns.
The confrontation with China, over what the United States contends is piracy of American inventions, represents the Bush Administration's first big trade case since the President returned today from a 10-day trip to Asia that emphasized international commerce.
The two sides have exchanged threats to impose trade sanctions totaling up to $2.7 billion starting on Thursday.


Hotelcopy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


CVB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK After 17 Years, the Attica Trial Lives
An almost palpable sense of expectation and weariness has gripped the courtroom here where one of the final chapters in the story of the 1971 Attica prison insurrection is being played out.
Many of the major legal players have spent most of their professional lives involved with this case, which went to the jury on Thursday and which will determine whether four New York State officials are liable for deaths and injuries that occurred during and after the uprising.


U.S. Charity Needs a Ride to Russia
David Shapiro, a Washington lawyer with the beginnings of a practice across the Atlantic, has suddenly thrown himself into the relief business.
He is trying find a way to get milk and food to the children and elderly of St.
Petersburg.
But although he has lined up tons of powdered milk in this country and has set up a food bank with a warehouse and distribution networks in St.
Petersburg, he has no sure way of delivering the milk to its destination.


Flowers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 14


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Forget's Serve Is Too Much for Wheaton


Lions Claim an Emotional Advantage
The Redskins are 13 1/2-point favorites over the Detroit Lions here Sunday, and some football people say the game will be more one-sided that that.
But today, Lions Coach Wayne Fontes and some of his players insisted that emotion could make as much of a difference as good offense and defense.
"We're an emotional football team," Fontes said at a news conference shortly after the Lions flew here.
"People said it was a love thing. I think it is. A lot of people thought this team would fold, but it has character. We're playing on great emotion."


Hong Kong Had to Return Vietnam Refugees
To the Editor
As members of the Hong Kong Students Association studying in the United States at Princeton University, we are concerned that readers may not have gotten the full picture from your coverage in "Hong Kong Ousts More Boat People" (news article, Dec. 11).


CHRONICLE
WARREN BEATTY and ANNETTE BENING, the stars of "Bugsy," became the parents of an 8-pound, 11-ounce girl, delivered by Caesarean section on Wednesday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, according to The Associated Press.
No name has been announced for the child, who is the first for both Mr.
Beatty, 54 years old, and Miss Bening, 33.
The couple, who have not married, met last year when they co-starred in "Bugsy" and announced the pregnancy in July, saying only that they were "very, very happy" about the prospects of parenthood.


No Regrets, Says Utley
MIKE UTLEY, the offensive tackle for the Detroit Lions who was paralyzed Nov. 17 in a game against the Los Angeles Rams, said that he had no regrets about playing football and that he would play again if he could.
"Most definitely I would," Utley said in his first public comments since the injury.
"It's what I've done since I was a little rug rat."


Bo Gets Permission to Boom in the Spring
The Chicago White Sox team doctor yesterday gave BO JACKSON permission to play in spring training, saying the outfielder's injured hip had improved.
Dr.
JAMES BOSCARDIN and Jackson's personal doctor, Dr.
JAMES ANDREWS, examined Jackson in Birmingham, Ala.


The Renovation of Alexander Hamilton Park Continues in New Jersey


Review/Theater; A Journey Into a Dreamlike World
While other theatrical experimentalists have allowed themselves to be subjected to the vagaries of change and fashion, Richard Foreman has remained dedicated to first Foreman principles for more than 20 years.
His plays continue to be personal to the point of being idiosyncratic.
They are documentations in words, deeds and images of his own innermost thought processes and obsessions with time, communication and the irrationality of presumed reality.
Because of their abstraction, his works are not entirely intelligible to the audience, which is asked to accept meaning at least partly on faith.
The reward, as in his new play, "The Mind King," is a voyage that is simultaneously mysterious and enticing.
Come with me, invites Mr.
Foreman as playwright, director and designer, into a world of dream pictures.


Israeli Air Raid Near Beirut Kills 12
Twelve people were killed and scores wounded today in an Israeli air raid on a village nine miles south of here, the Lebanese police said.
An Israeli Army spokesman said the target attacked was a Palestinian guerrilla base belonging to the hard-line Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, General Command, which is led by Ahmed Jabril.


For Nonviolent Legacy, A Violent Rap Message
Portraying violence against the only state not to honor the nonviolent legacy of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. or civil rights, a rap music video has aroused anger and fascination here.
Depicting the assassination of local politicians, the video, "By the Time I Get to Arizona," by the rap group Public Enemy, has been played repeatedly on news programs here.
Discussion of the video has appeared on the front pages and editorial columns of Arizona newspapers and on radio talk shows.


No More Cold Sweats
Cold weather can turn the most vigorous of outdoor exercisers into a hermit.
But the proper clothing can make workouts comfortable.
Runners, hikers and bicyclists are wearing lighter weatherproof fabrics, with reflectors, for greater visibility on dark days and at night.
Never start a workout program without consulting a doctor, and if you are planning to exercise outdoors for the first time, be sure the doctor knows that.
Here is some expert advice on what to wear and how to layer it for various activities in cold weather.
Runners: T-shirt, long-sleeve shirt, windbreaker or sweatshirt.
Insulated leggings or sweat pants.
Headband, hat or scarf.
Hikers: T-shirt or long underwear, flannel or wool shirt, lightweight sweater, windbreaker, down-filled jacket.
Wool pants or jeans.
Two pairs of socks.
Bicyclists: Insulated leggings and long-sleeve shirt.
Windbreaker and cap. (Source: New York Road Runners Club)


Music in Review
"Interpretations" Merkin Concert Hall
On the surface of things, David Wessel and Jin Hi Kim were in control of their jointly improvisatory "Refracted Confluence" on Wednesday night.
Operating from a finger pad to which Don Buchla's touch-reactive computer network is programmed to respond, Mr.
Wessel sat cross-legged in his sock-feet and gestured like a traditional virtuoso in command of his instrument.
Ms.
Kim played the komungo, a Korean zitherlike device here wired for computer enhancement and response.


U.N. Urged to Press Libya On Suspects in 2 Bombings
The United States, France and Britain today circulated a draft resolution asking the world to press Libya to hand over for trial agents accused of blowing up two passenger airliners and to pay compensation for those terrorist acts.
In what is likely to prove a difficult political operation, the three countries want the Security Council to approve a text that "strongly deplores the fact that Libya has not yet responded effectively" to requests made in connection with the blowing up of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in December 1988 and the destruction of a French Union de Transports Aeriens airliner over the Sahara in September 1989.


Bush Returns, Hailing Gains in Japan Agreement
From the moment President Bush stepped off Air Force One this morning, he and his advisers plunged into an effort to put an optimistic gloss on what automobile industry officials and Democratic Congressmen were calling a disastrous trade meeting with Japan's leaders.
In a speech at Andrews Air Force Base, Mr.
Bush promised that his four-day visit to Japan would produce "clear and measurable" gains in American exports and the jobs they create.


CHRONICLE
It's not easy planning a party when you have to keep political considerations in mind.
Take, for example, the dilemma faced by DRO PROUDIAN, the managing director of United States operations for Petrossian, who planned the Russian Orthodox New Year's party to be held in the Petrossian restaurant in New York on Monday.
"We were hestitant about everything because things were changing back and forth so rapidly," Mr.
Proudian said.
"We asked guests to wear Russian red. Someone said, 'Now wait a minute, red is not the color of Russia anymore.' "


Chilean Arms Shipment to Croatia Stirs Tensions
The interception of a shipment of Chilean weapons bound for Croatia in violation of a United Nations ban on such arms sales has caused a scandal that Government officials say could involve some of Chile's highest-ranking military officers.
Four investigations are currently under way to determine how Chile's state-run weapons manufacturer, Famae, managed to ship 11 tons of small arms, mortars, rifles, bullets and light antitank rockets to intermediaries representing Croatian forces.
The 11-ton shipment was intercepted in Budapest, Hungary, last month.


Latest Werdann Injury Crimps St. John's Style
The segment of the St.
John's basketball schedule that was considered soft just became a little harder.
Senior center Robert Werdann reinjured a calf muscle in his right leg during practice yesterday, raising another question in an already perplexing season for the Redmen.
Dr.
Irving Glick, the team's orthopedist, said Werdann would be unable to play for at least a week, beginning with the home game tonight against Boston College.
Werdann left Alumni Hall wearing a soft cast on the bottom of his leg and a pained expression on his face.
He politely declined to talk about his immediate future.


Rensselaer County Economy Makes Comeback
To the Editor:
Re "Rensselaer County Doesn't Need a Third Exit" by Francis W. Rodgers (letter, Dec. 14):


Barnett Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 Retailers See End to Chapter 11
In a bit of good news that left the retailing world cheering yesterday, a Federal bankruptcy judge in Cincinnati said he would confirm a reogranization plan that would allow the Campeau Corporation's Federated Department Stores Inc. and Allied Stores Corporation units to emerge from bankruptcy court protection next month.
Retailing experts said it would be the first large department store chain ever to emerge from a Chapter 11 bankruptcy.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Atrix International Inc., Minneapolis, a maker and distributor of office-machine repair equipment, and Ames Supply Co., Downers Grove, Ill., a wholesale distributor of office machine supplies and parts, canceled their merger agreement. *
Aura Systems Inc., El Segundo, Calif., said Martin Marietta Electronics Information and Missiles Group had signed a contract to buy Aura's infrared image projector for $2.1 million.


Paris Journal; Paris and Prostitutes: Withering Love
Henri Toulouse-Lautrec's oils captured the raucous friendliness of turn-of-the-century brothels, Emile Zola wrote warmly about a big-hearted prostitute in "Nana" and as recently as the 1950's, life on the sidewalks of Montmartre was set to music in "Irma La Douce."
The prostitutes of Paris, it seems, always had artists on their side.
And together, for the best part of a century, they helped shape the city's image as a haven of love, romance and sensuality for inhibited -- though hardly puritan -- northern Europeans in search of carnal thrills and spills.


Patents; Magnetic Fields to Help Plants Grow
Everyone  knows that light, water and nutrients in soil affect how well plants grow.
But this week, a team of three university researchers patented a much more unorthodox horticultural tool:
A method of using electromagnetic fields to help plants grow has been patented by three university researchers.
The invention is based on the theory that the activities of plant and animal cells can be fine-tuned by electromagnetic fields that fluctuate at particular frequencies.
The researchers contend that the magnetic flux can be used to speed up a cell's intake of calcium ions, which play a central role throughout a cell's chemical machinery.


2d Defection At Sematech
Micron Technology Inc., a computer memory chip manufacturer in Boise, Idaho, confirmed today that it would leave Sematech in July, becoming the second company to announce its departure from the semiconductor industry consortium this week.
LSI Logic, a customized chip manufacturer in Milpitas, Calif., announced Monday that it was dropping out.
The Harris Corporation, a diversified electronics manufacturer in Melbourne, Fla., has said it is considering withdrawing.
The defections come as Sematech, which is based in Austin, Tex., is trying to win new commitments for an additional five years of Government financing after its initial five-year charter expires in September.


Yes, Christmas, Hanukkah and Sun God Myths Are Connected
To the Editor:
Prof. Simon Schama suggests that "In all likelihood
both
Hanukkah and Christmas were designed to compete with the persistence of idolatrous sun worship" ("Whose Tree Is It Anyway?", Op-Ed, Dec. 24).


I.R.A. BOMB SET OFF IN CENTRAL LONDON
An Irish Republican Army bomb, the latest in a wave that has undermined public confidence in the effectiveness of anti-terrorist measures in England and Northern Ireland, blew up in the heart of the British Government quarter today, disrupting traffic but causing no injuries.
The explosion caused outrage, in part because it exposed the Government's inability, even in central London, to suppress the I.R.A. after more than 20 years of military and police measures that have cost billions of dollars.


New Jersey Fair-Housing Plan Goes Awry
A bright idea flashed through this woodsy suburb in the Watchung Mountains four years ago, promising significant relief from the state-imposed obligation to provide affordable housing for low- and moderate-income people.
With the prospect of being forced to rezone a 50-acre tract for such housing, leaders of the Township Committee approached the property owner, a well-known developer in Union County, with what seemed to be a mutually beneficial deal.
Exporting Fair Housing
The Township Committee would approve an office park with two 10-story towers, two five-story parking garages and a helicopter pad, changing the zoning to allow the larger project.
In return, the developer would pick up the cost of half the township's obligation under the Mount Laurel housing doctrine: $3.8 million for 129 units.
The money would be paid to Berkeley Heights, then transferred to Newark under a legal but much criticized arrangement that permits suburbs to export part of their "fair share" housing mandate to depressed urban areas.


James E. Hair, 76, Naval Officer Whose Unit Broke Color Bar, Dies
James E. Hair, one of 13 blacks who broke the Navy's color barrier by tutoring each other and winning record scores to become officers in World War II, died on Jan. 3 at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old and lived in Queens.
The apparent cause of death was heart disease, relatives said.


Supreme Court to Review Soliciting at 3 Big Airports
In a free speech case that could determine whether airports and other public buildings around the country can exclude people who want to raise money and distribute literature for a variety of causes, the Supreme Court agreed today to review the Port Authority's policy of forbidding such activities at La Guardia, John F. Kennedy, and Newark International airports.
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan ruled last year, in a lawsuit brought by the Hare Krishna group, that the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey could bar fund-raisers but must permit the distribution of literature.


Interco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Boy Beaver Foils Experts
Embarrassed wildlife experts in a Denver suburb have postponed an attempt to reduce their beaver population with the long-acting contraceptive Norplant after finding that their first specimen was a male.
Television cameras were on hand Thursday to record the first operation to implant the birth-control device in beavers, which have become a nuisance in the suburban town Wheat Ridge, where they gnaw trees and burrow under paths.


Corrections
The "Pulse" chart in The Metro Section on Thursday, about budget deficits in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, misstated New York's projected budget and deficit for the 1992-93 fiscal year.
The budget is $30 billion; the deficit is $4 billion, 13 percent of the total.


Bridge
Some deceptive plays by the declarer are totally automatic: they must be made in order to give the defense a problem.
A simple example is the heart situation in the diagramed deal, noted by Alfred Sheinwold, the veteran journalist.
In four spades, South has four "obvious" losers, two in each major suit.
He will survive if the defenders lead a minor suit, but unfortunately West has an automatic lead of a top heart.
If the defenders take both their heart tricks South is doomed, since he must lose two trump tricks.


Queens Hospital Seeking Minority Medical School
Eager to see an affiliation between Queens Hospital Center and a minority medical school, New York City hospital officials have contacted several out-of-state medical schools, one as far away as Puerto Rico.
The search for a successor to Long Island Jewish Medical Center, which is ending its affiliation with the hospital, is in its earliest stages.
But officials of the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation and a spokesman for Mayor David N. Dinkins say a minority institution would fulfill a long-standing goal to provide doctors who reflect the ethnic and cultural makeup of the hospitals where they work.


To the Presidential Hopefuls, The Middle Class Is Royalty
The vast group of voters known as "middle-class America" is about to be courted with a vengeance as the 1992 Presidential campaign gets under way.
Both parties are trying to calibrate their language, their policy proposals and their messages to show their concern for the middle-income American with a family, a house in the suburbs, a sense of economic alarm and a feeling that the politicians don't care.


Charles Mulberger, Theater Dresser, 42
Charles (Chip) Mulberger, a Broadway wardrobe supervisor and dresser, died on Sunday at Bryn Mawr Hospital in Pennsylvania.
He was 42 years old.
He died of AIDS, said his mother, Doris Mulberger, of Gladwyne, Pa.


Boston Police Partly Cleared Over Racial Tension
A report by a private investigative agency, made public by the city on Wednesday, found that the Boston police were not directly responsible for giving information to reporters that identified a black man as the chief suspect in the 1989 killing of Carol Stuart, a pregnant woman whose husband later became the prime suspect in her murder.
The report was commissioned by Mayor Raymond L. Flynn after the identification of the man, William Bennett, inflamed racial tensions in Boston.
Blacks in the city charged that the police had improperly arrested Mr.
Bennett, who had a lengthy criminal record, and had given his name to the press.


Review/Dance; Reveling In 'Seasons' Seriously
George Balanchine and Jerome Robbins knew what ballet could do best, which was to elevate the spirit and entertain at the same time.
Back in high gear in a new repertory season, the New York City Ballet drove this point home almost casually with Thursday night's program at the New York State Theater.
"The Four Seasons," choreographed by Mr.
Robbins in 1979 to ballet music from three operas by Verdi, may look like more of a crowd pleaser than a work of profundity.
But with the kind of first-rate performances it is now receiving from its principals -- especially Kyra Nichols, Darci Kistler and Damian Woetzel -- Mr.
Robbins's gloss on 19th-century allegorical conventions can take on a higher artistic dimension.


Patents; Yeast and Fungus For Fresher Clothes
Unilever Group, the diversified consumer products company that owns Lever Brothers, has patented a fabric softener for laundry in which a fresh-smelling perfume is encapsulated in cells of yeast or fungus.
According to the patent, most perfumes tend to wash away during a washing machine's rinse cycle.
In the new fabric softener, the perfume-stuffed microrganisms would cling to clothing and release the fragrance as the clothing dries and as it is ironed.
In one of several recipes decribed for such a softener, dried baker's yeast is mixed with perfume in a flask and then stirred in a centrifuge.
The resulting slurry was dried and mixed with the softener.


An Upheaval in Ice Dancing
After three consecutive years as runners-up, April Sargent-Thomas and Russ Witherby won their first national title in ice dancing tonight.
Rachel Mayer and Peter Breen, who were sixth last year, finished second to join the champions on the 1992 Olympic team.
The defending champions, Elizabeth Punsalan and Jerod Swallow, finished third and did not qualify for the Olympics.
The United States only sends two ice-dancing entrants to Albertville, France.


Sampson Ready to Play
RALPH SAMPSON, once a first-round draft choice of the Houston Rockets, practiced yesterday with his new team, Unicaja de Ronda, in Malaga, Spain, and said he was ready to play for the club, which is struggling with a losing record.
The 7-foot-4-inch Sampson is expected to make his European debut today for the team, which is in the Spanish league's top division.


Frederick's of Hollywood reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Savings Depositors to Be Paid More Interest (and Attention)
Millions of consumers who put their savings in commercial banks, savings banks and savings and loan associations are expected to benefit from a provision that was part of the bank bailout bill passed by Congress late last year.
The overall measure increased the borrowing power of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation by about $70 billion.
Under the law's "truth in savings" section, financial institutions will be required to provide a great deal more information to their depositors.
Among other things, the measure calls for these moves by banks:


Slovenian Yacht Withdraws
The struggle to wage an America's Cup campaign in the midst of civil war has finally proved to be too much for yachtsmen from Croatia and Slovenia.
Sailors from the Yacoma Challenge of Slovenia today withdrew their bid to challenge for the cup.
The team built its 75-foot mahogany yacht in the middle of a vineyard in the mountainous region of northern Slovenia.
When war broke out last summer, the sailors sneaked out the giant sloop through the war zone to Venice with the help of a sympathetic Italian yachtsman and businessman, Marco Cantoni.
The yacht was supposed to be shipped here no later than Jan. 15.
But time ran out.


Views of Bush's Trip From Corner Offices
American executives from many areas of industry were asked yesterday what they thought President Bush's trip to Asia would accomplish.
Following are excerpts from their interviews and statements:
Dexter F. Baker
Chairman and chief executive, Air Products and Chemicals, an industrial-gas producer in Allentown, Pa., and one of the executives accompanying the President on the trip.
We didn't just go to Japan.
The Pacific Basin is very important to America.
It's our largest trading relationship, with two-way trade of about $300 billion.
We are pretty close to balance or slightly positive with most of the countries.
The economies in that part of the world, outside of Australia, are booming.
It's a very strategically important part of the American economic scene.
Some market-opening initiatives were achieved.
I think it was a very positive trip.
This wasn't tokenism on the President's part.
I think he performed magnificently.
The key thing is that the President has created a really positive environment for American investment and trade to flow to Japan.
I'm convinced they genuinely want to improve the commercial relationships with the U.S.
We talked about the tremendous opportunity to work together in dealing with markets opening up in Central and Eastern Europe.
Now, American industry has got to get off its duff and start investing in those parts of the world.
The President has done his job.
The American business community now has to go to work to tranform that to the bottom line and jobs.
Fred W. Lyons Jr.
President and chief executive, Marion Merrell Dow Inc., a pharmaceutical company in Kansas City, Mo.
We're a little different from the auto industry.
We're very pleased with the relationship we have with the Japanese.
We introduced our Seldane antihistamine over there a year and a half ago and we did $100 million of business in 1991.
We go through a similar process in terms of drug registration in any country and the same kinds of marketing challenges.
The problems we deal with are not unique to Japan.
We are very strongly in favor of free trade. Wilfred J. Corrigan
Chairman and chief executive, LSI Logic Corporation, a semiconductor manufacturer in Milpitas, Calif:
I can see how they reached the conclusion that they should take predominantly the automobile guys, but I don't approve of it.
Either the President should have gone on his own, or, if he was making it into a trade mission, I think there should have been more businesses represented.
The message that gives to Japan is "Aha! What America is concerned about is automobiles." As far as the Japanese are concerned the automobile battle is over.
It's just a mopping-up operation.
Their concern is more on the industries of the future.
Electronics is going to be the manufacturing industry of the 21st century.
There should have been significant representation from the computer industry and the semiconductor industry, and I'm sure there's a dozen other strategic industries.
The message to give is: "We're really interested in the strategic-industry balance of trade." George Hatsopoulos
Chairman and chief executive, Thermo Electron Corporation, a high-technology and industrial-products company in Waltham, Mass.
I think the trip was ill conceived.
Looking at the trade deficit as a bilateral problem with Japan is inconsistent with a healthy world economy.
They may need a surplus from us in cars if they buy oil from other countries that buy things from us.
We have an overall trade deficit, but the problem is primarily economic policy in the U.S.
We do have problems with high-tech products, communications, and certain financial services in Japan.
President Bush focused on the wrong industry.
Focusing on autos is taking on Japan where they have a good story to tell.
I think the White House knows better.
Outside of politics, the only justification for looking at things bilaterally is to put pressure on them to remove invisible barriers.
James S. Davis
Chairman and chief Executive, New Balance Athletic Shoe Inc. of Boston.
Japan is our strongest trading partner so it was important for the President to go to maintain good political and personal relations.
It's good for chief executives to get to know each other because we are so interdependent.
Greater understanding comes from sitting down face to face.
We just wanted to remind everybody with our ad thatyou can still compete effectively in foreign markets.
I have got to feel that there were other people there who are doing reasonably well.
We just didn't hear about it because it's not controversial.
Don L. Gevirtz
Chairman and chief executive, the Foothill Group, a financial-services company in Agoura Hills, Calif.
As a Democrat, I think the handling of the Japan trip provides the first glimmer that someone like Bill Clinton could defeat Bush.
Bush is focusing on dying industries rather than focusing on newer entrepreneurial industries that are creating most of the new jobs and many of the new innovations.
It was a disastrous trip to Japan in terms of where our emphasis should be.
The major problem we have is that industries like autos have become completely non-competitive and at the same time we have a banking industry that is illiquid and not able to provide credit to smaller companies that are still growing.
Reginald Lewis
Chairman and chief executive, TLC Beatrice International Holdings Inc., a food company based in New York.
I don't think it was the wrong thing to do.
The trade imbalance with the Japanese can't be ignored.
The auto industry wanted his help, and he can't be criticized for trying to give it.
The American consumer is now more aware of the impact on the general economy of selecting a Japanese product over the American product.
It might encourage them to examine whether there is a real difference rather than a perceived difference.
Some of the strident aspects of the dialogue might be unfortunate.
The negatives probably couldn't be avoided because it was a media event.
Some of these problems have been with us for a long time and defy easy solution.
James Koontz
President and chief executive, Kingsbury Machine Tool Company of Keene, N.H., and chairman of the National Center for Manufacturing Sciences in Ann Arbor, Mich.
I think the trip created recognition that there is a problem.
The fact that we focused on the Japanese trade problem may have gotten some of the Japanese transplants to realize that they have to work more with American vendors.
Our company has been promised several orders in the near future.
On the other hand, our problems are not really with the Japanese.
They are at home.
The major companies and unions have to sit down and agree to make our plants more flexible and productive.
The whole trip was a bit of an embarrassment.
The Japanese are 90 percent right in saying our problems are here.
Richard B. Madden
Chairman and chief executive, Potlatch Corporation, a forest-products company in San Francisco:
I believe he should have made the trip.
The President and Prime Minister Miyazawa agreed the two nations would reach an agreement by the end of March that would substantially increase access to the Japanese paper market.
I don't know if this would have been achieved in anywhere near that time frame if the President hadn't made the trip.
Potlatch is a major exporter of bleached paper board to Japan but we have been trying to break into the fine- coated paper market for some time and have had many difficulties.
There are structural barriers.


Go Gentle on Giving That Special Ancestor a Face Lift
For 40 years, the portrait of great-great Aunt Agatha has hung over Grandmother's mantle.
But now the reputed family beauty looks dreadful.
Her skin is yellowish and little lines crosshatch her not-so-rosy cheeks.
Clearly, her face needs washing: not a do-it-yourself job.
It requires the services of a fine arts conservator.
"Get someone who uses the gentlest methods and does the absolute minimum," advises Daisy Craddock of New York Conservation Associates.


Music in Review
Quintet of the Americas Carnegie Hall
The quincentenary of Columbus's arrival in the Western hemisphere is likely to offer the Quintet of the Americas plenty of opportunities for thematic programming.
The ensemble specializes in wind music by North and South American composers, a repertory that has both New World connotations and Spanish roots, and on Thursday evening it joined forces with the Manhattan School of Music Chamber Sinfonia for a program called "Discovering the New World." Glen Cortese was the conductor.


Mazer Back on Air
BILL MAZER, whose "Sports Extra" program was canceled by WNYW-Channel 5 last summer, has resurfaced as the host of a morning drive-time radio talk show on WEVD-AM.
He will start his 5:30-10 A.M. shift Jan. 20.
"I'm not coming back as a sports guy, although I will still do the sports interviews and trivia," Mazer said.
"Over four and a half hours, we'll cover the whole spectrum."


Concord Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 1


GZA Environmental Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


In Spite of Hardship, I.M.F. Urges Russia To Raise Price of Oil
After a week of rising consumer prices and sporadic protests from angry shoppers, a team from the International Monetary Fund, acting with the endorsement of the United States, is pressing Russia for drastic additional steps, chief among them a sharp increase in oil prices.
The I.M.F. wants President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, where most of the commonwealth's oil is produced, to raise petroleum prices to 10 to 15 times their present level, and they have already quadrupled in the last week.


Evidence Tied to Organist
A Manhattan hotel employee cleaning out the room of a church organist charged with stealing from synagogues and churches found close to 20 religious items hidden in the room, the police said yesterday.
Detective Joseph Lesniak of the Port Authority police said that the items included gold plates inscribed to the memory of deceased loved ones, silver candlesticks and other items.
Oather James Blocker, 45 years old, was arraigned last week on three counts of burglary in the theft of religious items.
But officials of both the Nassau County and Port Authority police said that Mr.
Blocker had confessed to stealing items from as many as 500 churches in the New York metropolitan area and other states in the Northeast.


Casting for Car Thieves, Police Net Murder Suspect
The three-month sting investigation of car-theft rings was winding down here Tuesday afternoon when thieves telephoned the undercover officers, telling them to expect another batch of stolen cars from the Bronx.
The call produced something more than the undercover team expected -- a 13-year-old suspect in the murder of a Russian immigrant early Sunday morning in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn.


2 Get 25 Years to Life in Gay Man's Slaying in Queens
In an emotional scene pierced by the wails of one defendant's grandmother, two young men were sentenced yesterday to the maximum of 25 years to life in prison for helping to kill a gay man in Queens in a case that roused rage among many gay people.
"My God! My God! My God!" the grandmother of Esat Bici screamed in State Supreme Court in Queens after the 20-year-old Mr.
Bici and 21-year-old Erik Brown were sentenced.


End the Horror in Haiti
By ratifying the compromise choice of Rene Theodore as prime minister next week, Haiti's Parliament can halt the country's steep slide into catastrophe.
But it will require many months to repair the brutal damage done to democratic institutions in the three and a half months since soldiers ousted President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Haiti's people cannot afford further delay.
The nomination of Mr.
Theodore, a Communist, is the result of mediation efforts by the Organization of American States in which Washington played a constructive role.
Despite his Communist label, U.S. diplomats see him as a principled moderate.


McDonald's Decides to Forgo Restaurant
After two years of community opposition, McDonald's announced today that it would not build a restaurant in nearby Mattituck.
"The economic climate has changed since we introduced the project," said Tony Bonwell, regional real-estate manager for McDonald's.


E-Z-EM Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Quotation of the Day
"If you choose the younger Elvis, you'll get about 50 stamps to a sheet. But the older, larger Elvis -- perhaps I should call him the 'contemporary Elvis' -- will run only 40 stamps to a sheet. In commemorative stamps, clear detail is important. A big man takes a big stamp." -- POSTMASTER GENERAL ANTHONY M. FRANK.  [ 6:3. ]


Chemical Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A headline in Business Day yesterday about German inflation misstated West Germany's inflation rate for 1991.
It was 3.5 percent.


Push Comes To Shove But Nets Win
The outlook wasn't brilliant for the Nets tonight.
They opened the game without starting forward Derrick Coleman.
Trailing by 3 points midway through the third quarter, the outlook wasn't much better after starting center Sam Bowie was lost on a pair of technical fouls.
But the outcome was just the thing the Nets were hoping for, a 104-97 victory over Milwaukee before a crowd of 9,230 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The victory snapped the Bucks' four-game winning streak and extended New Jersey's winning streak to three.


Harry F. Reiss Jr., 75, a Leading Accountant
Harry F. Reiss Jr., a retired leader in the accounting profession, died Monday at his home in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 75 years old.
He died of emphysema, his family said.


REPORTER'S NOTEBOOKAfter 17 Years, the Attica Trial Lives
An almost palpable sense of expectation and weariness has gripped the courtroom here where one of the final chapters in the story of the 1971 Attica prison insurrection is being played out.
Many of the major legal players have spent most of their professional lives involved with this case, which went to the jury on Thursday and which will determine whether four New York State officials are liable for deaths and injuries that occurred during and after the uprising.


Religion Notes
Evangelist's Schedule
As 1991 drew to a close, the office of the Rev.
Billy Graham issued a summary of the evangelist's travels for the year, "preaching to one million people in person" and added, "Mr. Graham celebrated his 73d birthday in November and his schedule showed no signs of slowing down."


S.&amp;P. Upgrades Its Ratings On Merrill Lynch Securities
Standard &amp; Poor's upgraded its ratings on Merrill Lynch &amp; Company's long-term debt and preferred stock yesterday.
The rating agency cited improvements in the investment house's cost structure and its continued success in securing its market shares in a broad range of securities businesses.


Greenspan Asks Pause In Stimulus
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, told Congress today that he expected the steep cut in interest rates that the Fed ordered last month to be sufficient to get an economic recovery started and that he did not foresee a need for further rate cuts or for budgetary stimulus.
"That is my expectation; that is my best judgment," Mr.
Greenspan said in answer to questions from sharply critical Democratic senators.


Advanced Micro Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


A Deficit For First Chicago
In a report that surprised Wall Street, the First Chicago Corporation reported a fourth-quarter loss today of $15.1 million and announced a cut in the company's quarterly dividend to 30 cents a share from 50 cents.
The company's stock fell $1.25, to $23.75, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The parent of the First National Bank of Chicago attributed its quarterly deficit to losses from two large loans.
It said one was to the Maxwell Communication Corporation, the media conglomerate, now in bankruptcy, that had been controlled by the late Robert Maxwell.


Your Taxes; Home Buyers Win on Points
The long-clouded issue of deducting the prepaid interest, or points, that borrowers must often pay to obtain a mortgage is becoming clearer -- to the financial benefit of many borrowers -- as a result of a recent, little-publicized ruling by the Internal Revenue Service.
Although home buyers have largely ignored the distinction, the agency until now had held that points deducted at closing must be only those payments clearly identifiable as compensation for the "use or forbearance of money," or interest, and not fees for related services.
This seemed to bar deduction of points paid to a mortgage broker, either directly or through a bank.


Hong Kong Had to Return Vietnam Refugees; Violation of Rights
To the Editor:
The forced return by British and Hong Kong authorities of Vietnamese boat people deemed not to be refugees (news article, Dec. 11) is a gratuitous threat to the United Nations agreement governing Vietnamese refugees in the region.


Patents; Wristband to Ease Morning Sickness
Robert C. Giarratano, a gynecologist in San Diego, won a patent this week for a wristband to fight morning sickness among pregnant women by using the principles of acupuncture.
Invented in the hope of providing relief without drugs, which pregnant women are advised to avoid, the elastic wristband features a bead that presses against the Neiguan point, a point on the inside of the forearm about an inch above the wrist.
According to the patent, acupuncturists have applied pressure against this spot to relieve discomfort and pain, and most of the pregnant women who were treated with the new band were said to experience significant relief from nausea and vomiting.


News Summary
International 2-5 RUSSIA GUARDS ITS GOODS
Russia introduced border embargoes on most basic consumer goods to prevent a raid on its retail supplies by neighboring republics.  1


Plant Taxonomy Lives In Botanic Garden
To the Editor:
The renaissance of taxonomy, the naming and classification of plants (Science Times, Dec. 10), is going on right here at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Recognizing the abandonment by most universities of research in the field, the Botanic Garden has taken an initiative.


With Cuomo Out, New York Democrats Pick Sides for Primary
The post-Cuomo era of Presidential politics in New York began in earnest yesterday, as hundreds of Democrats lined up behind one or another of the five remaining candidates running in the state's April 7 primary.
Three weeks after Mr.
Cuomo's withdrawal and only four days after a favorite son candidacy was ruled out, Democrats freed from any political obligation to the Governor met the 5 P.M. filing deadline to qualify to run to be elected convention delegates in New York's April 7 presidential primary.


Penn Central Spinoff Plan
The Penn Central Corporation said today that it might develop a plan to spin off its principal manufacturing businesses.
A spinoff would include its wire and cable and materials handling and marine equipment operations but not its insurance and military services businesses.


First Empire State Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
JAMES HOGE, the former publisher of The Daily News, has been named a senior fellow at the Freedom Forum Media Studies Center at Columbia University.
The center, a think tank, is a program of the Freedom Forum in Arlington, Va.


Review/Music; Themes of AIDS and Remembrance in Corigliano's Symphony
Portions of the AIDS Memorial Quilt were on display in the lobby of Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday night.
Each of the quilt's 14,000 segments was created by a different person and dedicated to the memory of someone who died of the disease.
There was also a table of literature about AIDS in the lobby; members of the New York Philharmonic wore red ribbons, and a note in the program announced that the orchestra's concerts through Tuesday, conducted by Leonard Slatkin, are "dedicated to those who have died of AIDS, those who are living with AIDS and those who help and support them." Finally, just after intermission, Mr.
Slatkin introduced the work that provided the occasion for this focus on AIDS: John Corigliano's Symphony No. 1.
The 40-minute work was generated, the composer writes in the notes, by "feelings of loss, anger and frustration" as friends and colleagues have been felled by AIDS.
In the score, inscribed next to melodic themes, are names of the deceased; one phrase recalls Paul Jacobs, the distinguished pianist for the New York Philharmonic.
The first movement includes quotations from Albeniz's Tango as transcribed for piano by Leopold Godowsky, a favorite of another friend who died; the second recalls a music executive who descended into insanity as the disease progressed; the third movement's cello solos are derived from the instrumental improvisations of yet another victim of AIDS.
The themes associated with these figures reappear in a mournful epilogue.
The symphony is a gallery of the dead.
The composer said he was inspired by the AIDS quilt.


A Public Safety Campaign Falls Short of Its Mark
A 16-month campaign to warn that children could drown in large plastic buckets apparently is not working, and Government and industry officials may be forced to find a new approach.
The industry-sponsored campaign has relied on consumers getting warning labels and putting them on the plastic five-gallon containers they have at home, rather than requiring companies that make or use the containers to put the stickers on or to take other measures.
But thus far, only about 72,000 free stickers have been distributed to consumers.


Patents; A Ball That's Square But Also Bounces
In search of the next novelty fad, Jeff D. Myers of Scottsdale, Ariz., has patented a square ball that bounces as predictably as a round one.
The square ball features a hard rubber core encased in a spongy square.
Thus, when a person bounces the ball, the spongy square gives way to the rubber and the ball rebounds as if the square exterior were not there.
The patent does not describe why this would be useful.


Miami Emerges as Latin Art Center
Aided by a surge of interest in the painting and sculpture of Latin America and by a growing community of artists, galleries and dealers, Miami is rapidly emerging as an important center for the creation, display and marketing of Latin American art.
New galleries specializing in such art are opening and some existing galleries are beginning to display works from the Caribbean and South America.
Latin American artists and collectors are also arriving in increasing numbers, hoping to benefit from their involvement with one of the few bright spots in the depressed international art market.


RECORD BRIEFS
Nielsen: 'Saul and David'
Soloists; Danish National Radio Choir and Symphony Orchestra conducted by Neeme Jarvi.
Chandos CHAN 8911/2; two CD's.


Yorba Linda Journal; Where J.F.K.'s the Loser and Nixon's Still the One
To visit the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace, with its well-tended rose garden and attractive displays, is to rediscover the sense of combat that surrounded the former President's career in public office.
In elaborate exhibits touching the high and low points of his long career, on the screens of period television sets and on a question-and-answer videotape, Mr.
Nixon is still, in his own words, "in the arena," still fighting for his political life nearly 20 years after resigning the Presidency.


Tech Notes; Recycling the Proliferating Disk
When used with personal computers, compact disks can store vast amounts of information in very little space.
But as more computer software is introduced on CD-ROM (compact disk read-only memory), regular updates of that software are sure to lead to a growing pile of disks that have outlived their usefulness.
Before long, people are likely to be asking if they can recycle their outdated disks.
A fledgling program to recycle compact disks is under way at the Digital Audio Disk Corporation in Terra Haute, Ind., a subsidiary of Sony U.S.A.
Inc. that is the biggest manufacturer of CD's in the United States, supplying about a third of the market.
Right now, Digital Audio is recycling metalized disks rejected at the factory and using some of them to make the trays that compact disks are packaged in.


Susan K. Baer Is to Marry in June
Susan Kathleen Baer, the assistant to the college counselor at the Chapin School in New York, is engaged to be married in June to Mayo Andrew Noerdlinger, a student at Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Miss Baer, 24 years old, graduated from Mount Holyoke College and is a daughter of Martha Nagle of Oklahoma City and Prof.
George Baer of Newport, R.I.
Her father is the Alfred Thayer Mahan professor of maritime strategy at the United States Naval War College in Newport.
Her mother is an assistant vice chancellor for academic programs for the Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education in Oklahoma City.
Her stepmother, E. Kristina Baer, is a freelance textbook editor and magazine writer.


American Symphony Today
The second concert of the American Symphony Orchestra's 29th season is to take place today at 3 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
Catherine Comet, the music director, is to conduct Copland's "Appalachian Spring" and Richard Strauss's Oboe Concerto, with Richard Woodhams as soloist.
Also on the program is the Faure Requiem, with the soprano Beverly Hoch, the baritone Kevin McMillan and the San Antonio Symphony Mastersingers.
Tickets are $20 to $32.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


June Wedding For Miss Joslin
Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Joslin of Dedham, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Charlotte Railton Joslin, to Leslie Cheek 4th, a son of Mr.
Cheek 3d of Washington and the late Patsy Blake Cheek.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Joslin, 24 years old, is a development officer and grant writer at the Massachusetts Audubon Society in Lincoln, Mass.
She graduated from Harvard University, as did her fiance.
Her father is the president of TFC Financial Management in Boston.
Her mother, Sarah V. Joslin, is a landscape designer and watercolorist.


Beth Anopolsky Plans July Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Anopolsky of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Beth Anopolsky to James Kenneth Greenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Greenberg of Atlantic Beach, L.I.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Anopolsky, who is 25 years old, is the special-events coordinator for the Irvington Institute for Medical Research in New York.
She graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
Her father is a certified public accountant in New York.


August Bridal For Beth Dulik
Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Robert Dulik of Palo Alto, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ann Elizabeth Dulik, to D. D. Willard Gardiner, a son of Daniel W. Gardiner of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Eleanor C. Dwight of New York.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Dulik, who is 27 years old and is known as Beth, graduated from Duke University and is an associate producer at CNBC-FNN, a cable network in Ft.
Lee, N.J.
Her father is the retired owner of a restaurant design and contracting company in Redwood City, Calif.
Her mother, a teacher, is the director of the primary program at Philips Brooks School in Menlo Park, Calif.


War in Somalia a Major Test for New U.N. Leader
The continuing bloodshed and anarchy in Somalia will present the new United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Ghali, with his first serious challenge next week and test hopes that the organization can play a more effective peacemaking role in the post-cold-war era, according to many diplomats.
International pressure is building for the Secretary General and the Security Council to intervene in Somalia in an effort to end months of factional fighting that has cost about 20,000 lives.


Joline Jodoin and Robert Scott Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Ray E. Jodoin of Medford, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Joline Darisse Jodoin to Robert Conrad Scott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George A. Scott of Windsor, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Jodoin, 23 years old, graduated from Lafayette College.
Her father is an assistant division head of the Camden County (N.J.) Probation Department.
Her mother, Joan Marie Jodoin, is an elementary-school teacher in Camden.


U.S. Forces Find Work As Angels Of Mercy
FRESH off a triumphant year bracketed by the crushing defeat of Iraq's army and the breakup of its Soviet archrival, the United States military faces a growing role as an international angel of mercy.
In the last 12 months, American-led allied forces provided food, water and shelter to 500,000 Kurds in northern Iraq and Turkey.
Navy hovercraft ferried tons of supplies and medicine to typhoon-ravaged Bangladesh.
An olive-green tent city sprouted at an American naval base in Cuba to house 7,000 Haitians fleeing their country.
Perhaps most emblematic of this changing mission, Air Force cargo planes this winter are flying tons of food, blankets and medical supplies into the former Soviet republics.


Bowman Takes Title With Ease
With a program that dazzled the judges for its theatrics if not its difficulty, Christopher Bowman completed a week filled with his own special brand of craziness to win the men's title of the national figure-skating championships here today and make the United States Olympic team for a second consecutive time.
After leading 18 other skaters through the original program on Friday, Bowman delivered just what he needed in the free-skate phase of competition, a safe but entertaining routine, to earn the highest scores from eight of the nine judges.
While he completed all seven of his triple jumps, none was the most difficult, the axel.


U.N. Ends Protection for Vietnamese at Sea
An anti-piracy program intended to protect Vietnamese refugees from brutal attacks in the Gulf of Thailand has been phased out by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees because the attacks have all but ceased in the last 18 months.
Responsibility for policing the seas where, since 1975, thousands of Vietnamese refugees have been robbed, raped, killed or drowned when their boats were attacked, will now rest with the Thai Navy.


Birds in Prints and Drawings (and Outside at a Feeder)
PRESUMPTUOUS though it may be to say it, Roger Tory Peterson sells purple finches short when he likens them to "sparrows dipped in raspberry juice." After all, the average house sparrow's ankle is a poor thing compared with the exquisitely turned joint of its purple (or red) cousin, and its lines are far less elegant.
The difference can be seen most days at the feeder maintained here by the New Jersey Audubon Society.
On a recent visit, this reviewer was privileged to see, in addition, a slate-colored junco, a downy woodpecker and a horde of corpulent chickadees.
It is a floor show that, at an unfamiliar sound, vanishes into the hedge behind, returning seconds later to resume upstaging the exhibition of bird art inside the society's hilltop house of brick painted white.
The building and its wooded grounds were a bequest to the society by the late Fred Hoffman, of the Hoffman Beverage Company.


Lisa Galluzzi to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Galluzzi of Yonkers have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Ann Galluzzi to Christopher Vincent Moss, a son of John G. Moss of Portsmouth, R.I., and Patricia Moss-Henderson of St.
Petersburg, Fla.
A July wedding is planned.


Soviet Aftershocks Include a Global Commodities Glut
WHEN your chief competitor goes out of business, that is supposed to be good news for your bottom line.
But when the Soviet Union died, a lot of the commercial victors around the world caught a bad cold at the funeral.
The reason is a flood of exports from the former union that has severely depressed commodity prices.
From over there, the export activity of the last few months probably looked like a desperate effort to keep bread on the table.
But for competitors in uranium, aluminum, platinum, fertilizer and gold, it was an ironic reprise of the cold war threat of Nikita Khrushchev, to "bury you." Bruce L. Kaplan, who owns a precious metals consulting firm in Santa Monica, Calif., called it "dis-hoarding." The effects, which have been felt each year since 1989, have been dramatic, with the major exception to the pattern being oil, which Russia produces in abundance but is difficult to stockpile.


Camera
While electronic imaging may be grabbing the headlines these days, many photographers still prefer old-fashioned view cameras, or they buy new view cameras with updated controls like automatic exposure.
The view camera, one of the oldest cameras, is a big piece of equipment, mounted on a tripod; its lens and film are connected by a bellows.
Because larger-sized film is used, view-camera photography is called large-format photography.


Susan Burns to Marry J. K. Levine
Dr. and Mrs.
Donald T. Burns of Wyomissing, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Elizabeth Burns, to Jonathan Krasne Levine, a son of Robert P. and Dr.
Betty Krasne Levine of Ardsley, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Burns, 28 years old, is a Ph.D. candidate in English and American literature at New York University.
She graduated from Haverford College and received a master's degree in English from the University of Chicago.
Her father is chief of ophthalmology at the Reading (Pa.) Hospital and Medical Center.
Her mother is a registered nurse.


Grand Slam
As a pitcher for the Mets, the Reds, the White Sox and the Red, Tom Seaver was used to amassing some pretty impressive statistics: In his 311 winning games, he was responsible for 3,640 strikeouts and 61 shutouts.
In 1969 he helped the Mets regain their self-respect and win the World Series.
Last week, breaking a record set by Ty Cobb, he was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame by 98.8 percent of the ballots cast by members of the Baseball Writers Association of America.
His reaction was typically understated.
"My children," he said, "will be able to take their children to the Hall of Fame and say: 'There's your grandfather. In his time, he was pretty good at what he did.' " Ron Swoboda, the outfielder who played for the Mets with Seaver, was less reserved.
"He was the consummate pro from Day One," he said.
"And that comes from a guy who clearly wasn't. I and others felt our way along in the majors. But Seaver, he seemed to be walking a golden path."


A Crusade to Save the Soul of Arlington
A master at civic boosterism, Tom Vandergriff lured the Senators baseball team, now the Texas Rangers, away from Washington in 1971 and coaxed millions of dollars from voters for a stadium, a convention center, libraries, schools, lakes and roads.
But no triumph during his 26 years as Mayor here, until 1977, compares with the surprise choice by the General Motors Corporation 41 years ago to pass up Dallas and Fort Worth to build an assembly plant in Arlington, then a small farm town of 7,800 people and four square miles.


Corrections
The Evening Hours page last Sunday misstated the date of the 38th annual International Debutante Ball at the Waldorf-Astoria.
It took place on Dec. 28.


No Rush on Germany in Security Council; The Soviet Seat
To the Editor:
"Russia Deserves the Soviet Seat" by Richard N. Gardner and Toby Trister Gati (Op-Ed, Dec. 19) sublimely expresses the opinion that Russia was the Soviet Union.
Why should Russia gain the seat on the Security Council held by the Soviet Union, if the Soviet Constitution said all the republics were equal?


With Return of a Mob War, Prosecutor Presses for Peace
Faced with a deadly end to a holiday truce in New York City's most vicious mob war in 30 years, the Brooklyn District Attorney's office has recruited up to 120 Federal, state and city officers to try to push the battling factions into a new peace, a law-enforcement official said yesterday.
In the last seven months, since the struggle in the Colombo crime family broke into the open, there have been 10 attempted killings of members of two factions, leaving six men dead and seven people wounded, including at least four innocent bystanders.


Sunday Menu; Baba Gannouj With Lentils: Still Tasty but Easier to Cook
If this recipe for baba gannouj seems a bit strange, it is: lentils have replaced the traditional chickpeas and cut the cooking time to a fraction of what it would have otherwise been.


IN THIS CORNER
Michael Specter's article "In This Corner" (Dec. 15) portrayed Lowell Weicker as a tough, independent leader, trying to do the right thing, but it failed to express Connecticut's worst fears -- namely, that Weicker is simply using the state's desperate problems to further his ambition to repackage himself as a leader of national prominence.
Weicker worked hard during his campaign to create the impression that he was against an income tax.
When elected, he used strong-arm tactics on legislators to swing their votes to gain a huge tax increase.
Weicker wants a quick Connecticut miracle that can propel him to renewed national prestige.
It's too late.
The depression and economic collapse that started in New England is spreading, and so is the fury of the middle class, who have nothing left to give.
JAY BUETTNER
Avon, Conn.


Result Plus
SKIING Wasmeier Goes Whoosh
Markus Wasmeier of Germany, a late starter on one of his favorite courses, survived a treacherously icy Kandahar run in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany, yesterday to win a World Cup downhill.
Wasmeier was 38th out of the gate on a course on which several racers suffered bad crashes.
He was timed in 1 minute 50.58 seconds, edging Patrick Ortlieb of Austria, who was second in 1:50.64.


When 'Macbeth' Shook the World Of Astor Place
Rivalry in the theater is nothing new, but rarely does it lead to a riot causing the death of at least 20
people and the injury of more than 100 others.
That fatal incident serves as the backdrop of "Two Shakespearean Actors" by Richard Nelson, which opens Thursday at the Cort Theater on Broadway.
In the play, Mr.
Nelson examines the lives of the two principals behind what became known as the Astor Place Riot.
In May 1849, the English Shakespearean actor William Macready (played by Brian Bedford) and the American
favorite son Edwin Forrest (Victor Garber) appeared in competing productions of "Macbeth" in Manhattan.
The rivalry between the two, who at one point had been friendly, was fact -- and public: a previous theatrical tour of America by Macready had been hampered by competing bookings of Forrest; in England, Macready followers had insured that Forrest
would be snubbed while on tour by much of literary society.


Marinovich Explains
It was crossed signals, not willful intent, that kept Raiders quarterback TODD MARINOVICH from keeping a court date in Torrance, Calif., last week, according to the the rookie quarterback's lawyer.
Marinovich, who was charged with violating a noise ordinance at a party at his Manhattan Beach home last October, failed to appear for his arraignment on Thursday, prompting the judge to issue a warrant for his arrest.
After entering a plea of not guilty on his client's behalf and paying a $100 fine for Marinovich's missing the court date, his lawyer, GARY POHLSON said it had all been a simple misunderstanding: Marinovich had misread the citation. (AP)


Republican Legislators Emerge as the Victors
THE Republican Party took control of the Board of Legislators last week despite the fact that the Democrats won a majority on the Board last November for the first time in 83 years.
With the support of Suzanne R. Swanson, an enrolled Conservative from Mount Pleasant who was elected to her first political office as a County Legislator on the Democratic line, Republicans had just enough votes to approve Stephen P. Tenore, a Republican-Conservative from Mount Vernon as the Board's new chairman.
Mr.
Tenore defeated Sandra R. Galef, the Democratic leader, by one vote.


Genetic Record to Be Kept on Members of Military
The Defense Department said today that it would establish a repository of genetic information on all American service members as a new way of identifying future casualties of war.
Samples of DNA, the basic material of heredity, will be obtained from blood and oral swabs.
The samples will be added to existing fingerprint, dental and other records to produce a more comprehensive way of identifying the remains of war dead, said the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, which proposed the initiative.


To Repair Door Locks, Try Replacing the Cylinder
PROBLEMS with door locks do not always mean that the entire knob and latch assembly has to be removed or replaced.
Often just removing the lock cylinder, the part containing the keyhole, is necessary.
The cylinder can be taken to a locksmith for repair, replacement or changing the key.
Removing and reinstalling the cylinders of most locks, usually an easy job, require just a few ordinary tools.
But if a cylinder cannot be removed with such tools, the job will require a licensed locksmith.


Quayle Fills Bush's Irregular Regulation Shoes
To the Editor:
I must disagree with a statement in "Mr. Quayle's Irregular Regulation" (editorial, Dec. 15): "The Task Force on Regulatory Relief didn't amount to much when George Bush headed it as Vice President." All of the criticisms made of Vice President Quayle's Council on Competitiveness -- it is a "powerful force for watering down regulation," it operates "in secrecy," and it has a "pro-business slant" -- apply with equal force to Mr.
Bush's task force.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 29 about efforts to help parents at risk of abusing their children misattributed a description of a letter received by a program director from a grateful client on the same day the director was notified that three siblings on a waiting list for help had been found to have syphilis.
The account was from Betsy Palmer, executive director of the Exchange Club Centers for the Prevention of Child Abuse, not Cheryl Burack-Lynch of the Coordinated Council for Children in Crisis.


Another Round: Guns vs. Gulls at Kennedy Airport
Federal officials shot down almost 15,000 laughing gulls near Kennedy International Airport last year in an effort to reduce airplane-gull collisions.
They plan to resume the program this spring, a plan that angers conservationists and bird lovers.
In the latest battle of a long war to reduce interference with airplanes, Department of Agriculture biologists, armed with 12-gauge shotguns, killed 14,886 gulls between May 20 and Aug. 8, 1991, according to a report by Richard A. Dolbeer of the Agriculture Department's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service.


Stamps
The first United States stamps of the new year go on sale nationwide tomorrow: a set of five 29-cent stamps to commemorate the Winter Olympic Games in Albertville, France.
And with the first 1992 issue, the United States Postal Service seems to have committed its first gaffe of the new year: the dates given for the Winter Olympics in the margin of the sheet of stamps are Feb. 8-25; in fact, the games are to end Feb. 23.


Search for Sensitivity Means Leaving Jock Label Behind
UNTIL he rolled off the top of the Kensico Dam, Ed Gallagher offered himself to the world as a "meat man," a 6-foot-6-inch, 275-pound former offensive lineman who loved to hit hard, drive drunk and use women like Kleenex.
The mask came off in his suicide note.
He wrote: "The way I lived my life, I think death is deserving of me. I don't know how to handle the pain anymore."


Feldman's Minimalism in Maximal Doses
"By definition minimalism is minimal. It's a ridiculous assumption that any art form can seriously go backwards and survive. All the former Minimalists are hopping off the bandwagon. That's like the Nazis who said they were never Nazis. It makes me so sick."
Thus spake the composer Gunther Schuller in an interview in the October issue of Musician magazine.
Well, maybe Minimalism is dying, but tell that to the eager musicians who are busy performing and recording the music of Morton Feldman.
In the last year and a half, 12 Feldman releases have appeared, four times the entire recorded Feldman output to 1990.


Following A Rough Year, Bankers See An Upswing
IN 1991 a record 20 banks and savings and loan associations failed in Connecticut, and about half the financial institutions still in business are under some type of special regulatory watch.
"I don't think it's ever been this bad in the past," said Barbara S. McGrath, Deputy Commissioner of the State Banking Department.
"We've never closed this many banks before. We've never had this many regulatory orders outstanding. I guess the 1980's were too good to be true. It's not clear all the problems have been recognized yet, either."


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
East Brunswick 182,000
9 Hershey Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 19-year-old split level; fireplace, c/a, 2-car garage; taxes $4,177.
Metuchen 268,000
320 Grove Avenue  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old ranch; professionally landscaped, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $7,228.
Ramsey 327,500
18 Alida Place  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; deck, new kitchen and roof, fireplace; taxes $5,727.
Ridgewood 188,000
587 Spring Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old Cape Cod; finished basement w/rec room, garbage disposal; taxes $4,738.
South River 123,000
42 Charles Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 65-year-old colonial; enclosed front porch, new kitchen, fenced yard; taxes $2,987.
Wyckoff 210,000
393 Cornell Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 38-year-old ranch; new roof, fenced yard, fireplace; taxes $4,108.
OTHER AREAS Monroe, Conn. 297,000
19 Pilgrim Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; on cul-de-sac, exceptional landscaping, 1 acre; taxes $4,168.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 300,000
Bayberry Way
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old split-level; dining room, sun room, fireplace, 2 acres; taxes $5,090.
Williston Park, L.I. 170,000
27 Center Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $2,700.


David Edwards, 69, Judge and Lawyer In New York City
David H. Edwards Jr., a State Supreme Court judge in Manhattan who presided over several notable cases, died on Friday at his home in Queens.
He was 69 years old and died of heart failure, his family said.
Justice Edwards in 1988 ordered that $16 million of the purse from the Michael Spinks-Mike Tyson championship boxing match be divided among Mr.
Tyson and his co-manager and trainer to help settle a dispute between them.
In 1983, following earlier Court of Appeals rulings, he ordered New York City officials to pay the developer Donald J. Trump a multimillion-dollar tax abatement for Trump Tower.


New York to Ban Street Windshield Washers
The New York City Department of Transportation has proposed a rule that would prohibit people from washing windshields or selling flowers, newspapers and other trinkets and gadgets to drivers caught in traffic or waiting for traffic lights.
While violaters would face arrest under the rule, which is to take effect on April 1, the Department of Transportation does not plan "a round-up of people squeegeeing windows," said a spokesman, Joseph De Plasco.


Fate May Defeat University, but Not Its Basketball Team
NOT many college basketball coaches drive limousines to help make ends meet.
Bruce Webster does, though, and he guided his University of Bridgeport team to the final of the Division II national tournament last April.
Mr.
Webster, who is in his 27th year as the Bridgeport coach, was forced to seek outside work after the university cut his salary -- along with that of many others -- by one-third at the start of the 1990-91 school year because of financial problems.


The Hoyas' Defense Blankets the Pirates
Seton Hall may have played three conference games before today, but the Pirates' Big East season shifted into high gear this afternoon as Georgetown's suffocating pressure defense held the Pirates without a field goal for 10 minutes.


Individualism Was Preserved
To the Editor:
For Bernard Holland to call Sviatoslav Richter's pianism "iron-willed authoritarianism" is offensive.
Here is an artist who not only self-consciously avoids bravura playing, as he himself frequently says, but was a courageous opponent of Stalinism and everything it stood for -- witness his many hours of playing at the funeral of Boris Pasternak.


Let the Parent Beware
To the Editor:
With the recession, many children won't be able to manipulate their parents to get the promotional giveaways that travel agents, airlines and companies have planned for them ("Younger Set Leads the Way on the Road," Dec. 1.) These exotic juvenile vacations depend on adults who use vacations as status symbols.
They perpetuate the same type of vacation with their children and condition them to depend on it for happiness.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Instead of Salt
Q.
I'm concerned about plant
damage near walks where salt compounds are used to melt ice.
How can I counter damage caused by the chemicals? -- William MacFarland, Boston.
A.
Many chemical de-icing compounds will indeed ruin the soil and kill or damage shrubs and street trees.
The products to avoid are those containing sodium chloride, calcium chloride or rock salt.


Budget London
To the Editor: Solving the budget hotel problem in London is easy ("What's Doing in London," Oct. 6).
Just take the Tube from Heathrow (change at Hammersmith); or the express train from Gatwick direct to Victoria Station, take a cab, a 24 bus, or walk up to Belgrave Road (use your map, or ask) and just check amongst the dozens and dozens of low-cost, clean hotels that line that street and several adjoining streets.
Access is easy: the 24 bus directly connects the neighborhood with Westminster and Trafalgar Square; Victoria Station's trains, shopping mall, Tube and bus stations are a 5-to-10-minute walk, Buy a $:2.30 (about $3.90, based on the rate when I was there of $1.70 to the pound) London Transport day pass every day and use it (it's also good on the Tube to Heathrow, and on the new Docklands Light Railway).


Cures for Sartorial Cabin Fever
The year may be new, but winter is old, and there is no sign yet of spring.
It is the time you get bored with wearing the same clothes month after month and are yearning for something different.
The markdowns in the stores look as tired as what's already hanging in your closet, so they provide scant comfort.
But diligent shopping can turn up some early spring merchandise to perk up your spirits.
One new outfit, or even one new item, can add a touch of freshness to a stale wardrobe.
Perhaps a pair of platform pumps, which are showing signs of making a major comeback, can provide the needed lift.
Saks Fifth Avenue has a sling-back version in black patent by Escada ($315) that is sure to be different from anything you already have.


Matchmaking Over Latkes
LIKE generations before them, five mothers sat around a kitchen table in Deer Park and talked of finding mates for their unmarried children.
But unlike other generations, their children were down the hallway, meeting potential mates.
It was a gathering orchestrated by the mothers, an event that takes place almost every month in a different parent's house.


POSTINGS: Coming to the Trade Center; Showcase for the Russians
Thanks to the Russian Government, the World Trade Center actually will be using commercial space at its northeast plaza building for its intended purpose -- showcasing foreign products.
The Russians have chosen to open a trade and cultural center at the center in 52,000 square feet of ground-floor and mezzanine space.
They are also taking 28,000 square feet of office space.


Rosslyn Castle
To the Editor: I was so pleased to read the article on Rosslyn Castle.
A few years back we were taken there on a coach tour out of London that included Patterdale on the edge of the Lake District and finished at Ilkley.
We visited on a beautiful October day.
The castle was guarded by a little old lady in blue sneakers.
She took us out on the lawn and tugged up a stone to show how orders were communicated to either the kitchens or the dungeons below.


Erika L. Fox To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome B. Fox of Hillsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Erika Leslie Fox to Dr.
Richard Allen Eden, the son of Harry Eden of Pacific Palisades, Calif., and the late Nina Schuler Eden.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fox, 30 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Oneonta.
She is a member of Kibbutz Ketura in the Arava region of Israel, where she is a child-care worker.
Her mother, Marci Fox, retired as the assistant manager of Five Star Travel in Matawan, N.J.
Her father retired as a senior vice president of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in Red Bank, N.J.


G. H. Brown Wed to Ann McCloskey
Ann Elizabeth McCloskey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert P. McCloskey of Denville, N.J., was married yesterday in New Canaan, Conn., to George Holt Brown, a son of M. Barclay Brown of Duxbury, Mass., and Renee Bigler of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
T.
Guthrie Speers Jr. performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Waveny House.
Mrs.
Brown, 32 years old, is the director of sports and news marketing for NBC-TV in New York.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her father is the president of Edward J. Stewart Electric in Morristown, N.J.


Coach for E. Carolina
STEVE LOGAN, who has directed East Carolina's high-powered offense the last two seasons, was named yesterday as the Pirates' football coach.
Logan, 38, succeeds BILL LEWIS, who resigned Jan. 6 to become coach at Georgia Tech.
Logan said he would continue to emphasize the passing game that helped the Pirates gain an 11-1 record and the team's first top 10 ranking.
East Carolina beat North Carolina State, 37-34, in the Peach Bowl.


Michael Showing Legs for the Shopping-Spree Game
His shackles removed, Gene Michael acted like a contestant in a shopping-spree contest.
Racing down the aisles of the department store as if he had a proscribed amount of time, he plucked Danny Tartabull from the run-production department, turned right, sped toward the infield area and snatched Mike Gallego from a rack, then paused at the third-base counter, where he grabbed a gift certificate that he planned to convert into Charlie Hayes.
Finally, scampering to the back of the store, he retrieved Steve Sax from a trash bin and deposited him on a table in the pitching department, scooping up Melido Perez in his place.


For the Younger Set, Comfort With Style
Children live in sneakers, and their parents' problem is getting them out of sneakers and into something more substantial, a few days a week.
Mary Anne Fontana was never too pleased with the shoe styles available to her children.
Ms.
Fontana designs infants', boys' and girls' shoes for Shoe Be Do of Fancy Feet in Royal Oak, Mich.
"Moms can identify quality," she said.


Sharpton Is Acquitted of 'Outrage' Charges
The Rev.
Al Sharpton has been acquitted of misdemeanor charges that grew out of a "days of outrage" demonstration that he conducted in 1988.
Judge Peter Benitez presided over the three-week trial without a jury in Criminal Court in Brooklyn.
The judge found Mr.
Sharpton not guilty of unlawful assembly and criminal trespass, two charges that could each have carried up to 45 days in jail.


500 Years of American History in 7 Acts
THE Shubert Performing Arts Center in New Haven has put together an 11-month series of events under the umbrella title "Celebration of the Americas: 1492-1992." "This extensive program spotlights the variety of performing arts which have developed in the Americas as a result of our multicultural heritage," said the Shubert's executive director, Judith Lisi.
Seven major presentations form the pillars of the celebration.
The opening production, "I Have a Dream," will raise funds for the Dixwell Community House, which provides educational programs and other services for young people in New Haven.
The musical, performed by members of the National Black Touring Circuit, traces the life and death of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., fusing excerpts from his letters and speeches with almost 30 songs, mostly in the spiritual and gospel traditions.
There is a student preview on Thursday morning at 10 for school groups; the public performance is at 8 P.M. on Friday.


Amtrak Revises Elderly Discount
Amtrak has revised its discount program for elderly travelers, lowering the age qualification from 65 to 62 and at the same time reducing the amount of the discount.
Passengers aged 62 and over can now get a 15 percent discount off the lowest available round-trip coach fare Monday through Thursday.
The program began Jan. 6.
Previously, travelers aged 65 got 25 percent off the highest one-way fare seven days a week.
The lowest round-trip coach fares often sell out quickly, and since the senior discount is computed using the lowest available fare, passengers are advised to reserve well in advance.
Senior citizen fares will not be available on the Wednesday before Thanksgiving and Dec. 26, 29, 30 and 31, 1992.


Injured Celtics Send Shaw To the Heat for Douglas
With injuries threatening to ruin their season, the Boston Celtics made a bold trade late Friday night in hopes of strengthening their lineup.
Boston acquired 6-foot-1-inch point guard Sherman Douglas from the Miami Heat, in exchange for guard Brian Shaw.
Douglas was to make his Celtics debut last night at Madison Square Garden against the Knicks.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
DOMESTIC WORKSHOP
Wives and mothers going back to school, back to work -- or both -- often leave behind a trail of mismatched socks, burned dinners, abused appliances, hostile husbands and confused children.


Perspectives: Developing in Brooklyn; Putting the Cleveland Connection in Play
DEVELOPMENT has its ups and downs.
The 42-year-old Bruce Ratner, who has become the chief developer of major projects in Brooklyn, has had some of both.
The ups are to be found at Metrotech, the office center on a 16-acre site adjoining Polytechnic University, which contributed the land and is getting major building and grounds improvements.
With four completed office buildings, a fifth far advanced in construction and two or three more in prospect, Metrotech is easily New York City's leading phased office development project, second in scale only to Olympia &amp; York's World Financial Center at Battery Park City.


County Fights State on Judicial Costs
AT the end of 1991, Essex County Assignment Judge Burell Ives Humphreys decided to pay year-end bonuses to 96 State Superior Court employees out of a surplus in the county clerk's budget.
The Essex County Executive and the Board of Chosen Freeholders, however, citing a potential million-dollar shortfall in next year's budget, declined to issue the bonus checks.
Judge Humphreys ordered the officials to make the payments.
The officials refused.


INSIDE
For Quayle, the Old Question
The Vice President was brought face to face again last week with public doubts about his ability to govern.
White House memo, page 16.
Proverbs and a Protest
An Indiana town's custom of distributing Bibles at school is under attack, one of a number of pending Federal cases on church-state issues.
Page 12.


Jennifer Trachtenberg Is Engaged
Dr. and Mrs.
Don I. Trachtenberg of Wynnewood, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Trachtenberg to Steven Michael Hecht, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Hecht of Teanec k, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Trachtenberg, 25 years old, graduated from Haverford College, as did her fiance, who was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is pursuing a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
Her father, a prosthodontist in Philadelphia, is the former chairman of the department of fixed prosthodontics at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her mother, Judy Trachtenberg, is a freelance writer and an adjunct associate professor of English at La Salle University.


2 Sliders May Put Luge in Big Leagues
Duncan Kennedy had a searing headache, the flu and a touch of vertigo.
He was being asked to sled down a frozen water slide in 10-degree weather, dropping 93.3 meters at a 30 percent grade, traveling up to 70 miles per hour.
Kennedy took the plunge twice today, without thinking once, even though he had already clinched a spot on the United States Olympic luge team that is going to Albertville, France, next month.
A little shove at the top, and the ailing Duncan became an aerodynamic streak of blue.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 29 about stage fright misidentified Diane Nichols of the Miller Health Care Institute for Performing Artists at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
She is the clinical administrator of mental health.


What Is The Politics Of 'Tristan'?
In 1984, just before the New York Philharmonic left on an Asian tour, Malaysia objected to one of the works Zubin Mehta was to conduct: Ernest Bloch's "Schelomo: A Hebrew Rhapsody for Cello and Orchestra." The predominantly Islamic country did not allow presentation of any musical work of Jewish origin.
At first, the Philharmonic administration agreed to change the program, sparking an outcry.
This cowardly response was contrasted with Mr.
Mehta's courageous programming of Wagner in Israel three years earlier.
At that time, defying the Israel Philharmonic's 43-year ban on the German composer's music, Mr.
Mehta led music from "Tristan and Isolde" as an encore.
Fistfights broke out in the audience; some musicians left the stage in protest, and an usher bared battle scars before the Love-Death could reach its infinitely postponed cadence; a result was the indefinite postponement of future performances of Wagner.
These two examples of musical discord -- both seeming to involve politics -- are not similar.
Malaysia's objection was connected to its attitude toward Israel; political opposition was turned into racist law.
An American orchestra was asked to accommodate such perversity.
After the uproar, the Philharmonic canceled its concerts in Malaysia.


Lisa West Engaged to Mark Alpert
Mr. and Mrs.
Byron L. West of Toledo, Ohio, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lisa Lynn West, to Mark Franklyn Alpert, a son of Seymour and Dr.
Harriet Alpert of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss West, 29 years old, is the marketing manager for library subscription programs at Bantam Doubleday Dell in New York.
She graduated from the College of William and Mary and received an M.B.A. from Northwestern University.
Her father is a vice president of Rudolph/Libbe Inc., a Toledo construction company.
Her mother, Laura West, is the director of intervention services at the Cummings Zucker Center, a mental-health center in Toledo.


Conference Championships -- IN A WORD: DEFENSE; Redskins Counting on the Big 'D'
The Washington Redskins' plucky defense will go up against the Detroit Lions' sassy run-and-shoot offense Sunday in the National Conference championship game, and the Redskins' defensive coordinator, Richie Petitbon, says that his defense is pitted against a Babe Ruth.
He also says that he will rely on a few coaching principles of John Wooden and that his players will need Richard Burton's style.
Huh?


He Was No Abe Lincoln
JEFFERSON DAVIS
The Man and His Hour.
By William C. Davis.
Illustrated. 784 pp.
New York:  HarperCollins Publishers. $35.


ALGERIA'S LEADER QUITS, CITING FEAR OF POLITICAL CHAOS
President Chadli Benjedid announced his resignation today, two weeks after his ruling party was thrashed by Islamic fundamentalists in Algeria's first free elections.
Army units began to move into the streets of the capital.
The move seemed to bring an abrupt end to a democratic election process in which Islamic fundamentalists were widely expected to win a majority of the parliament.


Chloe A. Drake Is to Be Married
Lyman M. Drake 3d of Montecito, Calif., has announced the engagement of his daughter Chloe Andriveau Drake to Christopher Harper Martin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter B. Martin of Wilmington, Del.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Drake and Mr.
Martin are both 23 years old and are graduates of Yale University.
She is a program assistant at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle.
She is also the daughter of the late Claire Drake.
Her father is an antiques dealer in Santa Clara, Calif.


Let's Be Fair In Island Park
I wish to comment on "Honking Ducks or Disco: How Do You Control the Noise?"  [ Dec. 15 ] .
My particular concern deals with the situation in Island Park, as I am the owner of Paddy McGees Restaurant, one of the businesses cited for noise problems.
I don't believe a fair and accurate representation of our neighborhood was presented.
Your descriptions of "rustic Barnum Isle" and "this mostly residential neighborhood" implies that the nightlife of this popular waterfront has suddenly fallen from the sky and landed in our neighbors backyards.
This is the exact opposite of what has happened, and I wish to review this waterfront's history.


Wall Street; A Dubious California Play
As an investment concept, CleanAir Transit is pure California, right up there with wind chimes and chardonnay.
Based in Santa Barbara, this newly hatched company aims to design and sell nonpolluting electric buses to environmentally correct towns and cities everywhere.
No more diesel fumes, just a benign trace or two from the natural-gas generator that runs the air conditioner and heater.
This ahead-of-the-curve idea is outlined in a private placement memorandum now making the rounds among the very wealthy set out West. (The minimum outlay is $25,000, so none but the wealthy need apply.) By privately selling $2 million worth of preferred and common shares, CleanAir Transit hopes to grow enough to sell more shares to the general public in a year or so.


Ms. Johnston To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald J. Johnston of Hauppauge, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Maureen Elizabeth Johnston to William Michael Bauer, the son of Raymond Bauer of Breezy Point, Queens, and Carolyn Bauer of Englewood, Fla.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Johnston, 26 years old, a graduate of Skidmore College, is a senior marketing officer at Citibank in New York.
Her father is a vice president of R &amp; D Capital Inc., a New York real-estate management concern.
Her mother, Ann Johnston, is a real-estate agent at Park Place Realty in Hauppauge.


Robin Williams and Then Some
LET IT RIDE
By Samuel F. Pickering Jr. 177 pp. Columbia: University of Missouri Press. $19.95.


No Guts, No Glory: Short-Selling in a Bull Market
Steven Kibbey of La Jolla, Calif., could be speaking for any number of bearish investors on Wall Street when he described what it has been like in recent weeks to watch the stock market flirt with new highs.
As a person who helps run Centurion Capital's $15 million fund devoted to short-selling stocks and thus an expert at pinpointing overvalued stocks that might be ripe for a corrective decline in price, he watched help lessly as his fund dropped 24 percent last year, versus a 42 percent rise the year before.
Many sure-fire bets "went from being overvalued to wildly overvalued to downright silly," he said.
"And then they doubled," he added, lest anyone mistake what kind of year 1991 was.


Designer Jewelry Fashioned in Cairo
FROM Tutenkhamun to Cleopatra and from the ancient bedouin to the newer rich, Egypt's handcrafted jewelry has a long tradition as a means of accumulating wealth, and displaying it, too.
What is less well known these days is where to find not the beads and baubles of the bazaar, but unusual and exquisite ornaments, fashioned from pure metals and precious stones.
Although the list of jewelers in Cairo's commercial directory runs to 15 pages or so, it does not contain the addresses of the city's most talented -- and exclusive -- designers, who have to be sought out from those in the know.


Political Talk
Regrets, I've Had a Few
Messrs.
Serrano, Sinatra and Stein will not be getting together, and thereby hangs this tale of political duty and childhood dreams.
Anyone who knows Jose E. Serrano even slightly knows he is an ardent fan of Frank Sinatra.
In fact, Mr.
Serrano learned English from the Sinatra 78's his father brought home when he was growing up in Puerto Rico in the late 1940's, and he entertained childhood dreams of being a nightclub singer.
He never made it, although he seems to have done all right with his voice anyway, since he is now the Congressman from the South Bronx.


CAMPUS LIFE: Iowa State; Research Group Sues 2 Companies Over Fax Patent
In an effort to stop copycats from profiting from its research efforts, the Iowa State University Research Foundation is suing two Japanese-based fascimile machine manufacturers asking tens of millions of dollars in damages for patent infringement.
The companies, Murata Manufacturing and the NEC Corporation, refused to pay a licensing fee on a fax machine process developed by a university researcher and patented by the Iowa State University Research Foundation, according to court documents filed in Federal District Court in Des Moines.


A Chip-Industry Defection
Wilfred J. Corrigan is one of the senior statesmen of the American semiconductor industry, having co-founded and served as chairman of the Semiconductor Industry Association, the trade group that has pushed for policies to help American companies compete against the Japanese.
Yet Mr.
Corrigan last week broke with other companies in his industry.
The concern he heads, the LSI Logic Corporation, became the first company to drop out of Sematech, the consortium that was set up to help American chip makers become more competitive in manufacturing.


Elaine Morales To Wed in July
July wedding plans have been announced for Elaine Catherine Morales, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles J. Morales of Milford, Conn., and Jacques Bramhall 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bramhall 3d of Morristown, N.J.
Ms.
Morales, 23 years old, is the program coordinator in the development office at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton University, she cum laude.
Her father is a systems engineer for Xerox in Hartford.
Her mother, Kathleen A. Morales, is a vice president in private banking at the Fleet Bank in Westport, Conn.


Designs for Laughing
Explaining humor is a tricky business.
It's hard to convey exuberance, surprise and mischief if you're bent on analyzing them at the same time.
GRAPHIC WIT: The Art of Humor in Graphic Design (Watson-Guptill, Paper, $29.95), by Steven Heller, the art director of The Book Review and the author of several books on graphic art, and Gail Anderson, the deputy art director of Rolling Stone magazine, surveys the role of humor in design.
In their anatomy of wit at the service of communication, the authors explain how designers use such elements as scale and type to amuse, engage and persuade us.
The evolution of styles -- Art Deco, New Wave or the current nostalgia craze -- provides a context for discussing subtle corporate logos as well as outlandish advertisements.
Mr.
Heller and Ms.
Anderson, as one might expect, resolve some of the difficulties of explaining humor by the copious use of illustrations.
Interviews with leading practitioners of this difficult art make up the last part of the text, providing an anecdotal perspective that complements the analytic approach of the preceding sections.
The designers surveyed in the book represent a wide range of approaches -- from the elegance of Paul Rand to the boisterous and rollicking work of Push Pin Studios.
Underlying all humorous design is a sense of play and surprise, a skewing of the ordinary.
Not surprisingly, playful design seems more common in shopping bags than in annual reports.
The humor in corporate publications, as one graphic artist points out, is often a matter of getting away with something.
The book's own designers, Louise Fili and Lee Bearson, clearly favor an irreverent -- if not raucous -- style, sometimes at the expense of legibility.
Navigating these crowded and colorful pages, jammed with text and illustrations, is like trying to get a table at a hot eatery in SoHo -- it helps to have been there before, to already know your way around.


A Believer in Liberal Arts Tackles Worker Education
Since 1983, when the Government released a stinging critique of the nation's schools, educational reform has been high on corporate America's list of priorities.
But even before that report, titled "A Nation at Risk," the National Alliance of Business, a coalition of some 3,500 businesses, was intent on raising the quality of the country's work force by improving education and employment opportunities.
Recently, the organization, founded in 1968, appointed Joseph A. Pichler, president and chief executive of the Kroger Company, a Cincinnati-based supermarket chain, as its chairman.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 29 about migration in Europe misstated an eligibility rule for German citizenship.
The 1949 constitution offers citizenship to ethnic Germans from all former territories of the Third Reich, and to people who were deprived of German citizenship on political, racial or religious grounds by the Nazis.


Topics of The Times; Wine Tradition Goes Pop
Imagine the sommelier at Lespinasse, the new Old World restaurant at the St.
Regis Hotel, delivering an $80 bottle of 1988 Opus One, a California cabernet sauvignon, to a table.
With a flourish, he unscrews the metal cap and pours an ounce into a thin-stemmed German crystal glass.
Screw cap?
On premium wine?
Well, it certainly won't happen with Opus One.
To Robert Mondavi, who produces Opus One together with Chateau Mouton-Rothschild of Bordeaux, the traditional cork symbolizes the good life and the weight of history.
But Glen Ellen, an innovative Sonoma County producer, has now committed the sacrilege of replacing the cork on a $10 wine with a jug-style metal top.


Style of a Men's Club in a Hotel Setting
WHEN we reviewed the stylish restaurant in the new Hotel Sheraton Stamford in the summer of 1986, it was called Magnificent J's, after a class of sailboats that raced across the Atlantic in the 1930's.
The restaurant featured seafood, prepared with a panache that rated a Very Good, in a setting that resembled a ship's cabin.
Following a trend of the time, the hotel seemed to be making its restaurant a culinary flagship instead of the ordinary and predictable hotel dining room of decades past.
Alas, much that distinguished the small, handsome Stamford restaurant has disappeared, including most of its name, menu and wine cellar.
The new name, J's Bar and Grill, says it all.
The small menu, which is printed daily (though only a small category called "captain's choice" changes), offers several types of steak, a few seafood and chicken dishes and several currently popular appetizers.


CAMPUS LIFE: Chicago; Physics Research: Will Lab Problems Harm A Department?
High-energy physics researchers at the University of Chicago said they were worried about the future of their department.
What is causing their concern, they said, is the possibility that the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in nearby Batavia will not receive the money it needs for improvements.
Since 1967, the department has depended on the laboratory, known as Fermilab, to help attract graduate students and faculty members to the university.
Without a high-performance laboratory, the researchers fear that the quality of the department may decline.


On the Streets


Making Waves
The daughter of a missionary, Faye Wattleton decided long ago to proselytize for the right of women to abort unwanted pregnancies.
As the president of Planned Parenthood for the last 14 years she has seen the organization grow in militancy, size and influence.
But now she is moving to a wider forum.
Last week she said she would leave her $184,000-a-year job in early April and become the host of a daytime television talk show.
Her subject: women's issues.
The Tribune Entertainment Company in Chicago, which also produces and distributes "The Joan Rivers Show" and "Geraldo," said Ms.
Wattleton's show would appear this spring.
"I will continue to be supportive and to speak out," she said, "but I see this move as an opportunity to broaden my role. I was approached more than a year ago with the possibility of doing a serious issues show, and Tribune made a very attractive offer and we worked out a very attractive arrangement, which I am not at liberty to discuss."


Jennifer Powers to Marry F. S. Buddemeyer 4th
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas D. Burke of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Burke's daughter, Jennifer Catherine Powers, to Frederick Scott Buddemeyer 4th, the son of Mrs.
Frederick Buddemeyer 3d of New York and the late Mr.
Buddemeyer.
A June wedding is planned.


Carl Bridenbaugh; Teacher Who Wrote Many Books Was 88
Carl Bridenbaugh, an authority on Colonial America, died last Monday at Rhode Island Hospital in Providence.
He was 88 years old and lived in Providence, where he had taught at Brown University.
The cause of death was cancer, a family spokesman said.


Mozart and More


San Jose: Vanna the Robot Chooses the Right Letters
IN Silicon Valley, the nation's hotbed of high technology, some of the most successful companies started in garages.
So it is perhaps fitting that a museum devoted to the products and processes of the region should also start out small.
The Tech Museum of Innovation in San Jose, Calif., which opened a little more than a year ago, is a compact yet imaginative museum whose exhibits fit into one gymnasium-size room.
Indeed, the museum was initially named the Garage, but the name was deemed too confusing to those unaware that high tech entrepreneurs view a garage as more than a place to park a car.
The Tech, as the museum is now generally called, hopes to distinguish itself from other science museums by emphasizing applications of technology, not the basic principles of science.
"Theirs is the 'what' and ours is the 'so what,' " said Robert A. Grimm, a retired Hewlett-Packard executive who heads the museum's exhibits and programs committee.


Nets Turn Bleak Picture Into Winning Work of Art
The outlook wasn't brilliant for the Nets on Friday night as they opened the game without starting forward Derrick Coleman.
As they trailed by 3 points midway through the third quarter, the outlook wasn't much better after starting center Sam Bowie was lost on a pair of technical fouls.
But the outcome turned out to be just the thing the Nets were hoping for, a 104-97 victory over Milwaukee before a crowd of 9,230 fans at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The victory snapped the Bucks' winning streak at four games and extended New Jersey's winning streak to three.


Bruce Cranston Wed to Ms. Cronin
Cathryn Martin Cronin, a daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
James W. Cronin of Chicago, was married yesterday to Bruce Pitkin Cranston, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl M. Cranston of Billings, Mont.
The Rev.
Philip Blackwell, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Joseph Bond Chapel at the University of Chicago.
Mrs.
Cranston, 36 years old, is an advertising group manager in Los Angeles for The New York Times.
She graduated from Harvard University, as did the bridegroom.
Her father is a physics professor at the University of Chicago and a winner of the 1980 Nobel Prize in Physics.


Bulgarians Voting for President for First Time
Bulgarians will vote Sunday to elect a president directly for the first time in the country's history.
It is the third election since June 1990, the date of Bulgaria's first free parliamentary elections in 40 years.


The First Hints That Spring Will Return
THE catalogues are starting to arrive.
The days are getting longer.
These two signs always gladden an impatient gardener's heart.
They are positive hints that spring will indeed get here.
Nursery and seed catalogues are fine winter reading.
They are written in such glowing terms and illustrated with such enticing pictures, it is tempting to select one of everything.
Before long the wish list fills the order page and then some.
When the seed packets and plants arrive, gardeners wonder where everything will go.


Ninja Turtles Never Swung These Samurai Swords
At age 14, Walter Ames Compton read about Japanese swords in a boy's magazine, and his lifelong interest in this esoteric subject began.
Several years later, while a student at Princeton University in the early 1930's, he bought his first samurai blade for $6 at a laundry in the Chinatown section of New York.
Today, the Compton collection of 1,100 swords and sword fittings is estimated to bring $20 million at a three-part auction at Christie's in New York.
Japanese experts describe the collection as one of the finest privately owned holdings in the West.
Christie's won the right to sell it after months of intense bidding against Sotheby's, which had been storing the swords in its New York warehouse for security reasons.
The first day of sale will be March 31.


Passing Along the Family Business
To the Editor:
I read "The Family Business -- Letting Go" (Your Own Account, Jan. 5) with great interest.
But we need to look deeper at the succession dilemma.


Cambodia Gives 2 Sets of Remains to U.S.


Prague Opera
To the Editor: My wife and I recently spent part of our vacation in the lovely city of Prague.
A Mozart festival was in progress and we went to a nearby office of Cedok, the Czech National Tourist organization, to purchase opera tickets.
The tickets were inexpensive by New York standards, approximately $25 a pair.
However, when we arrived at the theater, we learned that these same tickets, sold at the box office, would have cost about $4 a pair.


This Week
As the catalogues roll in, treat yourself, depending on your obsession: Is it unusual perennials?
Old roses?
Heirloom vegetables?
Hundreds of companies across the country offer unusual plants and seeds.
The best source book I have ever used is "Gardening by Mail" by Barbara J. Barton.
If you don't have a dogeared copy, get the third edition (Houghton-Mifflin, $16.95).
The book not only cross-references plant and seed sources, professional associations and plant societies, but it also lists garden supplies, from goldfish to gazebos.


Against the Odds, 1992 Holds Hope
Talk about the international balance of payments: As the new year began, Japanese investors were buying two of Florida's three biggest tracks.
Arazi was resting in France before taking the road to the Kentucky Derby and the $5 million Triple Crown bonus.
The Sam-Son Farm of Canada was breaking records for earnings.
The Canadian filly Dance Smartly was bringing home more money than any other horse in the hemisphere.
And the Makhtoum brothers of Dubai were still propping up the American market by buying more race horses than anybody else.
But, in a business beset by mounting competition and dwindling attendance, the year dawned with tremors of change and glimmers of hope on the home front.
And they arose mainly in Florida, the winter home of racing in the East.


The Unlikely Success of Dennis Potter
"All clues. no solutions. That's the way things are."
The speaker is Philip Marlow, raging hero of the 1986 British mini-series "The Singing Detective." The writer, of course, is Dennis Potter.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEONARDO'S SOURCES
What did Leonardo know and when did he know it?
Dr.
Katherine Schwab, assistant professor of fine arts at Fairfield University, will discuss her premise that the artist's concepts for mammoth bronze monuments were not exactly original on Thursday at 8 P.M. in Greenwich.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Head of the Harbor 345,000
11 Watercrest Court  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 13-year-old contemporary; dining room, den, fireplace, deck, 2-car garage, 2 acres; taxes $8,100.
Massapequa 275,000
88 Cabot Road, 4-bedroom, 2-bath, 32- year-old ranch; Florida room, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600.
Nesconset 157,000
25 Maple Glen Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 24-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $3,900.
Rocky Point 216,500
39 Soundview Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 45-year-old log house; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, sunroom, 1-car garage, water view; taxes $2,600.
Seaford 172,500
1297 Shore Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30- year-old split level; den, basement, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $4,700.
Williston Park 170,000
27 Center Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $2,700.
OTHER AREAS Monroe, Conn. 297,000
19 Pilgrim Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; on cul-de-sac, exceptional landscaping, 1 acre; taxes $4,168.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 300,000
Bayberry Way
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old split-level; dining room, sun room, fireplace, 2 acres; taxes $5,090.
Metuchen, N.J. 268,000
320 Grove Avenue  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old ranch; professionally landscaped, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $7,228.


Neediest Cases Donors Help Despite Pain of the Recession
The recession and the suffering it is causing are cited by many of the donors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund as their reasons for giving.
What is more surprising, perhaps, is that scores of donations received so far have come from casualties of the economic slump.
"As a victim of the downsizing of one of this country's major corporations, this is not the best of holiday seasons for me," wrote a Manhattan woman who gave $100.
"And yet I am well aware that it is so much worse for so many other New Yorkers. So instead of feeling sorry for myself, I decided it was more important to focus on those who could really benefit from some help."


A Taste of the Hamptons Arrives in West Indies
HOW many people would travel to the Caribbean to eat a "Long Island" meal?
Pino Luongo, owner of a popular restaurant in East Hampton, Sapore di Mare, hopes that many will make the trip.
He is trying to re-create a "sister" Sapore di Mare on the French island of St.
Barthelemy, immediately south of St.
Martin in the French West Indies.


Under Political Steam, Health-Care Issue Gains Wider Support in Congress
In the last few months health care has jumped to the front of the Presidential race and to the top of the Congressional agenda, with proposals as radical as the creation of a national health insurance plan like Canada's gaining momentum.
Yet for all the commotion, most Congressional leaders expect only modest change this year.
They say the issue is so complex and the differences among members so wide that it will take months of study and hearings to arrive at a consensus.
Stop-gap measures, like an expansion of Medicaid and Medicare benefits for pregnant women and children or tax incentives to expand private health insurance, are picking up strong support, but the leaders say such changes are only the beginning.


Sunday Dinner; Places for Satisfying A Craving for Lobster
A craving for lobster isn't limited to the summer months.
It's as likely to seize diners in January as in July.
Fortunately, excellent lobster is widely available now and throughout the winter.
Here are three restaurants where you can sate your hankerings.
Le Pescadou
18 King Street, at Avenue of the Americas, (212) 924-3434 -- The widespread popularity of bistros in New York City, paired with the surging consumption of seafood, made the timing right for Le Pescadou, which opened as an all-seafood bistro early last year.
This smart-looking little spot in SoHo serves a generally fresh and diverse catch at reasonable prices.


A COSMOLOGICAL EVENT
Timothy Ferris's demystification of many of the interpretations of "near death experiences" is long overdue ("A Cosmological Event," Dec. 15).
Science may not be able to solve the ultimate mystery of life and death, but it can certainly clarify some aspects of the issue.
For example, aerospace physiologists have long known that a condition known as hypoxia (lack of oxygen) causes the sensation of tunnel vision (the photoreceptors responsible for peripheral vision are highly sensitive to a lack of oxygen) followed by sensations of intoxication, giddiness and euphoria.
These symptoms are precisely those of near-death reports where people say they see a long tunnel with a light at the end, all associated with a feeling of great joy.
THOMAS G. STEFFENS
Jamaica, Queens


Tokyo Seeks to Punish Network That Taped Bush
In a rare public rift with its semi-official broadcaster, the Japanese Government has threatened to impose sanctions on the television network that broadcast the dramatic scenes of President Bush's collapse at an official dinner here last week, as more explicit footage of the incident became public for the first time.
Government officials here assert that NHK, the country's leading broadcaster, violated strict rules about broadcasting at the official residence of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.
Forty minutes after Mr.
Bush fainted because of what the White House described as a stomach flu, NHK beamed footage around the world of an ashen-faced Mr.
Bush being lifted to his feet and then walking out of the dinner.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
MESSAGES FROM A STAR
IT was the type of day that many teachers only dream about.
Not only did Arnie Herman have perfect attendance, he had overattendance.


To Repair Door Locks, Try Replacing the Cylinder
PROBLEMS with door locks do not always mean that the entire knob and latch assembly has to be removed or replaced.
Often just removing the lock cylinder, the part containing the keyhole, is necessary.
The cylinder can be taken to a locksmith for repair, replacement or changing the key.
Removing and reinstalling the cylinders of most locks, usually an easy job, require just a few ordinary tools.
But if a cylinder cannot be removed with such tools, the job will require a licensed locksmith.


A COSMOLOGICAL EVENT
If Ferris intends to discredit near-death reports as an experience of "the great beyond," of having "caught sight of heaven," then he fails brilliantly.
There is, in fact, nothing remotely removed from a religious understanding of death in Ferris's description of death as a cosmological event.
His beautiful, profound and poetic incantation of the mystery of moving through death into cosmic harmony experienced as "a kind of major chord played on the nervous system by the plectrum of stress, a final note that bespeaks our resonance with the outer world" serves no less -- and, I think, far better -- in conjuring notions of eternal life and paradise, than many figures drawn from religious doctrine.
REV.
JOHN B. GIULIANI The Benedictine Grange
West Redding, Conn.


The First Hints That Spring Will Return
THE catalogues are starting to arrive.
The days are getting longer.
These two signs always gladden an impatient gardener's heart.
They are positive hints that spring will indeed get here.
Nursery and seed catalogues are fine winter reading.
They are written in such glowing terms and illustrated with such enticing pictures, it is tempting to select one of everything.
Before long the wish list fills the order page and then some.
When the seed packets and plants arrive, gardeners wonder where everything will go.


A Cast Changes And, Suddenly, A Play Is Reborn
Since the push is on for accuracy in labeling these days, it occurs to me that theater criticism ought to come with a cautionary warning.
Somewhere in the notices -- rapturous or otherwise -- shouldn't it be recorded, "Perishable contents" or "Invalid after June 1"?
We like to think -- we who produce it, especially -- that criticism is timeless.
But its shelf life is probably not significantly longer than that, say, of a carton of yogurt.
The reason is plain.
Critics bear witness to a singular event, destined by the conditions of its making never to be the same again.
The theatergoer rarely sees what the critics see, and by that I don't mean what the critics
perceive
. (That's another, thornier, issue.) I mean what they actually, physically, see.


Packers Get Holmgren, But the 49ers Gain, Too
They reportedly had to settle an old score with the 49ers to do it, but the Green Bay Packers finally got a new coach.
They signed MIKE HOLMGREN, the 49ers' offensive coordinator, to a five-year contract that will bring him an estimated $2.5 million.
The 43-year-old Holmgren, who spent six seasons with the 49ers after four years as the Brigham Young quarterbacks coach, replaces LINDY INFANTE, who was dismissed by the Packers after four seasons.


Stolen Statue Found in Brooklyn


Review/Jazz; Dizzy Gillespie Opens in the Company of Musical Peers
The opening show of Dizzy Gillespie's monthlong stand at the Blue Note was almost strange in the amount of invention it displayed.
Most bands working at this level feature a leader with a few younger players learning what to do; Mr.
Gillespie brought in an entire group of musicians who are roughly his equals.
The trumpet master was convening a group he ran in the early to mid-1960's, including the saxophonist James Moody and the pianist Kenny Barron.
They were there on Tuesday night along with a new rhythm section, Bob Cranshaw on bass and Elvin Jones on drums, and two ringers, Jimmy Heath on saxophone and Slide Hampton on trombone.
The result was a show by a company of musical peers who are all leaders in their own right and who were on their best behavior.


Cuomo Opens a Session With Barbs and a Gambit
IF the Governor's State of the State address sets the tone for the year, then last week's appearance by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in the ornate Assembly chamber certainly seemed to forecast continued sarcasm, getting heavy at times, with occasional snarling.
A Democratic Assemblyman from his home borough of Queens heckled Mr.
Cuomo about his proposal to dock lawmakers' pay when the budget is late, which it has been for the last seven years.
"You don't show up for work, you don't get paid," the Governor shot back testily.
An upstate Republican Senator groused something about his party wanting "structural reform" of the budget.
"Someday we're going to reform your structure, Senator," Mr.
Cuomo replied with a half-grin.


Boston: Walk-Through Computer
THE mark of a good museum, according to Oliver Strimpel, executive director of the Computer Museum in Boston, is that it leaves its visitors with a larger-than-life experience -- a lasting impression that changes the way they view their world.
At what may be the world's only museum devoted exclusively to computing, Dr.
Strimpel has been able to transform his vision into an array of interactive exhibits set around the museum's centerpiece -- a giant two-story walk-through computer.
It is a working model of a desktop computer blown up 50 times complete with a 25-foot-wide working keyboard and a six-foot-tall floppy disk.
To demonstrate a typical computer application visitors can roll a giant 9 by 6 feet trackball to move a screen pointer to starting and destination points from among 300 major world cities.
The computer will then find the shortest route between the two points and offer a slide show on its huge monitor of the sights along the way.


Prices You Can Swallow
BURGUNDY IS A DIFFICULT WINE region to understand.
The names of the towns, the wines, the producers, the vineyards and even the grapes combine to form an almost impenetrable barrier to the casual wine drinker.
And then there are the prices.
Here are a few 1988 vintages recently advertised in newspapers and wine-shop catalogues and fliers: Corton-Charlemagne, $170 a bottle; Richebourg, $375; La Tache, $400; Clos de la Roche, $215, and a Musigny for $132.
The 1988 vintage was a very fine one; even so, such prices are difficult for all but the wealthiest buyers to accept -- within memory, many of these wines sold for $25 or less.
It's a case of chronically small supply and constantly growing demand.
Though American Burgundy-style wines are getting better, there is still no substitute for genuine Burgundy -- at least for the time being.
But what about those impossible prices?
I asked Al Hotchkin, owner of the Burgundy Wine Company at 323 West 11th Street in Manhattan and one of the few wine merchants in America who concentrates almost exclusively on the wines of Burgundy.


Miss Murkland Plans to Marry
Mrs.
John Cromwell Murkland of Greenwich, Conn., has announced the engagement of her daughter Lindsey Austen Murkland to Peter Kincaid Hoffman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
Brooks Hoffman of Greenwich, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Murkland is also a daughter of the late Mr.
Murkland.
She teaches first grade at the Nightingale-Bamford School in New York.
She graduated from Wheaton College and has a master's degree in early childhood and elementary education from the Bank Street College of Education.


HAITIAN COMMUNIST SPEAKS OF HEALING
Playing down his longtime Communist affiliation, a compromise candidate for the post of Prime Minister has begun efforts to reassure a torn society that his primary task, if he is ratified for the job, will be to tap talent from across the political spectrum and to heal the country's wounds.
In his first interview since his nomination was approved Wednesday in diplomat-brokered negotiations with the deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Rene Theodore, Haiti's Communist Party leader, described a political evolution that he said had led him to favor "modern capitalism." He promised that any government he formed would be one of true national reconciliation.


Children's Books; Artists as Models
AS a child, happily daubing my way through painting classes in school, I never thought of art as something
grown-ups
did.
And small wonder.
Although my practical-minded parents had heard of Rembrandt, van Gogh, Picasso, and even took me to museums to see their work, they certainly didn't consider them role models.
There were no artists among their friends and acquaintances, nor did they know of anyone who made a living at art.
They didn't mind my mucking about with crayons, but take up art as a career?
Uh-
uh.
The low prestige of artists in those days probably accounts for the fact that there were few children's biographies of them.
The lives I read dealt not with cultural figures, but with men and women of action -- explorers, inventors, nurses, Presidents and sports figures.
In fact, artists were rarely celebrated even in books for adults (unless the artists were crazy, as in "The Moon and Sixpence" and "Lust for Life").
Interestingly enough, the first Pulitzer Prize for a biography whose subject was an artist was awarded only last year, to Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith for "Jackson Pollock: An American Saga."


Maria C. Flynn Plans to Wed
Dulce Cardoso de Almeida Flynn of Rio de Janeiro and Joseph Flynn of Naples, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Maria Christina Flynn, to Mark Kenwill Schmidt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Christoph H. Schmidt of Lakeville, Conn.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Flynn, 33 years old, is the beauty editor of Seventeen magazine.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father retired as a pilot for Pan Am.


CAMPUS LIFE: Lehigh; Fraternity Joins In To Help Restore 18th-Century Mill
When Albert Werner decided about three years ago that he and his fellow members of the Hellertown Historical Society should restore the Colonial-era gristmill outside the society's headquarters, he didn't realize how big the project would be.
The mill, at the south end of this small eastern Pennsylvania borough near Bethlehem, had been a tavern until the 1940's, and was then used for light storage.
Years of neglect, however, had left all but the stone exterior walls structurally unsound.
"We never knew what we had here," said Mr.
Werner, vice president of the historical society.
"It was in sad shape."


Getting About by Computer: Step-by-Step Programs
IF you are 62 or over and fly a lot, this is a good day to assess the airlines' discount-fare coupon books for seniors, some with recently changed rules.
If your situation matches the rules, it may be worthwhile to move rapidly because the prices of two books are going up this Wednesday.
Two programs allow you to buy seats for travel companions younger than 62; a third allows grandchildren if they are 2 to 11 years old.
One program, Continental's Freedom Passport, is being sold to people as young as 55, but only until Wednesday.
These programs, although not the only airline senior discounts, are still the best deal for older people who travel steadily.
The airlines set the price low because they get the money in advance and then limit the number of coupon seats on each flight; in return, travelers can fly from one coast to the other for around $100.
Those who get full value from these offers have flexible schedules and are not bound by a Monday-Friday workweek.
Blackout days may apply.


JUST ADD WATER
ALEXANDRE DUMAS, PERE, THE 19TH-CENTURY French writer and epicurean, reputedly drank only water.
He claimed that "never has the Grand-Laffite or Chambertin provided me with the delight that a glass of water from a fresh spring could."
Not many Frenchmen would trade their wine for water at the table, but the importance of this essentially free and abundant resource in the kitchen should not be overlooked.
Perhaps more than any other single ingredient, water enhances the natural taste of food, doing its job and then disappearing afterward.


If Russians Now Elect Their President, Why Can't Americans?; No Winner Take All
To the Editor:
Every fourth year, Tom Wicker goes on a snipe hunt against the Electoral College, alleging it is undemocratic.
The division of votes in the Electoral College is a matter of state law.
There is no winner-take-all provision in the Constitution.
Maine has already provided that two of its votes go to the winner statewide, and the other two follow the decisions of the two Congressional districts.


76ers Defeat Clippers, 102-90


A SEARCH YIELDS A SNIPER SUSPECT
A four-hour search for a sniper who sprayed a group of housing police officers with gunfire ended early yesterday morning with the arrest of a man in the 12th floor of his high-rise apartment building in Coney Island, the police said.
The man, Anthony Rodriguez, hit four of five police cruisers with at least eight bullets when the cars, responding to a report of shots being fired, pulled up outside the building shortly after 11 P.M.
Friday night, the police said.


Cynthia Hewitt Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Hewitt Jr. of Pebble Beach, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Cynthia Diane Hewitt to Nicholas Worthington Philip, the son of Cynthia O. Philip of New York and the late Nicholas W. Philip.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Hewitt, 30 years old, graduated from Smith College and has an M.B.A. from the University of Michigan.
She is a corporate finance associate at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
Her father is president of Hewitt &amp; Associates, a financial planning firm in Carmel, Calif.


More Worries About Breast Implants
WHEN an advisory panel to the Food and Drug Administration recommended in November that silicone breast implants be allowed to stay on the market, awaiting more data on their safety, it was hard to tell who was more relieved: the companies who make the devices, the surgeons who insert them, or the estimated two million women hoping for a sign that their decision to have the operation hadn't been a dangerous mistake.
But the issue was far from resolved.
Reports quickly surfaced that a manufacturer, Dow Corning, had withheld memos from its staff questioning the safety of its implants.
And the F.D.A. reprimanded the company for giving out misleading information on its telephone hotline.


RECORD BRIEF
The Galloping Coroners: 'Jumping Out the World -- Instinct' and 'Teach Death a Lesson'
Virus/Alternative Tentacles,  64 Mountgrove Road, London N5 2LT, England; CD only


Sculpture Show Fills the Housatonic Museum's New Gallery
AT a time when most cultural institutions are becalmed, the Housatonic Museum of Art has taken a step forward.
It is still housed in Housatonic Community College in Bridgeport, but its collection, born in 1967 under the administration of Burt Chernow and now more than 4,000 works strong, has a space to call its own -- a spanking new gallery on the third floor.
At 1,100 square feet, this is not the Louvre, but it is an area where excerpts like the present one of sculpture can be concentrated, instead of strung out through the college's corridors, communal areas and offices.
Not that the former arrangement was altogether unsatisfactory, since it meant that everyone -- students, faculty members and other college personnel -- was exposed to the art daily, which was Professor Chernow's principal intention.
Still, familiarity can breed indifference, and few of these 90 sculptures could have been displayed under the previous conditions.


Arizona's 71-Game Home Streak Ends
One of the coolest coaches in college basketball lost his temper this afternoon, and it contributed mightily to ending the longest home-court winning streak in the country.
Behind Don MacLean's 38 points and Darrick Martin's running 12-footer with three-tenths of a second left, and with help from a technical foul assessed to the usually mild-mannered Arizona coach, Lute Olson, second-ranked U.C.L.A. edged sixth-ranked Arizona, 89-87.


At Work With Sheet Metal and Wire, Embellished by Gemstones
VICKI EISENFELD'S meticulously fabricated jewelry takes its coloration from combinations of high-karat gold in yellow, rose, green and white, with the occasional use of gemstones for accent.
The bold ornaments created by Judith Kaufman, on the other hand, are characterized by lavish use of spectacularly colored semi-precious stones set in 22-karat gold.
Both Connecticut goldsmiths are represented in a recently published book, "Contemporary Jewelry Design," by Ettagale Blauer (Van Nostrand Reinhold), which chronicles the 50-year history of the American studio goldsmith movement.
And their work was included in a recent exhibition at the Artium gallery in Manhattan that was organized to illustrate the techniques featured in the book.


Kristina Grimm Is to Marry in May
Mrs.
Anthony B. Suso of Fair Haven, N.J., and Richard T. Grimm of Shark River Hills, N.J., have annouced the engagement of their daughter, Kristina Marie Grimm, to Robert Herbert McCooey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. McCooey of Rye, N.Y.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Grimm, 25 years old, is a personnel administrator at the Whitney Museum in New York.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father is president of Grimm-Jones Inc., a chemical equipment marketing company in East Brunswick, N.J.


No Rush on Germany in Security Council
To the Editor:
In "Recognize the Power of the New Germany" (Op-Ed, Dec. 27), Michael Lind argues that the United Nations should invite Germany to take a permanent seat on the Security Council.


Wilder's Flier
Lawrence Douglas Wilder, Governor of Virginia and candidate for President, is in Philadelphia to sell his political wares.
His first stop is a news conference at the Four Seasons Hotel.
"Where do you stand on the political spectrum?" a television reporter wants to know.


CORRECTION
A picture and caption last Sunday with an article about office vacancies in Shelton, Conn., were published in error.
The picture showed White Plains Plaza in White Plains.


Honoring the New


A Man's Eye View of the Long Skirt
IN THE STORY "PENGUIN ISLAND" BY ANATOLE FRANCE, there is a society of intelligent penguins who, as penguins are wont to do, waddle around stark naked in perfectly chilly bliss.
Then one day a single female, a not particularly attractive one, is made to wear clothes.
Soon she has a large retinue of lusting males who follow her wherever she goes.
Soon, too, all the other females begin wearing clothes.
The moral, as old as the idea of fashion: Sometimes, it's not what you show but what you don't show that is the most alluring.
Long skirts are like a secret waiting to be unraveled.
Among the things that men love: the sensual rustle of fabric against leg, the romance and sophistication of a lengthened silhouette, the mystery of what's beneath.
The more modern versions are all about danger.
Most of the new designs are slit, up the sides, back or front, and there is always the shifting drama of these openings.
While a short skirt emphasizes the lower leg, a long skirt gives you a sense of a woman's thighs, and there is a beautiful line to the hips.


Editors' Notes
An article on page 29 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the television producers Joshua Brand and John Falsey discusses their series "I'll Fly Away." After the section went to press, NBC rescheduled the series.
It will not be shown again until Feb. 28, when it will begin appearing regularly on Fridays at 9 P.M.
The article also refers incorrectly to "The White Shadow," a CBS series.
It was about a high school basketball coach.


What Mayor Dinkins Said
Leland Jones, the press secretary to New York City's Mayor, David Dinkins, has a valid complaint.
An editorial last Sunday said Mayor Dinkins "sometimes claims he is being held to a higher standard because he is black." The Mayor has made no such public statement and it was wrong of us to put those words in his mouth.
Mr.
Dinkins has from time to time said that he thinks he is being held to a different standard than previous mayors.
For instance, of the press's early interest in his devotion to tennis, he said perhaps people "would react differently if I shot basketball hoops." Discussing criticism of his fondness for elegant attire, he said, "I suppose some folks are so used to seeing us in dungarees and overalls -- you know, out on the plantation or something."


A Dizzily Romantic Staging of 'My One and Only'
NOTE to the management of the Downtown Cabaret Theater in Bridgeport: To close "My One and Only" just six days before Valentine's Day is to miss the point.
The "new Gershwin musical," as it was advertised for the 1983 Broadway production, is dizzily romantic.
It is also airborne and bubbly, as befits a story about an ace flyer (Capt. Billy Buck Chandler) who falls in love with an aquatic star (Edythe Herbert).


A Professional Whom Age Turned Into a Poet
Art historians can readily list a number of artists, like Titian, Rembrandt, Monet and Matisse, who broke new ground and reached new emotional levels as they grew older.
The careers of such painters should be taught in fitness classes and nursing homes to inspire a certain esteem for human potential in advanced age.
Monet, who had cataracts, at one point could only be certain of the colors he was using by checking the label on the tube.
Matisse's great cutouts were made when he was bedridden and had to draw with a piece of charcoal attached to a long pole.
The "old-age style" is quite rare among photographers (who, after all, have not had as many innings in history as painters have), but it is clearly identifiable in the work of Eugene Atget (1857-1927).
"Atget's Magical Analysis: Photographs, 1915-1927," recently at the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, was the first museum exhibition devoted to this aspect of his work.
Thirty pictures by no means exhaust the accomplishments of his later years, but they do give a satisfying glimpse into the mind of a man as he contemplated eternity on his ground glass. (A smaller show of Atget's work from all periods is at the Zabriskie Gallery in Manhattan, through Feb. 15.)


Social Events
For Minority Businesses
Jan. 15 -- The National Minority Business Council, a supporter of minority-owned and operated business ventures, is to benefit from a concert of new American music at 7:30 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center.
The New York Choral Society, the American Boychoir and the New Jersey Symphony will perform the New York premiere of "This Sacred Ground" by David Diamond.
Tickets, $12 to $25, from (212) 874-2424.


Miss Campbell To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Campbell of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Moina Merz Campbell to Bruce Kevin Freeston, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bert S. Freeston of Maple Glen, Pa.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Campbell, 27 years old, is the project manager at Advanced Marketing and Promotions in Mount Laurel, N.J.
She and her fiance graduated from Denison University, and she received a master's degree in psychology from Kean College.
Her father is the president of Investors Security Services in Short Hills.


Syrian Warplane Deal With Russia Reported
A Lebanese newspaper reported today that Syria was negotiating a $2 billion arms deal with Russia involving advanced jet fighters and bombers and long-range surface-to-air missiles.
The daily, Al Hayat, citing Russian informants in London, said the deal was about to be closed after the Syrians had agreed to pay cash in hard currency, as the Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin demanded.


Art's Sake
The satisfaction of buying a work of art, something unique in all the world, is a privilege usually afforded only to the rich.
But Herbert and Dorothy Vogel seem to look upon collecting not as a luxury but a necessity.
Mr.
Vogel, a 69-year-old retired postal clerk, and Mrs.
Vogel, a 56-year-old retired reference librarian for the Brooklyn Public Library, share a one-bedroom apartment in Manhattan with 8 pedigreed cats, 20 turtles and 19 fish as well as some 2,000 late 20th-century paintings, sculptures and drawings that they have acquired over the last three decades.
"We've never been able to save," Mrs.
Vogel said.
"We've always spent our money on art. Now we live on my pension, and Herbie spends his on art." Last week it was announced that the Vogels have pledged their collection, which includes works by John Cage, Christo and Donald Judd, to the National Gallery of Art in Washington.
"We liked the idea of giving art to our nation," Mr.
Vogel said.


Sunday Outing; For Teddy Roosevelt, East 20th St. Was Home
Theodore Roosevelt was an author, explorer, rancher, public servant, Nobel Peace Prize recipient and the inspiration for the Teddy Bear.
He was also the only President of the United States to be born in New York City.
The narrow Manhattan brownstone just west of Gramercy Park where the 26th President was born, in 1858, has been faithfully replicated at the Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace National Historic Site on East 20th Street in Manhattan, between Park Avenue South and Broadway.


Happy Birthday, HAL; What Went Wrong?
HAL: Good afternoon, Gent-le-men.
I am a HAL 9000 computer.
I became operational at the H.A.L. labs in Urbana, Ill., on the 12th of January, 1992.
My instructor was Mr.
Langley and he taught me to sing a song.
If you'd like to hear it, I can sing it for you.
Astronaut: Yes. I'd like to hear it, HAL. Sing it for me.
HAL: It's called "Daisy" . . .


A July Wedding for Audrey Prashker
Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene I. Prashker of Gladwyne, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Audrey Eve Prashker, to Alexander Oldham Clarke, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Clarke of New Bern, N.C.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Prashker, 33 years old, is an associate in the Tokyo office of the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
She graduated from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and has a law degree from Columbia University, where she was a Harlan Fiske Stone Scholar.
Her father is a private investor in Ardmore, Pa.
Her mother, Roberta Prashker, is a reading specialist at the Bala-Cynwyd Middle School in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.


Israel Parliament Proves Point of Its Reform Plan
Israel's fractured, contentious Parliament, an institution that it is safe to say inspires few fond thoughts among Israelis, found itself the butt of ridicule this week as the gang that couldn't vote straight.
It might have been laughable, press commentators said, if the subject was not so important: the proposed overhaul of a sclerotic electoral system that in the view of its many critics makes the prime minister a hostage of tiny fringe parties and political extortionists.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE JORDAN RULES By Sam Smith. Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.


Waiting for the Capital Gains Shoe to Drop
Nothing, it is wrongly said, is certain except death and taxes.
In reality, taxes are not a sure thing, and in that fact may lie a partial explanation for the soaring stock market.
Just now, chances seem better that the Government's desperate effort to revive the economy will produce a cut in the capital gains tax rate, a move that would be a boon to shareholders.


Layne Pomerleau Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Glen V. Pomerleau of Durham, N.H., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Layne Pomerleau, to Carl Michael Fier, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Morton Fier of Demarest, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pomerleau and Mr.
Fier are 24 years old and graduates of Trinity College in Hartford.
She is an administrative assistant at Psychiatric Associates in Hackensack, N.J.
Her father is the vice president of project development for the Willey Creek Company, a real estate management company in Exeter, N.H.
Her mother, Phyllis Pomerleau, is a social studies teacher at Oyster River High School in Durham.


An Ethnic Road to Riches: The Immigrant Job Specialty
When Parmjit Singh left his job as a mechanic on a Greek ship in 1981, he settled in New York City, instead of returning to the family farm in India.
After working three years as a busboy and cook in a Greek restaurant, Mr.
Singh met a fellow Punjabi who owned a gas station in the city.
"He taught me how to run a station," the 32-year-old Indian recalled.
"It's very hard work but it's easy to run -- to order gas, to clean, to keep the books."


Currency; Dollar Surges At Week's End
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
127.05
124.65
133.95
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5850
1.5435
1.5310
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1546
1.1461
1.1520
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7885
1.8490
1.9076
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$356.25
$350.50
$391.35
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


New Yorkers, etc.
A is for appointment books.
A is for address books.
Above all, A is for angst, which is what you get when your appointment/address book is lost/misplaced.
It is a condition most often likened to having one's analyst, internist and periodontist retire on the same day.
Consider the story of Susan Woelzl, who, in the hubbub of the holiday season, inadvertently slipped her appointment book down the chute of a mailbox along with her bill payments.


Sowing the Killing Fields
THE TRAGEDY OF CAMBODIAN HISTORY
Politics, War, and Revolution Since 1945.
By David P. Chandler.
Illustrated. 396 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $35.


The Executive Computer; Reports With Sound Effects and Video
Quicktime, one of Apple Computer Inc.'s most exciting recent innovations, holds the promise of making video, animation and sound almost as easy to use in computer programs as text and graphics.
A flood of products designed to take advantage of Quicktime will be demonstrated at the Macworld Expo trade show, which begins today in San Francisco.
Quicktime, which is invisible to the average user, is essentially a set of standards and tools for software developers who are expected to use it to make spreadsheets, data bases, graphics programs, word processors and other applications capable of working with sound and video along with text and standard graphics.
It was sent to software developers last month as an extension of the Macintosh operating system.


Working-Class Pair Now Reigns in Skating
The marinated chicken sandwiches are waiting for Calla Urbanski back at Kid Shelleen's restaurant in Delaware.
So are the customers, who miss the tiny blonde waitress with the hoarse Chicago accent.
"She scoots around pretty good," Russell Jennings, one of the cooks at Kid Shilleen's, said over the telephone.
"Those little legs can move fast."


Corrections
A picture on Dec. 22 with an article about gospel music was published in error.
It showed the singer Hilda Simms, not Clara Ward.


Rosslyn Castle
To the Editor: Philadelphia's Main Line boasts its own homage to Scotland's Rosslyn Chapel and Castle.
In 1911 the Philadelphia Quaker architect William L. Price designed and built Roslin House in Haverford, Pa., for Horace B. Forman Jr. and his wife, Elizabeth Chandlee Forman, from sketches provided by the Formans..


Susan Zuckerman to Wed in March
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Zuckerman of Woodmere, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Lynne Zuckerman, to Mark Allen Broude, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Broude of New York.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Zuckerman, 27 years old, is an associate in the corporate communications department of Goldman Sachs &amp; Company in New York and is a cum laude graduate of Connecticut College.
Her father is president of M. Zuckerman and Company, a general sales company in New York.
Her mother, Janet Zuckerman, is the director of development and planning of the Rockaway Development and Revitalization Corporation, a community economic development association in Far Rockaway, Queens.


Irish Pull Off Another Stunner
LaPhonso Ellis scored 31 points and grabbed a game-high 11 rebounds and Daimon Sweet added a career-high 30 points to lead Notre Dame to a shocking 88-76 victory over North Carolina yesterday at Madison Square Garden.
With the upset of the heavily favored Tar Heels (10-2), Notre Dame improved its record to 4-5 and stretched a winning streak to three games.
The game was the sixth of nine road games in a row for the Irish.


The Past Is What Catches Up With Us
MYSTIC CHORDS OF MEMORY
The Transformation of Tradition in American Culture.
By Michael Kammen.
Illustrated. 864 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $40.


How to Sell More U.S. Cars: Japanese Drivers Offer Hints
The very moment that President Bush and American automobile executives were calling on Japan to buy more American cars this week, Tomio Sakamoto was looking over a shiny black Cadillac Seville in a showroom on the Ginza, where it was selling for a pricey $60,000.
"Of course I might buy an American car," said Mr.
Sakamoto, a 43-year-old graphic designer.
"But I remember that my friend had a Pontiac, and it breaks down very often. The brake gets loose and the blinker lever dropped. It's unbelievable it was so badly made."


Jessica Diamond Weds Gary Schaer
Jessica Helen Diamond, a daughter of Stanley Diamond of New York and Harriet Diamond of Ardsley, N.Y., was married last evening to Dr.
Gary Lee Schaer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aaron Schaer of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Bennett F. Miller officiated at the Water Club in New York.
Mrs.
Schaer, 32 years old, is a clothing and accessories retail consultant in Chicago.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her mother is a painter.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin and a partner in the Castle Properties Company, a real-estate development concern in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Her stepmother, Dr.
Ethel Spector Person, is a professor of clinical psychiatry at Columbia University.


A Vision of Hollywood Along the Hudson River
PASSING by the County Medical Center in February 1988, people saw a giant crane spraying white foam on the pine trees there.
It wasn't being done for environmental reasons: an office in the Psychiatric Institute was being used in the filming of the movie "Working Girl."
The film crew transformed the office so that it resembled a posh Vermont hospital room, complete with a view of snow-covered trees outside the frosted windows.
The Medical Center received $3,500 for renting the property for a day and a half, and the children hospitalized in the institute received a surprise visit from Sigourney Weaver, who starred in the movie.


PANEL FROM C.I.A. URGES CURTAILING OF AGENCY SECRECY
A panel established by Director Robert M. Gates to explore ways to lift the veil of secrecy at the Central Intelligence Agency has recommended declassifying vast quantities of older documents and making agency officials more accessible to the public.
Intelligence officials say the internal panel has sent Mr.
Gates a list of options that also includes more on-the-record interviews, public speeches and public testimony to Congress by senior agency officials, as well as the release of new material to complement the current publication of maps, world fact books and economic reports.


... and a New Home for a Pioneering Theater
IT'S a success story that could be attributed to impeccable timing, terrific luck and slick marketing.
But it took more than that to move the nonprofit Crossroads Theater Company from its modest beginnings 13 years ago on the second floor of a rickety factory in a depressed area to a new $4 million building in a revitalized district of New Brunswick.
It took the persistence, vision and understated power of Ricardo Khan, who has been instrumental in gaining for Crossroads the artistic credibility and high visibility that affirm its place in the forefront of black theater in America.
All this at a time when the fortunes of the arts in general and professional black theater in particular are withering.


Commercial Property: New Hotels; Staying the Course, Despite the Gloom of Recession
THE FUTURE envisioned by the builders of the Regent New York Hotel at 57 East 57th Street is one that stretches well into the coming decades.
It is the coming months that may pose the greatest challenge.
The 54-story, limestone-clad hotel -- soaring over the neighboring Fuller Building -- is being finished at a time when the real-estate empire of its developer, Harunori Takahashi, is being restructured by Japanese banks.


Miss Thomas to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Thomas of Sebring, Fla., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Patricia Elaine Thomas, and David W. C. Riatti, a son of Dr.
Pierluigi Riatti of Rye, N.Y., and the late Doris O'Donnell Riatti.
Miss Thomas, 28 years old, is an account executive at the Axcess Marketing Group in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Riatti, 32, is the company's chief operating officer.


Teaching a Good Life, Singing the Bad One
Mercedes Moore leads a double life.
By day she is a no-nonsense teacher who tries to drill discipline and self-confidence into her students at a junior high school on the Lower East Side.
By night she is a frisky, hip-swinging blues singer who incites her audiences to applause and cheers at Manhattan jazz clubs.
The lanky Miss Moore, who has a cascade of dark curls, pulls her audiences into the saucy lyrics of songs she delivers in a voice that can be heard almost to Hoboken.


Justice Put on Hold
There may be as much as $2.8 billion at stake, but to the Federal judge presiding over a lawsuit in Buffalo brought against New York State officials by former inmates of Attica prison, there are more important things to do today than to weigh evidence in the suit.
It charges that the state's violent assault on the prison to end an inmate takeover in 1971 violated prisoners' rights.
The jury began deliberations late last week, but Judge JOHN ELFVIN announced on Friday that there would be no deliberations today, which, not coincidentally, is when the Bills play the Denver Broncos for the American Football Conference championship.


Kariene Koury To Wed in April
Mrs.
Frederick G. Koury of Westport, Conn., has announced the engagement of her daughter Kariene Noelle Koury to Thomas Joseph Maloney 3d, the son of Lois Cavanaugh Maloney of West Hartford, Conn., and the late Thomas J. Maloney Jr.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Koury, 28 years old, works in institutional sales at Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her late father, Frederick G. Koury, was the president of F.G.K.
Associates in Westport, a management consulting firm.
Her mother is a realtor with Prudential Connecticut Realty Company in Westport.


The Drama of the Solemn Child
They stand hunched in doorways, hesitant, their arms crossed.
They have almost no friends and are missing one or both parents.
Their lives are emotionally and often physically distant from adults, who can't seem to see the children standing before them.
These kids are not cheek-pinchingly cute -- the wounded look in their eyes is often their only memorable feature -- and they don't say the darndest things.
Television, theater and particularly dramatic films are increasingly representing childhood as a charged, difficult time, its sunniness mottled by shadows.
And the new crop of young actors chosen to portray these children look as if they know what it's like to be afraid of the dark.
Their ears may stick out, their hair is a nondescript shade, they're gawky or saddled with lingering baby fat.
Complex children's roles have been important elements in such theatrical productions as "The Secret Garden" and "The Good Times Are Killing Me," such films as "Rambling Rose," "Regarding Henry," "Hook," "Grand Canyon" and "Little Man Tate" and the forthcoming "This Is My Life," and such television series as "I'll Fly Away," "Brooklyn Bridge" and "The Simpsons."


Publisher of The News Charts a Tough Course
When he was growing up in the 1950's, James P. Willse, the publisher of The Daily News since Jan. 1, watched his father, a New York police officer, go through a ritual each morning as he read The News, the only paper allowed in the house.
"He would give it a shake," said Mr.
Willse, demonstrating the technique in his office just off the paper's newsroom, "and say, 'Well, let's see who got caught in whose bedroom!' "


Property Taxes
To the Editor:
The article "Homeowners Hit by Local Tax Increases"  [ Dec. 15 ]  about the rise in Long Island property taxes missed a crucial point.
The commercial tax base is eroding because growth companies are leaving the region, furious with the years of business bashing practiced by local government and civic groups.
The resulting tax burden created by the revenue vacuum is being placed on the homeowner.


Radisson Triples Air-Miles Bonus
Radisson Hotels, which normally gives 500 bonus miles to guests who stay at one of the group's hotels after flying with Air Canada, Northwest Airlines or USAir, is tripling the offer to 1,500 miles through March 31.
Travelers have to belong to one of the three airlines' frequent flier programs.
The airlines add the 1,500-mile bonus to a passenger's record on notification from Radisson.
The hotel group has more than 200 hotels at home and abroad.


Bobsledders Get a 2d Chance
An arbitrator ruled today that three members of the United States bobsled team were entitled to a second chance to qualify for the Olympic team.
The arbitrator, Ross Hart, ruled that Edwin Moses, Willie Gault and Greg Harrell, who said they were not properly informed of rule changes by the United States Bobsled Federation, should be allowed to participate in new pushoffs to determine the two four-man bobsled teams that will compete in the Olympics at Albertville, France, next month.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 15 about Glenda Jackson misidentified the author of the play "The House of Bernarda Alba." He was Federico Garcia Lorca.


Israeli Settlers See Shift By Arabs to Firearms
At night, Dov Kalmanovitz says he hears shots echoing through the hills that separate this settlement from the neighboring Palestinian village of Mazraa Sharqiya.
Although there are Israeli military bases in the area, Mr.
Kalmanovitz says he is convinced that the gunfire is not coming from them but from the Arab village, where he says terrorists are honing their skills on makeshift firing ranges.


Talking: Annuities; It Can Pay To Donate, Not Vacate
FOR the final 10 years of her life, a widow in Newport Beach, Calif., received a $10,000 check each month from nearby Hoag Memorial Hospital.
This was part of an arrangement under which she had agreed to donate her oceanfront estate to the hospital if she could stay there as long as feasible.
She needed the cash to maintain her large home and pay its taxes.
The hospital agreed, realizing it was probably the only way to get the property.
When the woman died in 1989, Hoag got the house and sold it for $6.6 million.


The First Hints That Spring Will Return
THE catalogues are starting to arrive.
The days are getting longer.
These two signs always gladden an impatient gardener's heart.
They are positive hints that spring will indeed get here.
Nursery and seed catalogues are fine winter reading.
They are written in such glowing terms and illustrated with such enticing pictures, it is tempting to select one of everything.
Before long the wish list fills the order page and then some.
When the seed packets and plants arrive, gardeners wonder where everything will go.


A 'No Sale' Sign on Soviet Arms
Italian investigators seize Soviet plutonium bound for parts unknown . . .
Libya reportedly tries to recruit Soviet scientists . . .
Ukraine holds up the removal of nuclear arms from its soil.
These are the latest incidents to sound an alarm about the potential spread of Soviet nuclear arms, material and experts to nuclear have-nots.
The danger has become increasingly clear in recent weeks.
But Washington has reasonable remedies -- if it acts with dispatch.


It's Fun Time for Kerr, Who Gets Set for Return
Tim Kerr, out with a shoulder injury since the fifth game of the season, was scheduled to be in the lineup tonight for the Rangers when they played the Nordiques at the Colisee.
"It's going to be fun," Kerr said after a light practice this morning.
"I'll keep my shifts short and go as hard as I can."


Activist Heads Campaign To Halt Deal With Taiwan
In his 26 years as a production worker at the McDonnell Douglas Corporation's Douglas Aircraft plant in Long Beach, Calif., Bob Gamboa has seen the company endure constant questions about its viability.
But now McDonnell Douglas is planning to sell 40 percent of its commercial aircraft business to Taiwan, and Mr.
Gamboa, who is the political director for the United Aerospace Workers local, fears that the future may be bleak for tens of thousands of aerospace workers in California.
Worried that McDonnell Douglas will phase out production at Long Beach and move jobs to Asia and other sites in the United States, Mr.
Gamboa began an effort last week to rally political pressure to delay the company's planned deal with Taiwan Aerospace.
Backed by California's aerospace workers' unions, Mr.
Gamboa said he wanted to find a "patriotic alternative," like an investment in McDonnell Douglas by companies in the United States or by the unions' own pension funds.


Portland Has Rights, Too
To the Sports Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's column on the women's basketball coach Rene Portland ("Penn State Coach Will Abide by Lesbian Policy, but Won't Discuss It," The Times, Dec. 20), criticizes her for not passing his sexual orientation litmus test.
It is not sufficient that she agree to follow the university policy.
She must also don the hair shirt, apologize for ever having acted differently, and promise not to have any of those politically incorrect thoughts any longer.
That is not the essence of a free society.


Diana Gershon To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald S. Gershon of Newton, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Diana Gershon to David Erani, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Erani of Brooklyn.
A May wedding in planned.
Miss Gershon, 23 years old, graduated cum laude from Boston University.
She is an investigator in the New York office of the General Accounting Office.
Her father is the director of quality management at Sky Computers in Chelmsford, Mass.
Her mother, Brenda E. Gershon, is an admissions officer at Boston University.


Taiwan Becomes a Tiger With an Identity Crisis
LIKE a compulsive overachiever who impresses everybody but himself, Taiwan has enjoyed stunning successes in recent years but is gripped by an identity crisis.
Despite having engineered an economic rise that makes Japan look like a slowpoke, and despite having introduced free speech and free elections, Taiwan still seems full of anxiety about itself and uncertainty about what it is.
Until five years ago, when four decades of martial law gave way to a sometimes tempestuous political free-for-all, the answer was clear: Taiwan was an inseparable part of China.
The Nationalist Government here claimed to be the ruler of all China, and in school children spoke Mandarin Chinese rather than the Taiwan dialect and learned about the history of mainland China rather than Taiwan.


Community Offers a Home Away From Home for Homework
ERIN PIKOR, 12 years old, was sitting in a large room in the Wallingford municipal building on a recent afternoon, working on her homework assignment, an English essay.
Several other sixth and seventh graders were busy with their own lessons.
"It's better than the library, because you can talk," Miss Pikor said of the Homework Place, as the room is called.
"And I don't want to go home, because my sister's there. She's 10, and she can be a pain."


Filming Life, He Found His Own
"Thirty-five Up," the latest installment in the documentary series about the lives of 14 Britons, is the culmination of 28 years' work, and as far as I know is the longest-running project in the history of film.
It started in 1964 with "7 Up," a documentary produced by Granada Television that looked at Britain through the eyes of these individuals as 7-year-olds.
I was 22, had just left Cambridge University with a law degree and had been hired to find the children from as diverse backgrounds as possible and, with the director Paul Almond, to get their opinions on money, love, God, sex, race, school and one another.
We also wanted to know what they had in mind for their futures.
These were the politicians, managers, union leaders and parents of the year 2000, so what kind of England could we look forward to?
We used the Jesuit idea "give me a child until he is 7 and I will show you the man," but, frankly, our underlying concept was political.
Granada was a left-wing company, and in the heady days of 1964 when England was the pop-cultural center of the world, we wanted to see whether the dynamics that gave fame and fortune to the Beatles, the Stones and other icons had permeated our class system.
Did everybody have a fair chance, or did the accident of birth bring power, wealth and success?
Were children made into winners or losers by class divisions, or was the old order changing forever?


Review/Opera; Taking Full Advantage Of the Met's Resources
There are times in the life of the Metropolitan Opera when a particular work fits the house's grand dimensions, when the depths and boundaries of the Met's technical resources match the opera at hand instead of swallowing it up.
Two years ago, August Everding and Hans Schavernoch created a production of "Der Fliegende Hollander" that not only occupies this big stage, but also uses its size for expressive purposes.
Wagner's opera -- perhaps the point at which he turned from his Italianate apprenticeship toward a new German art -- returned to the Met on Thursday evening with a particularly strong and suitable cast.
There are seven more performances coming up, and believers in this particular piece should have a look.


Carolyn Martin Is to Marry in June
Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Martin of Plymouth Meeting, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Carolyn Marie Martin, to Charles Joseph Buscarino Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Buscarino Sr. of Huntington, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Martin, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Harvard University and is a senior sales promotion consultant in the partnership investments department of the New York Life Insurance Company.
Her father is the director of international operations of the Premier Dental Products Company, which makes dental and medical supplies in Norristown, Pa.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 15 about "The Nutcracker" referred incorrectly to the dance school of the Eglevsky Ballet Company.
The school still exists; it is the American Theater Dance Workshop in New Hyde Park.


A la Carte: An Irish Gem Sparkles in St. James
THE Dublin Delights Cafe in St.
James is a tiny sparkling shamrock of a place.
Behind its multipaned cottage windows are just six tables and a small bar.
Inside the bright, cheery, clean cafe, diners in sweaters, plaid shirts and jeans eat Irish- and English-style pub food considerably superior to that usually found in Dublin or London.
The leprechaun-size charmer comes complete with a clover-shaped clock, a cow-shaped blackboard, green-bordered wallpaper and wonderful posters of Irish pubs, castles, writers, family names and Dublin doors.


A Better Mousetrap
To the Editor:
I have to disagree with David Richards's comment about musicals in regional theater  [ "Is There Life Beyond Broadway? Yes and No," Dec. 8 ] .
"The ambition," Mr.
Richards writes, "is to build a better mousetrap, which, in the theater, has come to mean concocting the next big Broadway musical."


Rosslyn Castle
To the Editor: I was delighted to read the excellent article by Andrew Sinclair on those two Scottish architectural jewels, Rosslyn Chapel and Rosslyn Castle ("Secrets of Scotland's Rosslyn Chapel," Sept. 22).
I know the area well: for two years I was resident as administrator of Rosslyn's sister castle, Hawthornden, home to a retreat for writers.
Mr.
Sinclair captures well the enchantment and startling beauty of one of the last unspoilt glens in Scotland.
Any traveler to Edinburgh should set aside a morning for Roslin, only 20 minutes by taxi from the city.
Once there, you are guaranteed a warm welcome from the curator of the chapel, Judy Fisken, and her volunteers.
A guided tour (often available on request) is essential for picking out the carvings and inscriptions.
Although there can never be a substitute for the original, tourists in London can still admire the beauty of Rosslyn Chapel via a plaster cast of a section of the interior, including the legendary Apprentice Pillar, in the Victoria and Albert Museum.


A Cast Changes And, Suddenly, A Play Is Reborn
Since the push is on for accuracy in labeling these days, it occurs to me that theater criticism ought to come with a cautionary warning.
Somewhere in the notices -- rapturous or otherwise -- shouldn't it be recorded, "Perishable contents" or "Invalid after June 1"?
We like to think -- we who produce it, especially -- that criticism is timeless.
But its shelf life is probably not significantly longer than that, say, of a carton of yogurt.
The reason is plain.
Critics bear witness to a singular event, destined by the conditions of its making never to be the same again.
The theatergoer rarely sees what the critics see, and by that I don't mean what the critics
perceive
. (That's another, thornier, issue.) I mean what they actually, physically, see.


Review/Dance; Athletes and Plexiglass Share Stage in 'Impact'
The best came last in a performance by the Elizabeth Streb Ringside company on Thursday night in the Altogether Different festival at the Joyce Theater.
Just as it began to seem as if there would be nothing to the evening but brutal belly flops and collisions, Ms.
Streb presented "Impact," a magical dance for six athletic performers, a Plexiglas panel and a frame hanging high over the stage, all bathed in gleaming white and yellow light.
An assault on heaven, the piece had welcome moments of gentleness and wit that made it clear that these were not just bionic bodies, but fallible human beings.
The work had a decent quotient of extraordinary physical feats.
A man slowly straightens from a squat, a woman balancing perilously on his shoulders as he rises.
But then, after a measured walk back toward the panel, he flips up and she vaults to the other side and crashes against the glass, knocking the man flat as if by seismic repercussion.
The sequence, a chain reaction of sorts, is breathtaking in its complexity, fluency and sly allusion to the knockabout physicality that is at the heart of Ms.
Streb's work.


An Ethnic Road to Riches: The Immigrant Job Specialty
When Parmjit Singh left his job as a mechanic on a Greek ship in 1981, he settled in New York City, instead of returning to the family farm in India.
After working three years as a busboy and cook in a Greek restaurant, Mr.
Singh met a fellow Punjabi who owned a gas station in the city.
"He taught me how to run a station," the 32-year-old Indian recalled.
"It's very hard work but it's easy to run -- to order gas, to clean, to keep the books."


CAMPUS LIFE: North Carolina; Future M.D.'s Show a Dramatic Flair
The question, "Is there a doctor in the house?" can easily empty the stage at the University of North Carolina, where the medical students are as likely to be reciting their lines for the U.N.C.
Staged Readings Company as they are to be tucked into their classrooms reciting their lessons.
The company has been performing through the fall semester as part of the North Carolina Medicine in Society Reader's Repertory Theater, whose members -- medical school students and faculty members -- perform and discuss stories about common problems in doctor-patient relationships.


Debra Caplan To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney D. Caplan of Framingham, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Debra Fern Caplan to Arthur Russell Kay, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil A. Kaye of Pompton Lakes, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Caplan, 27 years old, is a merchandise analyst in Framingham, Mass., for the TJMaxx Company, a national chain of clothing stores.
She graduated magna cum laude from Boston College.
Her father retired as president of Pinefield Drug, a drug store in Framingham.


All About/Tax Preparers; Doing Taxes for the Lazy, the Nervous and the Rich
Almost half of the 114 million individuals who filed Federal income tax returns in 1991 used a paid professional to help them.
But the industry that has sprung up to prepare those returns is diffuse, unstructured and virtually unregulated.
Though no one keeps track of its size, the individual-tax preparation industry generates billions of dollars in fees a year.
Minimal rules governing the practice of preparers have been established by the Internal Revenue Service.
They include requirements like signing every return prepared, providing a Social Security number, retaining a completed copy of the return and furnishing a copy to the taxpayer.


Topics of The Times; In a Lacquered Zoo
The latest addition to the many menageries in the Metropolitan Museum of Art is on the ground floor.
Go left at the entrance, past the head of the angry Aurelius, then right after the Roman frescoes into rooms inhabited by beasts and birds that have been carved and inlaid into the lacquered surfaces of ancient cabinets, bowls and trays.
Half a dozen dappled deer with mother-of-pearl antlers chatter at each other on a 17th-century stationery box.
Gilded crabs sit on golden sea grass, a black cricket hops across a pale moon and coiled dragons gnash their pearly teeth.
The exhibition of the Florence and Herbert Irving collection of East Asian lacquer encompasses work done from the 12th century to the 18th century in China, Japan, Korea and Okinawa, a region where the lacquer tree grows.
Its sap, refined and colored, is applied layer after layer to wood or metal, then endlessly rubbed.
The patient rubbing and the passage of time have given the lacquerware its special tactile quality: your fingertips seem to feel what your eyes are seeing.


Anne Ashbey Is Affianced
Mr. and Mrs.
William N. Ashbey of Middletown, N.J., and Santa Fe, N.M. , have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Avery Ashbey to Louis Francis Pierotti, the son of Leonard Pierotti of Napa, Calif., and the late Jean Kelly Pierotti.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ashbey, 27 years old, is a producer with Colossal Pictures, a San Francisco film production company.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father retired as a vice president of Bankers Trust Company in New York.
Her mother, Julia L. Ashbey, retired as a judge in the Appellate Division of the Superior Court of New Jersey.


CONGRESSMAN SAYS GIRL WAS CREDIBLE
The co-chairman of a Congressional panel has defended his decision to conceal the identity of a teen-age Kuwaiti girl whose account of Iraqi atrocities helped to stir American opinion in favor of the Persian Gulf war, arguing that the fact that her father was the Kuwaiti Ambassador to the United States did not alter her credibility.
An article on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times on Monday asserted that it was irresponsible for the Congressional Human Rights Caucus to propagate the accusation that Iraqi soldiers had removed scores of babies from Kuwaiti hospital incubators and left them to die without identifying the young woman beyond her first name, Nayirah.


Names Change, but Celtic Mystique Stays the Same
"McHale's a no-go tonight," a man who had just come from the Boston Celtic locker room told a scorekeeper at courtside at Boston Garden before last Wednesday night's game against the Knicks.
"No go -- that's definite?" asked the scorekeeper.


Reading Hemingway Without Guilt
IT is not fashionable these days to praise the work of Ernest Hemingway.
His women too often seem to be projections of male needfulness.
There are too many examples of his lifelong anti-Semitism, his affection for denigrating black people in just too many forums private and public.
And he was violent: he loved the bullfights, he wrote of them with zeal, explaining away the cruelty to bulls and horses by celebrating how the matador danced with death.
And he was just plain mean.
As we reread "A Moveable Feast," we experience Hemingway's ingratitude, his viciousness to Ford Madox Ford, to F. Scott Fitzgerald, to Gertrude Stein; and when we consider his treatment of Stein, we have to recall Hemingway's defamation of homosexuals.


The Middle Class Feels Betrayed, But Maybe Not Enough to Rebel
IF the 150-or-so million people who are loosely called the middle class are so steamed up about stagnant wages and big debts, about rising taxes and medical bills, about the bosses of floundering corporations who collect multimillion-dollar salaries while firing thousands of workers, will they take it any more?
Indeed they might.


CORRECTION
An article last Sunday about Weiss Research Inc., an insurance rating agency, misidentified the developer of the computer model used by the company.
He is Ted Brownstein, head of Weiss's insurance operation.
A large group of experts whose views were solicited by Mr.
Brownstein included Peter Chapman, then an outside actuary and now a Weiss employee, and Harold Skipper, an insurance professor at Georgia State University.


Simon Tackles Farce in Slick Staging of 'Rumors'
BY now, everyone knows that Neil Simon isn't only kidding.
He's been as facile at baring emotional scars, exploiting neuroses and unearthing animosities and other unpleasantries -- at hurting while laughing, to spin off one of his own titles -- as he was at simply jesting in his earliest works.
In "Rumors," his 23d play and 1988 contribution to the Broadway coffers, the American theater's most consistent generator of hits suddenly reverted to wisecracking for its own sake.


The Rules Change, the Problems Don't
IN last year's State of the City speech, Mayor David N. Dinkins promised "a new beginning." This year he invoked the poet Georgia Douglas Johnson as he wistfully envisioned a city government that would allow New Yorkers "to call our dreams." Instead, his beleaguered constituents seem more likely to get a jarring wake-up call shortly, as escalating financial and political pressures converge.
Next week, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is scheduled to unveil a $52 billion state budget, in which he promised no new taxes.
He held out no such hope regarding new pain, which the recession is likely to inflict on consumers of state services and on recipients of state aid -- including New York City.
Mr.
Dinkins's own financial plan was due this week, but he asked the City Council for a delay until Jan. 30 so he can factor the precise dimensions of that pain in projecting the city's own budget deficit.


Bahamas Lifts Duty on Items For Consumers
The Bahamas has abolished customs duty on jewelry, perfume and other goods to put the country in line with other duty-free centers in the Caribbean like St.
Martin and St.
Thomas.
On Jan. 1 the Government scrapped the duty on certain imported goods to reduce prices and thus encourage cruise passengers and other visitors to spend more on shopping.
The items freed from duty also include watches, china, linen, liquor and crystal.
The amounts of duty that merchants had to pay and passed on to consumers were, for china and glass, 15 percent of value; leather goods, 20 percent; perfume, colognes and toilet water, 25 percent; photographic equipment, 5 percent; jewelry, 25 percent; clocks and watches, 10 percent; sweaters, 5 percent; linens and table linens, 15 percent, and liquor, $12 to $18 a gallon.


Knowledge of Nina Reached the Pentagon
To the Editor:
For years, the drawings of Al Hirschfeld have appeared in The Times, in the Sunday Arts &amp; Leisure section and the Friday theater column.
In the foreword to his new book, "Art and Recollections From Eight Decades," Mr.
Hirschfeld writes:


TILL DEBT DO US PART
Your article unwittingly reveals the secret of what makes a great divorce lawyer.
During the years I practiced law in New York before moving to California, I learned that there are no kinder or more generous lawyers than the members of the New York matrimonial bar.
Their ability to look beyond Alvin Ashley's obvious vulgarity demonstrates the ability to believe the best, to cast aside dark doubts about human nature and to embrace the complex organism we call a human being.
It is this ability to accept people nonjudgmentally that makes them such excellent divorce lawyers for their clients.
KATHLEEN H. CASEY
Orinda, Calif.


A Pledge to Preserve Yugoslav Cease-Fire


Data Bank/January 12, 1992
Consumer Credit
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
0.0
2.7
0.1
Producer Price Index
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Monthly percent change
-0.2
0.2
0.7
U.S. Sales of Cars Assembled in N. America
Seasonally adjusted selling rate(millions)
5.9
6.0
6.0
Employment
In thousands
116,728
116,772
116,867
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
8,891 (7.1)
8,602 (6.9)
8,641 (6.9)
Weekly Jobless Claims
Jan. 3
Dec. 27
Dec. 20
In thousands
458
438
467
3-Month Treasury Bills
Jan. 10
Jan. 3
Dec. 27
Rate in percent
3.80
3.85
3.85
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.86
3.88
3.89


World Markets; The Year of the Foreign Bond
Bonds were generally more friendly than stocks for Americans investing abroad last year.
High interest rates in some countries, like Italy, and strong capital gains combined with high interest rates in others, like Australia, all helped to outpace average foreign stock returns by more than six percentage points.
Overall, bonds in the 11 foreign markets included in the J. P. Morgan government bond index were up 15.9 percent for 1991, compared to a 9.4 percent return for the stock markets in the same countries, according to the Financial Times index of world markets.
The 1991 return for foreign bonds matched that of 1990, when bond markets far outpaced stock markets, which tumbled because of the threat of the Persian Gulf war.


Poverty Engulfs Lives of Millions of Blacks in Rural South Africa
Joseph Tease, who is 30 years old, did not own a bed until a few weeks ago, when he inherited the hand-me-down frame and mattress sagging against the pounded-earth floor of his otherwise barren home here.
"My sister once worked in Johannesburg," Mr.
Tease said, wiping thin hands against his ragged shirt.
"She gave me the bed. She got it from her employer."


The Melody Lingers On
To the Editor:
Regarding the article "Rushing In Where Copland Feared to Tread"  [ Dec. 15 ] , I should like to clarify two possibly misleading impressions in the mention of my ill-fated commission from the Metropolitan Opera.


A June Wedding For Miss Nelson
Mr. and Mrs.
Paul H. Nelson of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Regina Daphne Nelson to Jeffrey Todd Altman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Altman of Phoenix.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Nelson, 28 years old, is a retail analyst for Polo/Ralph Lauren in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Wittenberg University.
Her father is the executive vice president of the Bibb Company, a textiles manufacturer with headquarters in Macon, Ga.


White House Memo; Doubt Is Spoiler in Bid to Be Vice Presidential
Vice President Dan Quayle went to New Hampshire this week to bury Patrick J. Buchanan, but found instead that the conservative challenger to President Bush came to the Vice President's defense after Mr.
Bush collapsed in Japan.
"I've engaged in some repartee with Quayle," Mr.
Buchanan told a New Hampshire radio audience, "but he's been a pretty good Vice President. He's knowledgeable. I don't think people should be unduly alarmed at the prospect that he would be President."


Chess
Vasily Ivanchuk, who many believe will become a challenger for Gary Kasparov's world title one of these years, defeated the Dutch grandmaster Jan Timman in the traditional Katholieke Radio Omroep exhibition match.
Ivanchuk, a 21-year-old Ukrainian grandmaster, scored 3 1/2-2 1/2 in the 10th running of the six-game contest staged Dec. 16-23 at KRO's broadcasting studios in Hilversum, the Netherlands.
That was not as close as the score might indicate.
Ivanchuk already had achieved the winning tally of 3 1/2 points after the fifth game and lost only the rump sixth game, which was played solely for the enjoyment of the spectators and the television and radio audiences.
Ivanchuk won the first two games and won the decisive half points by drawing the third, fourth and fifth games.


Q and A
Eastern Dude Ranches
Q.
Can I get information on dude ranches in the Northeast? -- Edward Solomon, Westbury, L.I.
A.
There are several resorts, mainly in upstate New York, that offer horseback riding as their main focus.
Rates include all meals, riding and other activities, unless stated otherwise.


Bible Giveaway Is a Rural Ritual to Some, an Offense to Others
For as long as anybody can remember in this country town on the Iroquois River, autumn was the time when the hickory leaves turned bright yellow, farmers hauled in their corn and soybeans, and churchmen from up the road came to school to pass out Gideon Bibles to every fifth grader.
It was a ritual as certain and as ordinary as the first frost and measles shots, and is still a tightly held tradition in many rural public schools from the Carolinas to Idaho.


Corrections
A picture on Dec. 29 with a report about the engagement of Kathleen O'Connell and Raymond James Peloso was published in error.
It showed Beth Ann Mooney, who is engaged to Jeffrey Longcope.
A report of their engagement appeared the same day.


Devils Find the Loss Of Crowder Is a Gain
The contributions of Dave Barr and Randy McKay to the Devils' success so far this season have made New Jersey a winner in its loss of the free agent Troy Crowder to Detroit last summer.
Because Crowder was the Devils' most effective enforcer last season, the Devils asked that the Red Wings provide Bob Probert, one of the most feared fighters in the National Hockey League, as compensation.
But the arbitrator in the matter, Judge Edward Houston of Ottawa, chose Detroit's proposal, Barr and McKay.


RECORD BRIEF
Johnny Adams: 'Johnny Adams Sings Doc Pomus/The Real Me'
Rounder 2109; CD and cassette


CORRECTION
Because of an editing error, a report in the Northeast Notebook column on Dec. 29 about plans to open a Daffy's discount clothing store in Philadelphia misstated the current number of stores in the chain.
It is 10.


Data Update
BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Nov. 91
Oct. 91
Nov. 90
New York
2,008
3,005
1,822
New Jersey
1,821
2,061
1,117
Connecticut
817
1,120
566
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.43
8.51
9.82
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.16
6.18
7.95
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.36
8.45
9.67
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.97
6.03
7.81
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.37
8.43
9.66
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.03
6.01
7.84
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.53
8.58
10.00
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.82
6.84
8.22
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.14
4.17
6.78
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.43
8.43
9.69
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Signed Danny Young, guard.
Continental Basketball Association  ALBANY PATROONS -- Signed Ken Bannister, forward-center.
Placed Clinton Smith, guard, on injured reserve.
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Signed Rory White, forward.
Football National Football League  DENVER BRONCOS -- Activated Mark Jackson, wide receiver, from injured reserve.
Waived Barry Johnson, wide receiver.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Named Mike Holmgren coach.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Named Carl Mauck offensive line coach; Ralph Friedgen tight ends coach, and George O'Leary defensive line coach.
Hockey National Hockey League  NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Signed Rick Green, defenseman, for the remainder of the season.
College  EAST CAROLINA -- Named Steve Logan football coach.


Power Struggle
AS THE GREAT WHALE River rises east out of Hudson Bay in northeastern Canada, its broad sandy shores quickly give way to a carpet of light-green lichen studded with granite outcroppings.
Beyond the banks lies a vast expanse of black spruce and tamarack, great coniferous forests broken here and there by lakes and bogs and kettle ponds.
In winter, the taiga can be harsh and remorseless, a region racked by "wind, snow and natural violence of every sort," as an adventurer described it a half-century ago.
But it is also a landscape that teems with life in fall and spring, when enormous herds of caribous stomp across the earth and millions of migratory birds tarry in the estuaries of James and Hudson Bays, some stopping to double their weight as they feast on eelgrass and coastal shrimp before flying as far south as Tierra del Fuego.
It is quiet in summer: on an August evening there is utter silence in the northern Quebec bush, save for the rippling of the river or the honking of a pair of geese overhead in a salmon-colored sky.
This subarctic wilderness is, in any season, an unlikely subject of an international controversy.
But that is precisely what it has become hundreds of miles away, in southern Quebec and in New York State's capital, Albany, where the central question about the Great Whale River basin is this: Should large parts of it be underwater?
Hydro-Quebec, a utility owned by the province of Quebec, envisions flooding the Great Whale as the second of three phases in a planned hydroelectric power system of colossal proportions.
To harness the kinetic energy in 20 wild rivers, Hydro-Quebec plans to erect three dozen huge dams and hundreds of dikes across the taiga, ultimately redrawing terrain in an area the size of France.


The 2:07 Waltz
To the Sports Editor:
There are times when sports fans must give thanks.
Like last Saturday when John Elway, writhing through an onslaught of pursuing bodies, coming from behind as he has so many times before, brought the Denver Broncos downfield, 87 yards in 1 minute 51 seconds, to set up Jeff Treadwell's game-winning field goal.
KOSTYA KENNEDY New York


Salads in Wintertime Require Freshness, and Some Ingenuity
IN cold weather, salad making calls for some creative thinking on the part of the cook.
Tender lettuces are usually expensive and may not be in the best condition, having suffered damage from frost on the way to market.
Other classic salad ingredients, like tomatoes, are typically inedible.
Decent off-season ones are costly -- as much as $3 a pound -- and even at that price may not have the flavor of summer's crop.
Similarly, small, heavily waxed and often frost-bitten cucumbers may not be worth the money.


CAMPUS LIFE: Yeshiva; Estonians Learn Jewish Tradition By U.S. Instruction
After teaching Jewish children in Estonia for a year, students from Yeshiva University and an organization they founded are preparing to help the Estonians teach themselves.
Since last January, two university students have been sent for monthlong stays at the Jewish day school in Tallinn, Estonia, where they teach Jewish law and tradition to the school's 240 pupils.
At night, the visitors teach adult education classes.


Conference Championships -- IN A WORD: DEFENSE; How Do You Stop This Guy?
Denver quarterback John Elway has inspired equal parts admiration and determination among the Buffalo Bills' defenders.
For the most part, the Bills are amazed at the things that he does.
But they have resolved not to let him do those things to them Sunday afternoon when Buffalo and Denver play in the American Football Conference championship game here at Rich Stadium.


Lions' Bandwagon May as Well Be an Import
Four seasons ago, when he was an impressionable rookie linebacker for the Detroit Lions, Chris Spielman discovered the emotional bond between the team and its fans at the Silverdome.
"It was discouraging to have fans throw beer and pop on you," Spielman recalled.
"It was discouraging to get booed as you left the field."


Fighting Back Against TV
To the Editor:
"A Conservative Look in Newsprint" (Forum, Dec. 29) took the troubling position of saying America's newspapers face the future with slight hope of maintaining media prominence given the constancy of newspaper closings.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE DIFFERENCE ENGINE, by William Gibson and Bruce Sterling. (Bantam Spectra, $5.99.) What if the computer -- powered by steam instead of electricity -- had been developed in England in the 1820's?
In this novel "the historical, cultural and scientific repercussions are enormous, as they have been in our own time, and the resulting counter-Victorian era is elaborated with a Dickensian density of imaginative detail," Thomas M. Disch said here last year.
BEYOND LOVE, by Dominique Lapierre.


Symphonic Niche for Young and Old
THE Fine Arts Symphony came into being two seasons ago, partly to compensate for the loss of the Chappaqua Symphony.
The latter orchestra, reduced to chamber proportions, has just come back to life (its opening concert was last night), but the Fine Arts has gone on to carve out its own niche in North Tarrytown and Bronxville, where the season continues next weekend under the music director, Louis Simon.
The repertory is standard but sure-fire: the Fourth Brandenburg Concerto of Bach, Brahms's First Symphony and the Mendelssohn Violin Concerto, with Benjamin Hudson as guest soloist.
Mr.
Hudson's recent CD recording of that work was praised by one critic as "utterly convincing and highly recommended." Starting times are 8 P.M.
Saturday at Sleepy Hollow High School and 3 P.M. next Sunday in the Bronxville School on Pondfield Road.


Bedford School Plans Program on Parenting
BLAME the recession or the stresses felt by working couples.
Whatever the reason, parenting seems to have hit hard times.
"People have forgotten how to enjoy their children," a psychologist was overheard saying at a recent holiday party in Scarsdale.
A local school administrator agreed.
"Parents today feel a lot of insecurity," she said.
In a recent report stating that many American 5-year-olds were not ready for kindergarten, the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching recommended parent-education programs as one way to help get families on track.
The Rippowam Cisqua School, an independent day school here for prekindergarten through ninth grade, was ahead of the game in planning just such a program to help celebrate its 75th anniversary.


Dropping Athlete Title
After a season and a half as a scholar-athlete, Penn sophomore WILL McALLISTER has decided to try just scholarship without the hyphen for a while.
Coach FRAN DUNPHY said that McAllister, the Ivy League's rookie of the year last season, would skip basketball during the spring semester to concentrate on his course work. (AP)


Kristin A. Rae To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Rae of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kristin Ann Rae, to Charles Edward Gray Allen, a son of Mrs.
Duncan Allen of London and the late Mr.
Allen.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Rae, 25 years old, is a program development assistant at the Children's Television Workshop in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother, Ann Rae, is an artist's representative in New Canaan.


Italian or Mexican: A Matter of Choice
THE opening of another pasta-pizza restaurant on Long Island is not news.
The appearance of a cafe offering both Italian and Mexican food is.
Viva Loco in Bellmore unites two cuisines that have nothing in common geographically, historically or culturally.
Yet, the partnership is serendipitous.
Pizzettas, big bowls of pasta, nachos, tacos and enchiladas are all casual dishes and easy on hard-hit recessionary budgets.


Casa Blanca Reopens in San Juan
The restored Casa Blanca in San Juan, built in 1521 as the residence of the first governor of Puerto Rico and believed to be the oldest continuously occupied residence in the Western Hemisphere, is now open to the public.
The building is furnished with 16th- and 17th-century pieces and houses two museums, the Juan Ponce de Leon Museum and the Taino Indian Ethno-Historic Museum.
The house stands on land given by the Spanish Crown to Ponce de Leon.
The explorer died the year the house was built, but it remained in his family for 250 years.
It is the oldest of about 800 Spanish Colonial buildings in Old San Juan, a National Historic Zone.


TILL DEBT DO US PART
Margolick is inaccurate when he says that lawyers who did matrimonial work years ago, like me, were known as the garbage men of the profession.
Margolick should have pointed out that the "progressive" state of New York, until recently, permitted divorce
only
on the grounds of adultery, evidence of which was rarely found in a library, a church or in any place other than an apartment.
Lawyers who involved themselves in raiding apartments did so because that's where the evidence was, not because they were garbage men.
LEONARD HOLLAND
New York, N.Y.


POSTINGS: A Happy Landlord; Reviving the Goelet's Glory
A 15-year effort to recapture the vibrant elegance of the Goelet Building -- an overlooked masterpiece by McKim, Mead &amp; White -- is to take a big step forward soon.
The Bombay Company, a furniture and furnishings store, plans to recreate much of the bold, curving arcade that wraps around Broadway and 20th Street.
An intrusive modern storefront, which obliterated the corner entrance, is to be removed.
And window bays that had been sealed are to be reopened.
The architect is Roy Euker of Manhattan and the designer is Ruth Mellergaard of the International Design Group's New York office.
Jeffrey J. Justin, whose family has owned the building since 1977, said he has been "trying to bring it back as close to the original as I can." His efforts have included an ambitious restoration of the lobby.
When Bombay decided to take the 5,000-square-foot space
and
restore the facade, he said, "It made me the happiest artistic landlord in New York."


Transit Police Reach Accord With New York on Contract
After working 18 months without a contract, the transit police union reached a tentative settlement with New York City that for the first time would provide pension benefits equal to those received by New York City Police Department officers.
The contract, modeled after an arbitration panel's decision on the city police contract in November, includes a number of concessions from the union, mostly in pay for new officers.


Washington: Interactive Multimedia for the 2000's
BY any measure, computers and television represent advances in the presentation and storage of information every bit as powerful as the development of the alphabet and the printing press.
In downtown Washington, a new permanent exposition now offers visitors an incomparable glimpse of the next great breakthrough in information technology: a joining of video images, computer processing, sound and text that has come to be known as interactive multimedia.
In its most elementary application, interactive multimedia is already a fixture in millions of American homes in the form of Nintendo and other video games.
But the Tech 2000 Exposition, situated midway between the White House and the Capitol, goes much further in offering more than 60 other hands-on applications of the multimedia format.
In effect, an airy hall has been turned into an electronic playhouse and a compelling vision of what's coming to schools, businesses and homes in the 21st century.
Plan on spending a few hours because the exposition is the computer-age equivalent of a carnival midway.


BEST SELLERS: January 12, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
14
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
2
13
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
3
3
8
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the lives and fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
4
4
21
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
5
6
18
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate an accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force. (LP)
6
7
34
THE POLAR EXPRESS, written and illustrated by Chris Van Allsburg. (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.) A small boy's Christmas Eve train ride.
7
9
44
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
8
5
15
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II. (LP)
9
8
4
THE JOLLY CHRISTMAS POSTMAN, written and illustrated by Janet and Allan Ahlberg. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) A mailman delivers letters to nursery rhyme and fairy tale characters.
10
11
3
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
11
10
6
WLT, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $21.95.) The birth, prosperity and decline of a down-home Minneapolis radio station.
12
12
11
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) A diplomat, returning to his native Gloucestershire, finds that his past life in horse racing may help save others.
13
14
11
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $22.50.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide. (LP)
14
15
93
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
15
13
9
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Macmillan, $21.95.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
17
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
2
2
20
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces. (LP)
3
4
13
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
4
6
6
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) An account of a championship season spent with Michael Jordan and the Bulls.
5
3
6
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
6
5
10
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel, with his view of the Iran-contra affair.
7
7
10
CHILDHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Putnam, $14.95.) The entertainer reflects on his boyhood and kids today.
8
9
21
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
9
8
4
THE WORLD IS MY HOME, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) The autobiography of the popular novelist. (LP)
10
15
8
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
11
11
11
PRAIRYERTH, by William Least Heat-Moon. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A close look at the people and mores of Chase County, Kansas.
12
12
30
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
13
58
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
14
10
2
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning from the 19th-century American Indian.
15
5
MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) The story of an Auschwitz survivor in the Catskills, told in comic-book form.
16 *
13
9
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
6
THE BEST TREATMENT, by Isadore Rosenfeld. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Advice from a physician on a host of medical problems.
2
3
61
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
3
4
101
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
4
2
44
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
5
5
2
THE FRUGAL GOURMET CELEBRATES CHRISTMAS, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $25.) A collection of holiday recipes, Christmas Day menus and family memories.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE TRAINING GROUND, by Siegfried Lenz. (Holt, $24.95.) An East Prussian family's wartime escape to the West and to prosperity becomes a powerful symbol of the development of postwar Germany in this open-ended tale by a Hamburg novelist.
THE TANGO PLAYER, by Christoph Hein. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) A professor jailed for a "trifle" in East Germany is the focus of a fictional inquiry into the nature of freedom.
SAN CAMILO, 1936: The Eve, Feast, and Octave of St.
Camillus of the Year 1936 in Madrid, by Camilo Jose Cela. (Duke University, Cloth, $45.95; Paper, $14.95.) A Spanish Civil War novel with a difference: the apolitical vision of its Nobel Prize-winning author is a ringing rejection of fanaticism in any form.
THE FACADE: M.N.O.P.Q., by Libuse Monikova. (Knopf, $23.) In a novel about the restoration of a castle in Bohemia, a Czechoslovak writer creates a house of mirrors to reflect the political distortions of reality in her native land.
THE ASPIRIN WARS: Money, Medicine, and 100 Years of Rampant Competition, by Charles C. Mann and Mark L. Plummer. (Knopf, $25.) A fascinating and thoroughly researched history of a most remarkable little pill.
KEEPING A RENDEZVOUS, by John Berger. (Pantheon, $21.) Reflections on art and philosophy demonstrate the astounding range of a British-born essayist, novelist and playwright.
RICHARD WRIGHT.
Early Works: "Lawd Today!" "Uncle Tom's Children." "Native Son." (Library of America, $35.) Later Works: "Black Boy (American Hunger)." "The Outsider." (Library of America, $35.) A superbly restored version, edited by Arnold Rampersad, of Wright's major works and some minor ones.


Business Diary/January 5-10
ECONOMY In Tokyo, Just Squabbling Among the Motorcar Moguls


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Portsmouth, R.I.; A Boys Town For the Future
AS part of a nationwide effort to expand its care of troubled children, Boys Town U.S.A. is building a residential center in this town of 16,800 residents five miles north of Newport.
It will serve as New England headquarters.
Founded in 1917 in Omaha by the Rev.
Edward J. Flanagan, the nonprofit organization plans to build five ranch-style homes on 20 acres here.
Each will have 6 children, age 10 to 16, supervised by a married couple.
Three will be for boys and two for girls, who were first admitted to the Omaha community in 1979.


Corrections
A chart on Dec. 29 with an article about the decline of independent cinemas misstated the telephone number of the Westbury Theater.
It is 997-7082.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11  ALGERIAN LEADER RESIGNS
As army units began to move into the capital, President Benjedid of Algeria said he was resigning two weeks after his party was defeated by Islamic fundamentalists.  1  President Benjedid has been swept away by his own liberalization.  10


Susan Sherman To Wed in June
Dr. and Mrs.
Maurice E. Sherman of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Ann Sherman to Leslie Noah Morgenstein, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Morgenstein of Chevy Chase, Md.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sherman, 24 years old, as is her fiance, until recently taught pre-kindergarten at the Dalton School in New York.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and is a candidate for a master's degree in social work at New York University.
Her father is an ophthalmologist in New York.


On the Street; Giving Legs a Satiny Glitter and Gleam
New satin-finish stockings that gleam in the daylight and glitter in the sun are being seen around town these winter days.
They are favored by women who wear above-the-knee hemlines and high-heel pumps.
This feminine look has nothing to do with trousers, boots, sneakers and moccasins.
The legs have a lacquered look, as if they had just been painted in inky black or in rare instances, a vibrant color.


Tainted Data
For years David B. Straus, a professor of biochemistry at the State University of New York's College at New Paltz, has been studying the effect of toxic chemicals on DNA.
But a recent experiment, involving PCB carcinogens, was entirely unintentional.
His laboratory was exposed to the chemicals late last month when a car hit a utility pole, setting off a power surge that caused transformers in five campus buildings to overheat.
The manufacture of PCB's, or polychlorinated biphenyls, was banned in the late 1970's, but some older transformers still use them as a coolant.
The science building, where his laboratory is, a theater and three dormitories will be closed until contaminated material can be destroyed.
Professor Straus is afraid that the casualties will include seven years' worth of research notebooks and files.
"That's your professional life's work, and you don't want to lose it," he said.
"But if the contamination is serious and widespread, you can't risk it."


Beth McCabe and Dean Bornstein Are to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. McCabe Jr. of Wayland, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Beth Ann McCabe, to Dean George Bornstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Bornstein of DeWitt, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
McCabe, 30 years old, is the program director of the Academy of American Poets in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father retired as president of Joseph P. McCabe Inc., a general contractor in South Boston, Mass.


Soviet Sounds


City College Shifts Games
Because of the investigation of the recent deaths at Nat Holman Gymnasium in Manhattan, City College has had to relocate at least four of its basketball games.


Forget Rose; Ban the Writers
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson's article about Pete Rose and George Steinbrenner ("Write-In for Rose: 3 Years Are Enough", The Times, Jan. 5) stirred emotions in me, anger quite frankly.
When will the punishment of Rose stop?
Maybe Rose has a gambling problem, but it has been obvious to me that he never ever had an interest in throwing a game to make money.


Sally D'Zmura Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Peter D'Zmura of Edgartown, Mass., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter Sally Ann D'Zmura and Dr.
Evan Gary Rosen, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alan A. Rosen of Syosset, L.I.
Miss D'Zmura, 31 years old, is a senior systems analyst for IMI Systems, a software consulting concern in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father, who is retired, was an engineer for the Federal Energy Department.


Miss Balletta Is Engaged
Judge and Mrs.
Vincent R. Balletta Jr. of Port Washington, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Andrea Marie Balletta to John Arthur Gullickson, a son of Joan and Clayton H. Gullickson of Spokane, Wash.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Balletta, 27 years old, is the convention director for the Washington State Republican Party in Bellevue.
She graduated from Bucknell University.
Her father sits in the Appellate Division of New York State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.


2 Companies Cited for Worker Training
IN both business and educational circles, there is a concern about the declining skills of American workers and the number of high school dropouts.
Now two Westchester companies have been singled out for their commitment to improving the work force through education and training.
The Pepsi-Cola Company, with headquarters in Somers, and International Business Machines, with headquarters in Armonk, recently received a United States Department of Labor award for exemplary achievement in expanding workers' skills.
Nationwide, more than 400 companies competed for the award; 8 received it.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Retail sales, percent change
0.3
0.2
Auto sales, annual rate, millions
7.1
5.6
Wednesday
Business inventories, percent change
0.4
0.1
Thursday
Consumer price index, percent change
0.4
0.3
Friday
Merchandise trade, billions
-6.7
-6.5
Industrial production, percent change
-0.4
-0.2
Capacity utilization, percent
79.1
78.9
Monday: GATT meeting * World agricultural supply and demand estimates
Tuesday: World agriculture production
Wednesdayz: Two- and five-year note announcements
Thursday: Real earnings
(Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Noted With Pleasure
Passing the Gift On
We may imagine the most humane elements of our nature originate with us.
In fact, they are an inheritance preserved and passed down by each generation, according to a character in the story "The Cardinal's Third Tale," included in "Last Tales" by Isak Dinesen (Vintage, paper).
There are many things in life which a human being . . . may attain by personal endeavor.
But there exists a true humanity, which will ever remain a gift, and which is to be accepted by one human being as it is given to him by a fellow human.
The one who gives has himself been a receiver.
In this way, link by link, a chain is made from land to land and from generation to generation.
Rank, wealth and nationality in this matter all go for nothing.
The poor and downtrodden can hand over the gift to kings, and kings will pass it on to their favorites at Court or to an itinerant dancer in their city. . . .
Strange and wonderful is it to consider how in such community we are bound to foreigners whom we have never seen and to dead men and women whose names we have never heard and shall never hear, more closely even than if we were all holding hands.
Art's True Purpose
It isn't art's business to show us the world, Oscar Wilde asserted in an 1889 essay on Shakespeare: its true purpose is to hold up a mirror to our souls.
This is from "The Fireworks of Oscar Wilde," edited by Owen Dudley Edwards (Barrie &amp; Jenkins/Trafalgar Square, paper).
We become lovers when we see Romeo and Juliet, and Hamlet makes us students.
The blood of Duncan is upon our hands, with Timon we rage against the world, and when Lear wanders out upon the heath the terror of madness touches us.
Ours is the white sinlessness of Desdemona, and ours, also, the sin of Iago.
Art, even the art of fullest scope and widest vision, can never really show us the external world.
All that it shows us is our own soul, the one world of which we have any real cognizance. . . .
It is Art, and Art only, that reveals us to ourselves.
Touching the Past
It is in the study of our local history, the artifacts and buildings of our immediate surroundings, that we come closest to an encounter with the past.
This is from a 1927 essay by Lewis Mumford, included in "Hudson Valley Lives," edited by Bon nie Marranca (Overlook).
The things that we can see and touch are those that awaken our imagination. . . .
Nothing has ever made me, for one, feel the might of the Roman Empire more keenly than stumbling across the tiles and foundations of a Roman villa in the midst of a quiet English field.
Local history touches off these things that have happened on the spot; and the facts of local history become parts of a person's own life to an extent which is rare with scenes and incidents one has taken out of books and secondhand accounts. . . .
Every old part of the country is filled with the memorials of our past: tombstones and cottages and churches, names and legends, old roads and trails and abandoned mines, as well as the things we built and used yesterday.
All these memorials bring us closer to the past and, so doing, they bring us closer to our own present; for we are living history as well as recording it; and our memories are as necessary as our anticipations.
Our Home in the Desert
We may never have traveled to a desert, but the idea of that landscape as a place of stark clarity, and of struggle, haunts our imaginations, according to Charles Bowden in his memoir "De sierto: Memories of the Future" (Norton).
Deserts can be very specific places for a botanist or a zoologist.
But not for most of us.
We tend to see deserts as a quality more than a place.
To go off into the desert in our language means not to visit a locale, but a state of mind.
And so if we consider a very specific desert, the Sonoran, and a very specific place, El Camino del Diablo, we still cannot really contain ourselves with bundles of the specifics -- checklists of plants, and animals, weather reports of startling June days and cold January nights.
That is why when we read the . . .
Bible, a very early collection of desert writings, we feel an eerie kinship with the wandering Hebrews.
Not in the promised land.
Not in Egypt.
Not in Babylon.
But in the Sinai.
Every one of us, regardless of where we are sitting on this planet, no matter what the birds are trilling in the green forest outside our window, every one of us snaps alert with a clear sense of the ground when the Hebrews enter Sinai and begin their long trial by God in the desert.
Fragrant, Delicious Words
Language and food are so intertwined, it is now hard to imagine one without the other.
This is from "The Secret Life of Food: A Feast of Food and Drink History, Folklore and Fact" by Martin Elkort (Tarcher, paper).
The English language is marinated in food words; words that describe food and its qualities and also serve as reliable metaphors and similes when other words fail.
How many breathless poets and tongue-tied lovers have compared the lips of their beloved to cherries, their cheeks to peaches?
How many call their beloved honey, or sugar, to express tenderness or curry favor?
How many babies are the apple of their parents' eyes, who regularly bring home the bacon, to provide a nest egg for their brood?
How many people feel sheepish if they do something wrong, and have to eat humble pie in atonement? . . .
From the time the first caveman grunted in appreciation as he came upon a berry-laden bush, we have been searching for the right word to describe and classify each fruit, each vegetable and each food animal.
The search for food builds a strong appetite for words to describe them, and the words themselves become capable of stimulating the appetite by bringing forth fragrant, delicious images.


Barkley Demonstrates He Is Not Past His Prime
When Iran Barkley came into the ring at the Paramount at Madison Square Garden on Friday night, it was clear he was spoiling for a fight.
In a hooded robe, his face was a visage of bad intentions.
So wrought-up was the fighter from the South Bronx that he had to be restrained by his trainer, Eddie Mustafa Muhammad, from getting physical with his opponent, Darrin Van Horn, the International Boxing Federation supermiddleweight champion, even before the opening bell.


Q and A
Refinancing a Mortgage Question: My home was financed by First Northern Mortgage Corporation.
After two months, First Northern sold my mortgage to Midlantic Home Mortgage Corporation.
I decided to refinance the loan.
At closing I was told I had to pay a state mortgage tax, which I had paid the first time.
Do I have to pay this tax again? . . .
Gurunath Pasumarty, Rego Park, Queens Answer: Maybe.
According to Carl Felsen, a spokesman for the State Department of Taxation and Finance, your liability for the tax payment depends on whether the refinanced loan is a new mortgage or just a modification of the original agreement.


Democrats Fail to Kill the Tax Rise That Doomed Them
FOLKLORE has it that just about every seven years the Jersey Devil reappears to rampage through the state, setting blood boiling and stirring the locals into fits of hysteria.
The Devil is said to be kin to Bigfoot and to the Fouke monster of Arkansas, and statehouse legend holds that the scowling carving on the clerk's podium in the General Assembly is its very image.


Fire Roars Through a Chemical Plant in Newark
A spectacular explosion and fire visible for miles around roared through a chemical plant in Newark late Friday night.
One worker suffered critical burns over much of his body, and 13 other people -- workers, firefighters and police officers -- were injured in the blaze, which heavily damaged the plant.
Newark fire officials said a vat of plastic resin used in the manufacture of paint pigments apparently exploded shortly before 11:30 P.M. on the top floor of the five-story Reichhold Chemical Company plant in an industrial section lined with chemical and manufacturing plants.


To Repair Door Locks, Try Replacing the Cylinder
PROBLEMS with door locks do not always mean that the entire knob and latch assembly has to be removed or replaced.
Often just removing the lock cylinder, the part containing the keyhole, is necessary.
The cylinder can be taken to a locksmith for repair, replacement or changing the key.
Removing and reinstalling the cylinders of most locks, usually an easy job, require just a few ordinary tools.
But if a cylinder cannot be removed with such tools, the job will require a licensed locksmith.


Father Time Need Not Be A Dancer's Enemy
Old dancers seldom fade away.
They simply tend to disappear, often dropping precipitously out of sight, then bobbing up later as caterers, masseurs or teachers.
But a few remain on stage, dancing well past their theoretical prime.
Some offer transcendent lessons on the art of dance.
Performances by Dudley Williams, Beverly Blossom and Anthony Dowell, all veterans in their late 40's and beyond, have been among the most illuminating of the year just ended.
There was a world of vivid information about the stage and the heart, for example, in the eloquently placed yet seemingly effortless stretch of Mr.
Williams's arms and legs in performances last month with the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.
A solo performer, Ms.
Blossom has a way of standing center stage, turbulently still, and filling that stage with a sense of memory and wry humor beyond the ken of most youthful purveyors of multiple pirouettes or resilient falls.


Salads in Wintertime Require Freshness, and Some Ingenuity
IN cold weather, salad making calls for some creative thinking on the part of the cook.
Tender lettuces are usually expensive and may not be in the best condition, having suffered damage from frost on the way to market.
Other classic salad ingredients, like tomatoes, are typically inedible.
Decent off-season ones are costly -- as much as $3 a pound -- and even at that price may not have the flavor of summer's crop.
Similarly, small, heavily waxed and often frost-bitten cucumbers may not be worth the money.


What Can Candidates Expect to Keep Private?
PSYCHOANALYSIS was never meant to be practiced from the back of a campaign plane by a press corps with problems of its own.
But in four weeks, Americans will begin voting on a field of Democratic Presidential contenders who, by and large, are unknown outside their home states.
The voters will be looking for some quick sense of the men, in the middle of the rocket ride of a late-starting campaign.
They will get it from television commercials and the news media.
The search for the candidates' character -- what these wary, packaged, public men are
really
like -- has begun.


The State of the Art of Travel
IN "Dodsworth," Sinclair Lewis's novel about a retired automobile magnate, Samuel Dodsworth sails to Europe for a Grand Tour and is dazzled by the ship.
It is state of the art, for the late 1920's, with a swimming pool, a wireless room and "ventilators like giant saxophones."
"I love this ship," Dodsworth tells his wife.
"It's so -- Man certainly has put it over Nature for once!"


Tours to Visit Dutch Floriade
Several European tour packages this year include a visit to the Netherlands and the world's largest horticultural exhibition, Floriade, which is held every 10 years.
Hundreds of acres of flowers, plants, trees, bulbs, fruits and vegetables will be on display outdoors and in pavilions at the exhibition site at Zoetermeer, near The Hague, and a 45-minute drive from Amsterdam, from April 10 until Oct. 11.
Floriade '92 will have exhibits from 20 countries, including the United States, competing for 3,000 prizes.
The Dutch expect about three million visitors.


Elizabeth Lerner Is Engaged to John Donatich
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Lerner of Woodbridge, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Susan Lerner, to John Ernest Donatich, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernesto Donatich of Fort Lee, N.J.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lerner, 31 years old, is an editor at the Houghton Mifflin Company in New York.
She graduated from New York University and received a master's degree in writing from Columbia University.


Good News For Snackers And Venture
The announcement this month that Eagle Snacks Inc. has begun selling Cape Cod potato chips made with a canola oil low in saturated fats was good news for Richard Laster.
He heads the Intermountain Canola Company of Cinnaminson, N.J., a joint venture of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company and the DNA Plant Technology Corporation, a biotechnology concern that is also led by the 68-year-old Mr.
Laster.
The company has been long on promising projects and short on commercial success.


RECORD BRIEF
Donald Brown: 'People Music'
Muse 5406; CD only


Sports of The Times; Skating's Double Standard
NOBODY would ever make the claim that all men, or all women, are created equal in the attractive but complicated little world of figure skating.
Within 12 days, Todd Eldredge is going to be asked to perform for two officials what he might have performed yesterday in front of 15,000 fans and nine judges, had his back been healthy.


Dawn I. Hickey To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
William Hickey of Stratford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dawn Irene Hickey, to David Christopher Angileri, the son of Joyce Warshauer of Weston, Conn., and David Angileri of Rockford, Ill.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hickey, 25 years old, is a manufacturing assistant at the Greenwood Publishing Group, an academic publisher in Westport, Conn.
She graduated from Central Connecticut State University, as did her fiance.
Her father is a plant maintenance manager for Textron Lycoming, a gas turbine engine manufacturer in Stratford.


NOW Reasserts Its Role as Outsider
The National Organization for Women celebrated its 25th anniversary here this weekend by embracing its status as a militant outsider in politics at home while reaching out to other countries in an attempt to create a movement of "global feminism."
Harking back to her days as an airline stewardess, NOW's new president, Patricia Ireland, told the group's plenary session on Friday that her job usually consisted of "walking up and down aisles, taking people's garbage, and saying 'thank you, thank you.' " For too long, she added, "women in Washington and other capitals of the world have been taking other people's garbage and saying 'thank you.' "


Miss Otruba to Wed
Teresa Ann Otruba and John Montgomery Gleason, both lawyers in Washington, are engaged to be married.
Miss Otruba, 28 years old, as is her fiance, is an associate with the firm of Baker &amp; McKenzie.
She graduated from William Smith College and the University of San Francisco Law School.
She is a daughter of Gerald and Mary Otruba of Great Neck, L.I.
Mr.
Gleason is an associate with Reed, Smith, Shaw &amp; McClay.
He graduated cum laude from Hobart College and has a law degree from the University of California, Hastings College of Law .
He is a son of George and Gloria Gleason of Boonton, N.J.


LOST KEYS
Philip Caputo's article "Lost Keys" (Dec. 15) moved me.
He isn't the first to lament the tragic and unnecessary decline of the Florida Keys.
Before the current plague of condos and shopping centers, Jimmy Buffet sang of earlier woes in his song "Migration": "Now those mobile homes are smothering my Keys. . . ."
I first visited the Keys in the 70's, and often thereafter, as a college student in Miami.
I guess I just caught the tail end of what the Keys used to be, but I saw enough to know how special it was.
I, too, remember driving on Looe Key and seeing rays, octopuses, nurse sharks and a multitude of colorful fish.
Judging from Caputo's article, I dread the thought of what I would see today.


The First Hints That Spring Will Return
THE catalogues are starting to arrive.
The days are getting longer.
These two signs always gladden an impatient gardener's heart.
They are positive hints that spring will indeed get here.
Nursery and seed catalogues are fine winter reading.
They are written in such glowing terms and illustrated with such enticing pictures, it is tempting to select one of everything.
Before long the wish list fills the order page and then some.
When the seed packets and plants arrive, gardeners wonder where everything will go.


Technology; Experimenting With an Unbreachable Electronic Cipher
In the next phase of the Information Age, when business and scientific documents, photographic images and personal correspondence are all stored in computers as strings of 1's and 0's, digital forgery may become a significant threat.
Because of that threat, a number of techniques are being developed by cryptographers trying to make it impossible to forge computer-based documents.
For example, engineers are close to insuring that scientific laboratory data or digitized photographs can be stored in tamperproof form.
Some researchers have even begun to discuss the possibility of digital money and computer networks that automatically protect privacy.


Almodovar, Adrift In Sexism
In the annals of mother-daughter reunions, this one should hold a special place.
Becky Del Paramo, a onetime pop star, returns to Spain after 15 years abroad.
She hasn't seen her daughter, Rebecca, since the girl was 12, but recently Rebecca has found a mother substitute.
She stands before a poster depicting a female impersonator named Lethal, whose act is modeled on Becky at the height of her sequined and miniskirted fame.
"Whenever I missed you," the grown daughter tells her mother with evident affection, "I'd go see his show." Other film makers would have given Rebecca a stepmother or puppy or at least a Barbie doll; only Pedro Almodovar would have concocted this hilarious, unsentimental surrogate parent.
Mr.
Almodovar sustains his wry irreverence until the strained, mawkish end of "High Heels." As the story begins, Rebecca has married one of her mother's former lovers, and when the husband is murdered both women are suspects.
"High Heels" is very much an Almodovar blend: a murder mystery about mother-daughter competition and sexual ambiguity, laced with scathing touches of pop-culture insanity.


Elkington In Lead
The players at the top of the leader board after today's third round of the Infiniti Tournament of Champions might be less than famous, but by virtue of even being in the season opener, they know how to win.
Heading the unheralded, but highly respectable, list is Steve Elkington, who shot a bogey-less 67 today for a 54-hole total of nine-under par 207.
It gave the Australian-born Elkington a two-stroke lead over a trio of first-timers to the tournament -- Billy Andrade, Brad Faxon and Rocco Mediate.


It's Not Just Some Cars, It's the Future
NOBORU HATAKEYAMA, Japan's vice minister for international trade and industry, emerged from the bruising negotiations over auto imports that dominated President Bush's visit last week in an uncharacteristically reflective mood.
Now that the President had finally followed Japan's example and put economics at the top of his international agenda, Mr.
Hatakeyama admitted to a certain ambivalence.
A United States focused on competing economically with Japan as vigorously as it once waged the cold war is not a prospect the Japanese relish.
On the other hand, a weak United States could be just as troublesome.
And what ails America, Mr.
Hatakeyama said, is not too few Jeep Cherokees in Japanese showrooms or even the recession, but America's industrial future.


Big Shelters Hold Terrors for the Mentally Ill
New York City's huge shelters for men are intimidating places for the homeless generally, but they can be truly terrifying for the mentally ill.
After the lights go down at night at the Fort Washington Armory in upper Manhattan, paranoid schizophrenics lie nervously next to ex-convicts they rightfully fear.


Miss Spindell To Wed in June
Dr. and Mrs.
Lloyd Spindell of Livingston, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Stephanie Spindell to Dr.
Ira Jay Bleiweiss, the son of Rita Bleiweiss of Brooklyn and the late Paul Bleiweiss.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Spindell, 33 years old, is a vice president of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her father is on the staff of Newark Beth Israel Medical Center and is a clinical associate professor of radiology at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.


POSTINGS: Tax Challenge; 421-a Benefits in Condos
Any day now, New York City homeowners will be getting their tax bills for 1992, but there is a new complication this year for condominium owners.
A Manhattan condo's successful court challenge to the way the city figures taxes on buildings getting Section 421-a tax benefits may spur tax-bill protests by other owners.
In the suit on behalf of 51 owners in the condominium at 108 Fifth Avenue, at 16th Street, lawyers held that residents were overcharged about 10 percent because the Department of Finance misapplied the formula for taxing 421-a properties.
Last month, Justice Stanley Parness of State Supreme Court found for the condominium owners.
"The ruling does not extend to other 421-a properties," said Jay Gordon Seiden, a partner in Seiden, Stempel, Bennett &amp; D'Agostino, the firm that brought the suit.
"But there will be future challenges to Finance's methods. Owners of 421-a units need to protect their interests by protesting their bills."


Environmentally Sensitive Construction
IN the SoHo section of Manhattan, the floor of a recently renovated loft is coated with juniper-berry juice, rosemary and beeswax rather than the usual gloss of polyurethane.
In West Redding, Conn., the doors and beams of a new home will come not from standard cut timber but from trees that are nonthreatened species or were felled naturally by a hurricane.


The Doctor Won't See You Now
In the confusion, hypocrisy and animosity generated by the AIDS epidemic, finally we hear a voice of
sanity
-- and from the medical profession at that.
Thirty percent of doctors surveyed by the American Medical Association in November said they felt no ethical responsibility to treat AIDS patients.
And why should they?
For too long, this country has faced rising medical costs and malpractice mania caused in large part by the mistaken notion that doctors are supposed to treat any slob who comes to them.
This involves dealing with old people who are on the way out anyway, with all sorts of nasty sores and tumors, and now with AIDS patients, most of whom got sick because of some sort of disgusting behavior.
Except, of course, hemophiliacs, the
good
AIDS patients.


Streetscapes: The Office of the Astor Estate; A 'Frankly Modern' Addition
ONCE the administrative center for the greatest of New York's family fortunes, the jewel-like, two-story Office of the Astor Estate at 21 West 26th Street is not a landmark and is ignored by guidebooks and New York histories.
Miraculously, the exterior of the Victorian Gothic building has survived unchanged since 1881 -- but now construction is proceeding on a "frankly modern" rooftop addition.


Booking With a Computer
THESE days, a journey of a thousand miles can begin with a single tap of the computer keyboard.
The best way to get somewhere, some travelers assert, is through the personal computer.
Using a computer and a modem, which allows two computers to exchange data over telephone lines, travelers can scan flight schedules and fares, check the weather at the destination, research restaurant reviews, uncover unadvertised bargains and in general tap into the knowledge of most of the world's travel providers and many veteran travelers.


Brenda Bocina to Wed T. J. Curnin
Mr. and Mrs.
Casper Bocina of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Brenda Ann Bocina, to Thomas Johnson Curnin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Curnin of Larchmont, N.Y.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bocina is the president of Rustic Ridge Financial Planning Inc., a financial consulting firm in Rockaway Township, N.J.
She graduated from Gettysburg College and has an M.B.A. from Duke University.
Her father is a real-estate developer in Short Hills.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 12, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
36
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
2
4
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Plume, $15.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
3
8
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
4
2
COYOTE WAITS, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The murder of a Navajo tribal policeman involves an ancient artifact.
5
7
COLD FIRE, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A despondent reporter finds hope and romance while she tracks the course of a good Samaritan.
6
11
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $6.99.) The experiences of a couple on a trek across Europe during the ice age.
7
4
STAR TREK VI: The Undiscovered Country, by J. M. Dillard. (Pocket, $4.99.) Enemies of the Federation capture Captain Kirk and Dr.
McCoy.
8
5
THE FOURTH K, by Mario Puzo. (Bantam, $5.99.) The tumultuous career of President Francis Xavier Kennedy, cousin of John.
9
20
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four tales of late-night horror.
10
29
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
11
3
THE WITNESS, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $4.99.) A Philadelphia cop finds himself on the hit list of a band of robber-terrorists.
12 *
7
PRISONER OF MY DESIRE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 12th-century English belle seeks to capture the heart of a lord.
13 *
11
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
14
3
MURDER AT THE NATIONAL CATHEDRAL, by Margaret Truman. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A professor-sleuth investigates the death of an Episcopal priest.
15
8
POSSESSION, by A. S. Byatt. (Vintage, $12.) A pair of British academics pursue the relationship between two Victorian poets.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
112
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.
2
3
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
3
42
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
4
34
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
5
26
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
6
32
THE CAT WHO CAME FOR CHRISTMAS, by Cleveland Amory. (Penguin, $7.95.) A self-styled curmudgeon's memoir of a cat that adopted and soon owned him.
7
27
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
8
10
A LIFE ON THE ROAD, by Charles Kuralt. (Ivy, $5.99.) The memoirs of the television newscaster.
9
427
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
10
11
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, touch, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
22
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
15
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
3
11
UNNATURAL SELECTIONS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) A collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
4
5
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1992. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
5
3
AN ALTOGETHER NEW BOOK OF TOP TEN LISTS, by David Letterman, Steve O'Donnell, et al. (Pocket, $10.) Humor.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


A Chief Undone by Freeing Algeria's Politics
The Algerian President, Chadli Benjedid, who resigned unexpectedly tonight, dismantled almost three decades of one-party rule and pledged to lead his nation toward democracy, but he has now been swept away by the results of his political liberalization.
He stepped down in a dramatic television appearance just 17 days after his party, the National Liberation Front, suffered a humiliating electoral defeat and only four days before the fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front seemed poised to win an overwhelming parliamentary majority in a second-round vote.


Bidding in the Dark Amid the Free Agent Market
Mike Gallego's defection to the Yankees produced an unusually severe reaction in the Oakland Athletics' organization and raised an interesting question of ethics and business practices for general managers and agents: Should a free agent's former club be entitled to know what other clubs the player is dealing with and what offers those clubs have made?
This has nothing to do with collusion, that illegal practice the owners clumsily but effectively engaged in for three years as they hindered the movement and bargaining power of free agents.
This is a matter of what courtesy, if any, a player and his agent owe an organization that has nurtured the player and brought him to the point where he can earn millions.


New Bias Attacks Occur; Bronx Girl Faces Charges
Investigators in the Bronx and Brooklyn continued searching for suspects in a spate of bias attacks among youths, incidents that neighbors of two of the latest victims attribute to tensions churned up by last week's paint attack on two black children.
Each of the attacks, including two on Friday and one yesterday morning, has provoked anger and frustration among residents of the communities involved.
Each has raised questions of whether the attacks are related -- actually or symbolically.


CAMPUS LIFE: California, Santa Cruz; Redwood Haven Inspires Battle Over an Elfland
Students past and present call it Elfland, a wooded refuge on the University of California, Santa Cruz campus that is revered as a sanctuary and spiritual haven.
Since the 1960's, students have erected totems, altars and "fairy rings" -- circles of branches -- among the towering redwoods.
In one small altar, a hand-lettered scroll reads: "Lord of the gnomes and earth elements, let your kingdom of little people surround this area, forming a cordon to protect and defend it from interlopers, developers, realtors, construction, vandalism, ruin and assassination."


No Immunity for Coffin Nails
The Supreme Court is having trouble deciding whether Congress, when it required health warnings on cigarette packs, excused the tobacco companies from all civil liability based on state law.
While Congress undoubtedly has that power under the Constitution's Federal supremacy clause, the Court should have no difficulty ruling against the tobacco companies in this case.
The Court has been vigilant of late about states' rights, never lightly assuming that any given Federal law has in fact displaced the laws of 50 states.
The Court heard arguments in the case, Cipollone v.
Liggett Group, in October but with only eight justices; it soon called for a reargument, which is scheduled for tomorrow.
The assumption based on past experience is that the newest Justice, Clarence Thomas, is needed to help break a 4-to-4 deadlock.


Carsten Sierck, Student, Weds
Carsten Wentworth Sierck, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander W. Sierck of Washington, was married yesterday to Stockton Ward Atterbury, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Rennie Atterbury 3d of Peoria, Ill.
The Rev.
John C. Harper performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's Church in Washington.
The couple are both 25 years old and third-year law students at the University of Virginia.
Mrs.
Atterbury graduated from Columbia University.
Her father is a partner in the Washington law firm of Beveridge &amp; Diamond.


Would You Buy a Used Car From This Family
THE TAX INSPECTOR
By Peter Carey. 279 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $21.


Nynex and Its Customers
To the Editor:
While "The Local Call Goes Up for Grabs" (Dec. 29) illustrated the intense competition for large business customers in Manhattan, a comment from an officer of the Teleport Communications Group seemed to question Nynex's commitment to serving its local customers elsewhere, namely in Brooklyn and Queens.


Public &amp; Private; The Stomach Thing
Historians will analyze for years to come the causes and effects of the President's recent intestinal flu, or what Mr.
Bush has begun to call "the stomach thing." Some have blamed fatigue, others jet lag, and a few have even posited that Mr.
Bush intentionally fell ill to win sympathy from the Japanese, a kind of Bush-bugged-himself scenario that, if true, failed.
Americans considering protectionism, free trade and sushi watched the President keel over on the dais and shouted, "Lose the sea urchin, George." They were unaware that the Japanese had feted the President with the sort of country club cuisine that reached its zenith during the Administration of Gerald Ford: to wit, cold salmon, clear soup and the ubiquitous medallions of beef -- a dinner as much like a traditional Japanese banquet as cars made in Detroit are like what American consumers want to buy.


Quick, Henry, the Fix
QUICK FIX STILL LIKELY to tempt Bush, Congress," headlined The Washington Times, despite the advice of sobersided pundits that went, "Don't just do something, stand there."
Lawrence A. Kudlow, chief economist of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, argued that "the wrong tax cut is a temporary quick fix that puts money into people's pockets."


Gabrielle Ballin Is Wed on L.I.
Gabrielle Janow Ballin, an assistant vice president for Chemical Bank, and Dean Stewart Benjamin, a lawyer, both in New York, were married last evening at the Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph Ehrenkranz officiated.
Mrs.
Benjamin, 25 years old, graduated from Hamilton College and is a daughter of Betty and Gene Ballin of Locust Valley, L.I.
Her father and mother own Tyz-All Plastics Inc., designer and manufacturer of plastic products in Glen Head, L.I.


Yugoslav Army Chief Pledges Support for U.N. Plan
Yugoslavia's new acting Defense Minister pledged the Serbian-led army's continued support today for the Unlited Nations peace plan to halt the Yugoslav civil war.
Gen.
Blagoje Adzic, the Yugoslav Army chief of staff and regarded as a hard-liner among the army's top commanders, denied reports that the resignation of Gen.
Veljko Kadijevic as Defense Minister signaled an end to the Sebian-led army's support for the United Nations plan.


Michele Marie Mahoney Is a Bride
Michele Marie Mahoney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeremiah J. Mahoney of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kenneth Hamilton Richardson, a son of Hamilton F. Richardson of New York and Ann Kennington Richardson of Dallas.
The Rev.
Joseph Orlandi, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Maggie's Cafe in New York.
Mrs.
Richardson, 28 years old, is a vice president in credit research at Lehman Commercial Paper Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father is the manager of treasury operations at the Xerox Corporation in Stamford, Conn.


TILL DEBT DO US PART
David Margolick's article "Till Debt Do Us Part" (Dec. 15), on the scandal in the matrimonial bar, is a superficial report on a situation that should be given the most serious attention.
The incestuous relationships of many matrimonial lawyers and judges in the conduct of business translates into conflict-of-interest influence peddling and corruption of the worst order.
The money squandered is often that which should pay for college, food and rent -- blood money squeezed from families made vulnerable by emotional upheaval.
This serious subject deserves in-depth reporting.
PEGGY HAMMOND
New York, N.Y.


Julia Fernald Wed to Martin Lauck
Julia Dana Fernald, the daughter of Mrs.
David G. Fernald of Upper Montclair, N.J., and the late Mr.
Fernald, was married yesterday to Martin Alejandro Gonzalez Lauck, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ignacio Gonzalez Monreal of Mexico City.
The Rev.
Paulette T. Schiff, an Episcopal minister, officiated at the First United Methodist Church in Montclair, N.J.
Ms.
Fernald, 29 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and is pursuing a doctorate in finance at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father was the treasurer of Rockefeller Family &amp; Associates in New York.


TEACHER PROGRAM IS GIVEN A BOOST
For much of its two-and-one-half-year history, Teach for America, a national not-for-profit teacher training and placement organization, has managed to exist by balancing its members' youthful energy and idealism against a shoestring budget.
All the while, the organization searched for some of America's most promising college graduates, many of whom never considered working in education, to teach in some of the least promising corners and crossroads in the country.


Opportune Time For Borrowing
To the Editor:
In his essay "May Russia End the War at the Piano"  [ Dec. 8 ] , Bernard Holland discussed the dismantling the awesome machinery of the Soviet school of pianism.
He observed that the Soviet system has produced a significant number of virtuoso pianists with not much to say musically and with a certain cultural limitation, as well as a limited repertory, which created a stereotyped image of the "virtuoso Soviet pianist." It is true that a totalitarian political and social system has often had a peculiar way of affecting the product of such professional schools.


Mutual Funds; Goodbye to the 'Cold Call'
One thing that is difficult about being a stockbroker is that income is prone to fluctuate as stock market activity waxes and wanes.
But for brokers who sell mutual funds, this volatility is being tempered somewhat by the increased use of "trail commissions" created by 12b-1 plans, which permit funds to use a fixed percentage of their assets each year to pay certain marketing expenses, and "wrap accounts," in which one annual fee covers all investment expenses.


An Ethnic Road to Riches: The Immigrant Job Specialty
When Parmjit Singh left his job as a mechanic on a Greek ship in 1981, he settled in New York City, instead of returning to the family farm in India.
After working three years as a busboy and cook in a Greek restaurant, Mr.
Singh met a fellow Punjabi who owned a gas station in the city.
"He taught me how to run a station," the 32-year-old Indian recalled.
"It's very hard work but it's easy to run -- to order gas, to clean, to keep the books."


Lisa Ann Levitz To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Levitz of Lido Beach, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lisa Ann Levitz, to Jeffrey Wade Newman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton Newman of North Woodmere, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Levitz, 28 years old, is an account executive at Hal Riney &amp; Partners, the New York advertising agency.
He is a graduate of Bucknell University.
Her father is the president of the Harry Levitz Company in Rockville Centre, L.I., the home-furnishings chain.


Art and a 50th Birthday
TUESDAY -- The Robert Miller Gallery on East 57th Street gave a reception for three of its artists, Robert Graham, a sculptor, and David McDermott and Peter McGough, photographers.
At the preview Mr.
Graham's admirers included Anjelica Huston and Lauren Bacall.
In an adjoining gallery, Mr.
McDermott and Mr.
McGough, devotees of Victorian style, showed 39 of their new prints.
The pair drew a large, colorfully dressed group who reflect the downtown art scene.
WEDNESDAY -- Thomas J. Hubbard, a lawyer and the new chairman of the New York Botanical Garden, was introduced to 400 guests and members of the garden by Enid A. Haupt and the garden's senior vice chairwoman, Beth B. Straus, at a cocktail reception at the Knickerbocker Club, a private club on East 62d Street.


North Korea and Cambodia Cited
American travelers are warned by the State Department against signing up for tour groups bound for North Korea without first checking with the United States Treasury Department.
The warning, which points out that financial transactions by Americans in North Korea are restricted by the United States Government, follows the signing last month of a nonaggression pact by North Korea and South Korea.
The agreement, providing for economic exchanges, was the first step toward a full peace treaty since the Korean armistice was signed 38 years ago.
American passports are valid for travel to North Korea, a travel advisory from the department said, but United States regulations prohibit the use of credit and other charges there, even for traveling expenses.
Visitors also need a North Korean visa.
The advisory pointed out that United States companies are prohibited from arranging tours to North Korea unless specifically licensed by the Treasury for groups involved in academic, sports, cultural or family reunions.


One Building That Knows What It's About
Henry James wrote eloquently about New York, but he missed the point of its architecture.
On a 1904 visit, the novelist railed against the city's first skyscrapers; it pained him to see "those monsters of the mere market" towering over the spire of Trinity Church.
Why didn't he recognize that the skyscraper, too, elevates spirit over matter?
A prolific writer, James was no stranger to the work ethic.
Skyscrapers are the work esthetic, monuments to work as the moral victory of energy over inertia.
The new 23-story office building at 101 Avenue of the Americas, designed by Bruce Fowle of the New York firm Fox &amp; Fowle, doesn't stretch the art of architecture to giddy new heights.
But it is a finely wrought homage to a heroic age in the history of the New York work place.
Designed as a headquarters for Local 32B-32J, the union of building services employees, 101 Avenue of the Americas is notable for the remarkable context to which it pays its respects.


FROM VICE TO NICE
We were delighted to see an article on Las Vegas that talks about the other side of that very glamorous, and as Trip Gabriel discovered, very "nice" city (From "Vice to Nice," Dec. 1).
While we're not displeased with the Las Vegas that people often characterize as "the entertainment capital of the world," we are especially proud of the Las Vegas that is populated by hard-working, family-oriented citizens.


Red Wings' Talent Runs Wild
Some teams worry about not having enough talent, but the Detroit Red Wings were concerned about having too much.
Going into last night's home game against the Edmonton Oilers, they led the National Hockey League in overall winning percentage.


If Russians Now Elect Their President, Why Can't Americans?
To the Editor:
Gerard J. Fitzpatrick, advocating retention of the Electoral College (letter, Dec. 25), in response to a Tom Wicker column, has his facts right, but his conclusions wrong.


Will Russia Find Lessons In Poland's Shock Therapy?
TO appreciate the magnitude of the task facing economic reformers in Russia, consider Poland.
The Poles began their version of economic shock therapy two years ago with a number of things working for them: private farms, an adequate harvest, a decade of initial experimentation within the Communist system, a semi-functioning system for food distribution, prosperous emigres eager to send dollars home, and a $1 billion fund provided by Western governments to prop up a currency that could for the first time be exchanged for dollars.


Toulouse-Lautrec, Stripped of the Cliches
His is one of the most familiar biographies in the history of art.
He was born in 1864 into an aristocratic family that could trace its ancestry to the Crusades and whose tendency to intermarry probably caused the congenital disease that turned him into a dwarfish, misshapen figure.
From his father, who enjoyed lunching in a tutu and having himself photographed in exotic costumes, he may also have inherited a taste for the bizarre, theatrical and socially marginal.
The alcoholism and other illnesses that hastened his death at the age of 36 were byproducts of a career spent largely among the prostitutes, nightclub performers and hangers-on in the seamier quarters of Belle Epoque Paris.
No wonder the life of Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec became fodder for Hollywood.
The name of the artist still summons memories of "Moulin Rouge," John Huston's overblown 1952 movie with Jose Ferrer as the lustful Lautrec opposite Zsa Zsa Gabor.
That film, combined with the enduring appeal of the sardonic posters Lautrec designed to advertise the cabarets of Montmartre and the Champs-Elysees, has helped to insure for the artist a level of fame demonstrated at the Hayward Gallery here by the more than 20,000 visitors who stream each week through the latest retrospective of his work.
The show, which runs through next Sunday before traveling to Paris, is the largest presentation of Lautrec's art since the 1964 exhibition in Paris celebrating the centenary of his birth.


RECORD BRIEFS
Handel-Mozart: 'Der Messias'
Soloists; Gachinger Kantorei; Stuttgart Bach Collegium conducted by Helmuth Rilling.
Hanssler Classic 98.975; two CD's.


Contract for Worrell
The Cardinals, avoiding arbitration, came to terms with its ailing reliever, TODD WORRELL, on a one-year contract.
Terms were not disclosed, but the 32-year-old Worrell, who has been out with elbow and shoulder problems since September 1989, was paid $660,000 last season. (AP)


By the Way, Whose Money Is It?
ONE reason our economy is in its present condition is provided in Jerry Sterner's play "Other People's Money," at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale.
The play, which won awards Off Broadway and became a recent movie, is a wry examination of the back-room corporate politics leading up to the 73d shareholders' meeting of the New England Wire and Cable Company.
In a sense, it provides the flesh-and-blood excitement behind the profit-and-loss columns of a standard annual report.


Popular Opinion Is the Bottom Line
To the Editor:
In his article "TV Creators Face a New Caution"  [ Dec. 8 ] , Jeff Silverman writes about what is perceived in the television world as the reluctance of advertisers to have their products associated with controversial topics such as abortion, homosexual life styles and teen-age suicides.
This is viewed, he says, as "censorship" based not "on perceptions of morality but almost purely on economics."


Stephen B. Judelson, 'Junk Bond' Pioneer And Trader, Was 56
Stephen B. Judelson, a retired Wall Street executive and a pioneer in the high-yield "junk bond" business, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
Mr.
Judelson, who was 56 years old and had a second residence in Quogue, L.I., died of cancer, his family said.


Wall Street; A Very Bad Year for the Dividend Dependent
Some people buy stocks in the hope that prices will go up.
For those people, 1991 was a terrific year.
But other people buy stocks in the hope that they will collect ever-increasing dividends.
And for that crowd, 1991 was simply horrible.
According to Standard &amp; Poor's Outlook newsletter, only 1,086 companies increased dividends last year, the lowest number in 20 years.
What is worse, 437 companies either reduced or eliminated dividend payments last year, the highest number in nine years.


Wagner, Nazis and the Israeli Soul
Symbols are where you find them.
As a benign example, Kurt Masur, a German, led the Israel Philharmonic last week in a recording of "Elijah," by the Jewish-born composer Felix Mendelssohn, whose works were banned for a time in Nazi Germany.
Meanwhile, controversy continued to rage in Israel as to whether Richard Wagner, whose music was appropriated by the Nazis, should be restored to the Philharmonic repertory.
The orchestra has not given a scheduled performance of Wagner's music since 1938, when, as the Palestine Symphony, it played a Wagner program under Arturo Toscanini.
What sparked the latest fracas -- the most heated since Zubin Mehta added a Wagner encore to a Philharmonic program a decade ago -- was the announced intention of the conductor Daniel Barenboim to present a Wagner concert with the orchestra late last month.
After protests from some of the country's 300,000 concentration-camp survivors and others, the concert was postponed to allow for a poll of the Philharmonic's subscribers.
The concert is not now scheduled, and many observers believe that no such event will ever take place, at least until the last Holocaust survivors have passed.


On the Road With Oldsmobile's Tourer
I REMEMBER, once, trying to rent a summer place in Nantasket, Mass.
This was in the mid-60's, and the prospective landlord was a nasty guy.
But I wanted the place, and my family was counting on me, no matter that this grouch thought us too inferior to spend a week in his rental house.
He didn't like my name.
Didn't like that I had two little kids.
But, most of all, I remember that in the middle of my stammering interview, he asked imperiously what kind of car I drove "over the road." It was a test.


Salads in Wintertime Require Freshness, and Some Ingenuity
IN cold weather, salad making calls for some creative thinking on the part of the cook.
Tender lettuces are usually expensive and may not be in the best condition, having suffered damage from frost on the way to market.
Other classic salad ingredients, like tomatoes, are typically inedible.
Decent off-season ones are costly -- as much as $3 a pound -- and even at that price may not have the flavor of summer's crop.
Similarly, small, heavily waxed and often frost-bitten cucumbers may not be worth the money.


Style Makers; Brenda Lynn, Milliner
With two hat collections to her credit and two more in progress, Brenda Lynn, 24 years old, probably ranks as one of the most prolific young milliners around.
Ms.
Lynn ventured into the field after a stint designing budget outerwear.
Hats appealed to her, she said, because she believes the back-to-hat movement is still so young that it needs visionaries.
"Some people still think there's such a thing as a head that can't wear hats," Ms.
Lynn said.
"But something can always be done."


The Car: Now You See It, Now You Don't
TO law-enforcement officials and insurance companies, the scenarios are all too familiar.
The car was left running while its driver ran into a store to pick up a package.
The car was parked overnight on the street with an activated alarm system; or it was in a parking lot or a public garage.
But it was not there when the driver returned.


Bronx Man Charged With Killing Child Over TV
A Bronx man who threw an 18-month-old girl head first into a wall when she blocked his view by crawling in front of his television was charged yesterday with killing her, the police said.
The girl, Adriana Rodriguez, died Friday night at Montefiore Medical Center.
A spokesman for Montefiore, Fred Yeager, said she had suffered a fractured skull and severe brain damage.


A New U.S. Problem: Freely Elected Tyrants
NORMALLY, Washington gets rather exercised about the toppling of freely elected presidents.
But when the freely elected, yet brutish, Government of President Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia was ousted by rebels in the former Soviet republic of Georgia last week, the Bush Administration was silent.
It did not know quite what to say, so it said nothing.
It will soon have to get its script together, though, because the case of Georgia is no anomaly.
It is at the core of the next major debate on American foreign policy.
In the post-cold war era, Washington is going to have to wrestle with the complexities of a world governed increasingly by its own values, or at least imitations of its own values.
In such a world, America will increasingly have to acknowledge that elected tyrants -- like Mr.
Gamsakhurdia -- are scarcely better than unelected ones, and it will have to choose its allies not by choosing between dictators and democrats, or between friends and foes in a cold war, but between so-called democrats and genuine democrats.


Echoes of Debate


Abroad at Home; 'On His Word Alone'
"The Constitution supposes what the history of all governments demonstrates, that the executive is the branch of power most interested in war, and most prone to it. It has accordingly, with studied care, vested the question of war in the legislature." -- James Madison
A year ago this week the United States went to war against Iraq.
How much the war achieved, at how great a price in human devastation, remains a matter of debate.
But one thing is not in doubt.
The way we went to war marked a new high in the unilateral power of the President of the United States.


Booking With a Computer
THESE days, a journey of a thousand miles can begin with a single tap of the computer keyboard.
The best way to get somewhere, some travelers assert, is through the personal computer.
Using a computer and a modem, which allows two computers to exchange data over telephone lines, travelers can scan flight schedules and fares, check the weather at the destination, research restaurant reviews, uncover unadvertised bargains and in general tap into the knowledge of most of the world's travel providers and many veteran travelers.


Mining Unhappiness in a Changed New Hampshire
Facing their first primary election in a state that is home to some of the nation's most economically alienated voters, this year's candidates for President have begun a battle to define themselves that could set the course of the 1992 election.
For the Democrats as well as the Republicans campaigning in New Hampshire, it is no longer enough to politely introduce themselves to voters at house parties and coffee shops.
The compressed campaign season leading to the Feb. 18 primary, coupled with a recession that has tripled the number of unemployed New Hampshire residents since 1988, has forced a different approach this year.


That Fish Was How Big?
To the Sports Editor:
In "Believe It: Fishermen Lie, Lie, Lie" (The Times, Jan. 4), Peter Bodo perpetuates the myth that fishermen are inveterate liars.
He should have remembered the adage that runs "Fishermen are not liars; they merely have a distorted recollection of what probably began as the truth." CLIFFORD P. ALBERTSON Suffern, N.Y.


Miss Kennedy to Wed J.B. Duke 2d
Joan Friedman Martin of Virginia Beach, Va., and Jackson W. T. Kennedy of Toms River, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Jackson Kennedy to James Buchanan Duke 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Duke of Durham, N.C.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Kennedy, 26 years old, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, and is pursuing an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is a project manager for Coastal Group, a real-estate developer in Colts Neck, N.J.
Her mother is a partner in the law firm of Williams Kelly &amp; Greer in Norfolk, Va.


Responding to Academic Achievers as School Budgets Tighten
IN a classroom decorated with children's self-portraits and essays -- along with globes, games and boxes labeled with different mathematical processes -- about a dozen third graders are intently engaged in proofreading logic puzzles before binding them into books.
All is conducted under the watchful eye of their teacher, Judi Sternberg.
If it is difficult to determine exactly where these activities fit into a third-grade curriculum, that is because these students are not in an ordinary classroom.
They are participating in Highview Elementary School's High and Wide program, one of the Greenburgh Central 7 District's answers to the special needs of academically able students in grades two through six.


Kelley Reagan To Wed in April
Mr. and Mrs.
Ogden Mills Phipps of Old Westbury, L.I., have announced the engagement of her daughter Kelley Reagan to William Stamps Farish Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Farish of Versailles, Ky.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Reagan, 24 years old, graduated from Rollins College and is a research associate at the American Horse Council in Washington.
She is a daughter of the late Joseph A. Reagan.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Bedford, N.Y. 1.13 million
3 Kilborn Lane  5-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, family room, deck, indoor pool, spa, wet bar; taxes not yet assessed.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 300,000
Bayberry Way
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old split-level; dining room, sun room, fireplace, 2 acres; taxes $5,090.
South Salem, N.Y. 545,000
Millstone Lane
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, family room, game room, Jacuzzi, 2 acres; taxes not yet assessed.
Essex, Conn. 267,500
143 Saybrook Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 300-year-old colonial; wide-board floors, bread oven, heated barn, 1 acre; taxes $2,170.
Monroe, Conn. 297,000
19 Pilgrim Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; on cul-de-sac, exceptional landscaping, 1 acre; taxes $4,168.
Shelton, Conn. 158,000
19 Rugby Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; bedrooms with skylights, pool w/decking, 0.50 acre; taxes $1,291.
OTHER AREAS Seaford, L.I. 172,500
1297 Shore Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30- year-old split level; den, basement, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $4,700.
Williston Park, L.I. 170,000
27 Center Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $2,700.
East Brunswick, N.J. 182,000
9 Hershey Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 19-year-old split level; fireplace, c/a, 2-car garage; taxes $4,177.


Rosa Flores Marries
Rosa Flores, a resident of the Rofay Nursing Home in the Bronx, was married yesterday to Aurelio DiPietro, a volunteer at the home.
The Rev.
John Salvas performed the ceremony at the Immaculate Conception Church in the Bronx.
Mrs.
DiPietro, 71 years old, was a widow.
Mr.
DiPietro, 76, is a retired factory worker.


FASHION
LIKE THEM OR LEAVE them.
That's the attitude most women have already taken about the longer skirts that have resurfaced as bona fide spring style.
But any woman with fashion acumen owes it to herself to try one on.
If she hates it, she can be happy that the prevailing length remains just above the knee.
On the other hand, just one outfit in this new longer length might add a provocative element to an existing wardrobe.


Quotation of the Day
"Now we feel very sorry for him. He's got so much pressure on his shoulders because of these economic problems. But my question is: why don't the American people work harder and try to fit what they do into what other countries want to see?" -- KEIKO SHIMIZU, a teacher browsing an automobile showroom in Tokyo, on President Bush.  [ 6:5. ]


Downtown Cabaret's 'One and Only'
NOTE to the management of the Downtown Cabaret Theater in Bridgeport: To close "My One and Only" just six days before Valentine's Day is to miss the point.
The "new Gershwin musical," as it was advertised for the 1983 Broadway production, is dizzily romantic.
It is also airborne and bubbly, as befits a story about an ace flyer (Capt. Billy Buck Chandler) who falls in love with an aquatic star (Edythe Herbert).


Indonesia Tries to End Orangutan Research
To the Editor:
Twenty years ago, Dr.
Louis B. Leakey sent a young doctor of anthropology into the jungles of Borneo to begin a lifelong study of orangutans.
This remarkable woman, Dr.
Birute M. F. Galdikas, has devoted her life to the preservation of these great apes and the tropical rain forest habitat that supports them.


Editors' Notes
An article on page 30 of The Times Magazine today about Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia discusses his Presidential candidacy, characterizing it as "seemingly hopeless." On Wednesday, after the magazine went to press, Governor Wilder withdrew from the race.


Salads in Wintertime Require Freshness, and Some Ingenuity
IN cold weather, salad making calls for some creative thinking on the part of the cook.
Tender lettuces are usually expensive and may not be in the best condition, having suffered damage from frost on the way to market.
Other classic salad ingredients, like tomatoes, are typically inedible.
Decent off-season ones are costly -- as much as $3 a pound -- and even at that price may not have the flavor of summer's crop.
Similarly, small, heavily waxed and often frost-bitten cucumbers may not be worth the money.


Big Hopes for a Billion-Dollar Building
On Tuesday, the first Jeep Grand Cherokee utility vehicle will roll off the line at the Chrysler Corporation's new $1 billion Jefferson Avenue assembly plant in Detroit.
From that moment on, Dennis K. Pawley, Chrysler's executive vice president of manufacturing, and the workers under his command will be feeling the heat to build as many Grand Cherokees as possible as quickly as possible.
About 2,100 hourly employees will be working at the plant when it reaches full production later in the year.


Sports of The Times; Blue Collars, Blue Wigs, Spicy Wings
WHEN she learned that the winner of a contest for the most outlandish stunt involving the Bills would receive two tickets to today's American Conference championship game, Marie Brandt never hesitated.
She promised to sleep with a buffalo.
In a barn at the Fort Rickey game farm near Utica, this 36-year-old mother of three, wearing her Bills sweat pants and other warm layers, snuggled into a sleeping bag Thursday evening next to the pen of an 800-pound buffalo named Bill.
She emerged Friday morning with her picture on the front page of The Utica Observer-Dispatch and two tickets.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Dec. 29 MANHATTAN  Flatiron District 750,000
108 Fifth Avenue (16th St.)  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,400-sq.-ft. condo in a 4-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, 3 balconies; common charge $1,206, taxes $6,000 (Broker: Delson/Ginsberg Real Estate)  Greenwich Village 312,000
89 Washington Place  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. duplex condo in a postwar building; 24-hr. doorman, fireplace, double-height living room, 12- by 6-ft. terrace; common charge $526, taxes $4,452 (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  Kips Bay Area 150,000
140 East 28th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, fireplace, renovated kitchen; maintenance $927, 56% tax-deductible (Broker: Silverman Group)  SoHo 370,000
66 Crosby Street  1,750-sq.-ft. duplex loft-co-op; elevator, 2 baths, 16-ft. ceilings; maintenance $924, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Thomassian Realty)  Upper East Side 800,000
188 East 64th Street  (Royale)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,496-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining el, renovated kitchen and bath, 2 exposures, Central Park view; common charge $790, taxes $2,500 (Broker: J.I. Sopher Co.)  West Side 285,000
211 West 71st Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,180-sq.-ft. postwar condo in a 6-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, renovated kitchen and bath, balcony, 2 exposures; common charge $661, taxes $3,643 (Broker: West Side Properties)  BRONX  Riverdale 350,000
571 West 231st Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family detached brick ranch; dining room, den, fireplace, finished basement, 54- by 100-ft. corner lot; taxes $2,800 (Broker: Trebach Realty)  Soundview 205,000
1240 Elder Avenue  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; hospitality suite in finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Ditmas Park West 250,000
489 Rugby Road  7-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family detached Victorian; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,926 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  Park Slope 220,000
8 8th Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining area, high-ceilings, fireplace, terrace; maintenance $525, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS  Rego Park 200,000
108-33 65th Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family semi-attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 29- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  Forest Hills 242,000
67-75 Fleet Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Dix Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Oakwood 183,000
404 Tysen's Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 66- by 100-ft. corner lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  West Brighton 160,000
185 Morrison Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached Colonial; dining room, full-basement, 1-car garage, 36- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: George K. Wonica)


Russia and Ukraine Try to Settle Military Dispute
Russian and Ukrainian delegations, meeting today in the Ukrainian capital, Kiev, moved to defuse a tense standoff between the two former Soviet republics over the status of the Black Sea fleet.
They pledged to avoid taking further unilateral steps.
The two sides issued a joint statement tonight that provided a framework for negotiations by experts later this month.
These specialists will discuss dividing the fleet into strategic and conventional components.


No Rush on Germany in Security Council; The Soviet Seat
To the Editor:
"Russia Deserves the Soviet Seat" by Richard N. Gardner and Toby Trister Gati (Op-Ed, Dec. 19) sublimely expresses the opinion that Russia was the Soviet Union.
Why should Russia gain the seat on the Security Council held by the Soviet Union, if the Soviet Constitution said all the republics were equal?


Grand Jury Won't Indict Officers
A Brooklyn grand jury has voted not to indict the plainclothes police officers involved in the killing of a restaurant owner but recommended an overhaul of their anti-crime unit.
The report, released Thursday, called the training of officers for the anti-crime units "grossly inadequate." It said that the police typically received no formal training for plainclothes duty and that their superiors measured their success largely by the number of arrests that they made.


To Repair Door Locks, Try Replacing the Cylinder
PROBLEMS with door locks do not always mean that the entire knob and latch assembly has to be removed or replaced.
Often just removing the lock cylinder, the part containing the keyhole, is necessary.
The cylinder can be taken to a locksmith for repair, replacement or changing the key.
Removing and reinstalling the cylinders of most locks, usually an easy job, require just a few ordinary tools.
But if a cylinder cannot be removed with such tools, the job will require a licensed locksmith.


Mutual Funds; An Old-Timer Suddenly a Star
William M. B. Berger, a Denver money manager with a superb five-year record, was discovered by investors in 1991, and his biggest fund's assets increased more than tenfold.
What is more, he believes the good times are just beginning for growth stocks.
But Mr.
Berger does not work cheaply, and his year-to-year returns can fluctuate widely.
Mr.
Berger is a confirmed growth investor, who says "the value system really doesn't exist." According to him, "In the long run, earnings is what makes an investment work, not one's cleverness in picking stocks." Growth investors look for companies whose earnings will outpace the average; value investors look for stocks that are cheap relative to a company's probable worth.


Bridge
One would expect bridge to be a popular and beneficial recreation in prisons, and indeed 10 prisons have clubs affiliated with the American Contract Bridge League.
The most famous of them is at Leavenworth, the Federal prison in Kansas, which has had a program for more than 30 years.
Others could probably be developed if local players took the trouble to encourage them.
It is sometimes possible for local players to take part in a prison duplicate, and this has happened in the United States and England when inmates have been allowed to circulate with some freedom.
Those in more restricted situations may be lucky to assemble four players.
Such efforts tend to depend on the enthusiasm of one inmate, and if he departs, the effort may collapse.


POSTINGS: 15 Units in Yonkers; Town Houses for the Homeless
Construction will start next month in Yonkers on a unusual compact town-house rental complex for homeless families that maximizes space to maintain a high degree of separation for its 15 units.
Each unit will have its own outdoor entrance.
There will be no common walls, and the tallest of the houses, which will be built on a slope, will be four stories.
"It is a town-house development turned sideways," said the architect, Duo Dickinson, of Madison, Conn.


Influx of U.S. Aid Before Primary Draws Fire
An influx of Federal aid into New Hampshire in the weeks before the Presidential primary there has provoked the ire of Patrick J. Buchanan, the main Republican challenger to President Bush, and Democrats in nearby states.
In rapid succession last month, Federal and state officials announced three Federal initiatives that would create 400 jobs and pump more than $274 million in financial aid and loan guarantees into New Hampshire.


Review/Television; Fondas Come to Terms With the Past
Dad was a legend.
That made life difficult.
But there were some great moments.
That's more or less the thrust of "Fonda on Fonda," tonight's hourlong documentary on TNT at 8, with a repeat at midnight.
Dad is, of course, Henry Fonda, and although there are other Fondas on hand -- his son, Peter, and his widow, Shirlee -- the one given star billing in the title is his daughter Jane.
She serves as host and, as it happens, is also the new wife of Ted Turner, Mr.
TNT himself.
The producers and writers of "Fonda on Fonda" are Joan Kramer and David Heeley, the team whose credits, singly or together, over the last decade have included such outstanding performer profiles as "Fred Astaire: Puttin' on His Top Hat," "Starring Katharine Hepburn," "Bacall on Bogart" and "The Fred Astaire Songbook." Their shrewd technique is to combine clips of well-known movie scenes with original material in the form of interviews or personal reminiscences and artifacts.
In this instance the comments of Jane Fonda and the others are skillfully combined with family home movies and excerpts from Henry Fonda's letters.


Now Let's Learn Self-Help From the Japanese; Logic and Ethics
To the Editor:
"Taming Japan's Trade Surplus" (Op-Ed, Dec. 28) by C. Fred Bergsten demonstrates what happens when alleged free market proponents confront market forces not to their liking.
Mr.
Bergsten suggested that President Bush should "work out an agreement" in Japan to strengthen the "grossly undervalued" yen and "seek a Japanese commitment to restore domestic expansion."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Dow Corning scientists urged company officials for years to conduct critical safety studies of its silicone gel breast implants, but the tests were put off for more than a decade, a review of hundreds of company documents shows.
The documents also suggest that the studies that were done were inadequate.  [ Page A1. ]


Trade Proposal Draws A Lukewarm Response
A proposal to pull down world trade barriers has received a lukewarm response from many countries because of its provisions on farm products, forcing negotiators to focus more on opening world markets for other goods, American and European trade officials said today.
In the last three weeks, the European Community, the United States and Japan have all declined to endorse strongly a proposal made on Dec. 20 by Arthur Dunkel, the director general of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
All three trading partners have expressed concerns about exposing their farmers to international competition.


Sports of The Times; Utley's Spirit and Bowl of Chips
At the beginning of the fourth period, with nighttime having fallen on Washington, and the Redskins having very much fallen on the Lions -- it was 27-10 Redskins and they were looming ever larger.
Despite this the team from Detroit raised up its thumbs in a display of optimism, of O.K. guys, let's get 'em, and, something else.
It was, "Hi Mike," a signal to a guy watching the game in Craig Hospital in Denver, watching it, as he had said on Friday, on the big screen and "like everyone else, with chips at my side."
Unlike most others, however, Mike Utley would be lying and watching with a steel halo around his neck and head and he would be paralyzed from the chest down.


Dance in Review
Dendy Dance Joyce Theater
The plague of AIDS has hit dance in a particularly difficult way.
The short career span means that most dancers are very young, and there is an intense physical camaraderie to the work of dance.
So mortality, or even illness, are painful in a special way.
Mark Dendy's ambitious new "Back Back," a world premiere presented by Dendy Dance on Wednesday night in the Joyce Theater's Altogether Different festival, suggests that pain.
But though AIDS calls for a degree of maturity few of us possess, Mr.
Dendy's piece was, to put it most charitably, immature.


Coopers Partners Bristle at Raise
Many chief executives are under fire for collecting large paychecks in the face of poor corporate performance.
Now, partners at Coopers &amp; Lybrand, one of the nation's largest accounting firms, are questioning the size of the pay raises pushed through for its top partners after profits hit a five-year low.
The issue leapt to the fore last month when Coopers's executive committee sought to raise its share of the firm's profits by an average of 9.9 percent.
The increases ranged from the 4.8 percent requested by Vincent M. O'Reilly, a deputy chairman who made $649,350 last year, to the 22.6 percent sought by Eugene M. Freedman, the firm's new chairman.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 12, 1992: MONDAY  American Wtr Wks Inc Indiana Energy Inc Phillips Pet Co TUESDAY  AAR Corp Unifirst Corp Mass WEDNESDAY  Cincinnati Gas &amp; Elec Clorox Co Hartmarx Corp St Joseph Lt &amp; Pwr Wpl Hldgs Inc THURSDAY  Bear Stearns Cos Grumman Corp Oneok Inc Outboard Marine Corp Stand Fed Bank of Troy, Mich FRIDAY  Aluminium Co Amer Aon Corp Communications Satellite Equitable Res Inc Nationwide Health Pptys Twin Disc Inc


Critic's Notebook; Why Met's 'Ghosts' Will Be Disembodied Until 1994-95 Season
The success of "The Ghosts of Versailles" must be both gratifying and frustrating for the Metropolitan Opera.
After a quarter-century in which the notion of commissioned work reminded Met administrators of the emblematic failure of Samuel Barber's "Antony and Cleopatra" and the lukewarm reception of Marvin David Levy's "Mourning Becomes Electra," the company overcame its fears and presented a newly commissioned opera.
That meant reconfiguring the production process to contend with the wishes of a living composer and librettist.
But having the authors on hand turned out to be a two-way equation: John Corigliano, the composer, and William M. Hoffman, the librettist, made changes in their text to reflect the wishes of the singers and the production team.
By all accounts, the company found the experience an invigorating reminder that opera can be a living, flexible art.


U.S. COURT BLOCKS I.R.A. EXTRADITION
A Federal appeals court has blocked the extradition of a former member of the Irish Republican Army on the ground that a new treaty with Britain specifically aimed at I.R.A. guerrillas in the United States unlawfully singled him out for punishment.
But the ruling last week by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit may have the unintended effect of putting the former I.R.A. member, Peter McMullen, 44 years old, at greater risk.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Retail Sales . . .
Dec. 10-Day Auto Sales . . .
Dec.
Wednesday  Business Inventories . . .
Nov.
Thursday  Consumer Price Index . . .
Dec.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Merchandise Trade . . .
Nov.
Industrial Production . . .
Dec.
Capacity Utilization . . .
Dec.


Outdoor Memorial Service Becomes Emotional Rally
An outdoor memorial service for the nine victims of the City College stampede turned into a heated rally yesterday, with organizers denouncing college administrators and city officials before rushing the guarded doors of a student center in protest.
The lone bereaved family who attended the memorial service, the parents of 24-year-old Yul Clayton Dargan, did not see the commotion or hear the chants of "Whose school? Our school!" as organizers demanded to be allowed into the North Academic Center on the City College campus.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Dec. 31 about Chinese Government surveillance of foreigners omitted a passage describing what appeared to be official efforts to keep a Chinese dissident from talking to an American reporter.
Telephone service for the dissident, Zhang Wei, was interrupted for six weeks, presumably to prevent the correspondent from reaching him.


Volunteers to Help Ex-Soviet Lands
Richard Garnitz, a 70-year-old former furniture store owner, is considering leaving his two-bedroom apartment overlooking the third fairway in a suburban retirement community to enter a two-year life of uncertainty where he may find himself in long lines just to buy eggs and milk and fretting over a scarcity of fuel to heat his living quarters.
Mr.
Garnitz, a former Commerce Department employee, Foreign Service officer and international trade expert, may join the Peace Corps to become a part of its first group ever to enter and assist what was once the Soviet Union.


People
*
Jan Wessling has been named senior vice president and account group director on the McDonald's account at DDB Needham Worldwide, McLean, Va.
He previously was president of Wessling, Burke &amp; Associates in Olney, Md.


Honors
*
Two European advertising publications have selected their agencies of the year for 1991.
J.
Walter Thompson London has been named by Campaign in Great Britain and DDB Needham France has been named by Communication/CB News in France.


Anger Lingers After Leak at Atomic Site
The scare is over, but in the "Prince of Tides" setting of golden coastal marshes, moss-draped live oaks and seaside resort communities, the questions linger after a leak of radioactive water from the Savannah River Site raised new questions about the safety of the nuclear weapons plant there.
At recent public hearings in Beaufort (pronounced BYOO-fort) and on nearby Hilton Head Island, residents demanded a halt to plans to restart the aging reactor that caused the leak about 150 miles from the coast.
Energy Secretary James D. Watkins and other officials said that Federal monitoring and notification procedures should have been better but that there was no risk to public health in the incident


Sports of The Times; Bailey's First Touchdown, Ever
THE man of the moment, Carlton Bailey, the right inside linebacker who had scored the Buffalo Bills' only touchdown in their 10-7 victory over the Denver Broncos, had already stripped down to his white T-shirt as a Bills official, Scott Berchtold, approached him in the locker room.
"Television wants you right now," Berchtold said.


News Summary
International A2-11  ALGERIAN ELECTIONS CANCELED
The military and civilian leaders who have taken the reins of Algeria's Government canceled elections, wiping out voting that had placed Islamic fundamentalists on the verge of taking control of Parliament.
A1  CHINA CLAMPS DOWN ON CHURCHES
The authorities in China recently are clamping down on Christian activities not sponsored by a Government-affiliated church.
A3  ETHIOPIANS CELEBRATE IN PEACE
Lalibala Journal: With Ethiopia's civil war over, Christmas was celebrated in peace for the first time in nearly 20 years.
A2  TAPE OF BUSH ILLNESS BROADCAST
Graphic new television footage that shows President Bush collapsing at a Tokyo banquet and his wife, Barbara, rushing to help him has been shown on American and Japanese television.
A4  EXTRADITION HALTED IN I.R.A.
CASE
A Federal appeals court in New York blocked the extradition of Peter McMullen, a former member of the Irish Republican Army.
A7  RUSSIANS PROTEST FOOD PRICES
About 10,000 Communist supporters took to the streets of Moscow to angrily protest rising prices and demand the resignation of the Russian Government.
A6  Peace Corps volunteers will go to former Soviet republics.
A6  NON-COMMUNIST LEADS IN BULGARIA
The non-Communist incumbent appeared to have finished first in the Bulgarian presidential election but faces a runoff vote.
A7  EGYPTIAN SENTENCED FOR A NOVEL
An Egyptian novelist, his publisher and a book distributor were sentenced to eight years in prison by a court that found a book, condemned by Muslim clerics as blasphemous, to be a threat to the peace.
A10  CHILE TOLD TO PAY BOMB VICTIMS
Arbitrators ordered Chile to pay more than $2.6 million to the families of a former Chilean diplomat and an American policy institute fund-raiser killed in a car bombing in Washington in 1976.
A11  Researchers called the 1990's crucial to the world environment.
A10  A U.N. agency reported grimly about growing drug smuggling.
A11  National A12-13, B8-10  IMPLANT STUDIES WERE DELAYED
The Dow Corning Company put off safety studies of its silicone gel breast implants for more than a decade after its own scientists said the studies were crucial, a review of company documents showed.
A1  A COOPERATIVE SPACE RACE
Scientists from Russia said they had made great progress toward perfecting nuclear-propelled rockets and would propose working with the United States to use the rockets to send humans to Mars.
A1  NEW DANGER FOR LENDERS
The lower interest rates that benefit homeowners may ultimately pose new risks for banks and savings and loan associations.
A1  ABUSING RESEARCH MONEY
Federal audits of 14 universities indicate that abuse of Government research money is widespread.
Auditors found that all 14 universities inappropriately billed the Government for housing, entertainment, and other activities.
A1  MACY'S DELAYS PAYMENTS
Citing borrowing restrictions in bank agreements, R. H. Macy has told suppliers it will be late in paying them, again calling into question the the company's ability to weather the difficult retailing climate.
D1  MINOR LEAK, BUT FALLOUT ANYWAY
A recent leak at a nuclear weapons plant in South Carolina demonstrated how high the economic and environmental stakes remain in a nuclear weapons industry that lives on after the cold war has died.
A12  F.B.I.
CHANGES MISSION
Washington Talk: By reassigning 300 espionage agents to combat street gangs, the F.B.I. in a single stroke succumbed to the shake-up that swept the rest of the intelligence community after the collapse of the Soviet bloc.
A13  HARKIN AND BUSH VS.
NOBODY
When Iowa speaks at party caucuses on Feb. 10, few people elsewhere will listen, because everyone knows precisely what will happen.
A13  FROM MOONSHINE TO COCAINE
Twenty years ago the thing to do in Jasper, Ala., was to go to the county line for some beer.
But these day nobody blinks at the mention of large cocaine deals, or murder for hire, or unsolved disappearances.
B8  RECESSION?
WHAT RECESSION?
At the annual meeting of the firearms manufacturing industry, the glow of prosperity was in the air.
A12  Choosing colleges for economics instead of academics.
A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 MORE RIDERS EVADING FARES
Fare beating has long plagued New York City's subways, but in the last 18 months it has reached epic proportions.
Despite stepped-up efforts by the Transit Police, it continues to grow, with some stations becoming virtual fare-free zones.
A1  MYSTERIOUS SEAL DEATHS
In the last two years, more and more harbor seals have been stranded in distress or washed up dead on Long Island beaches.
While some of the increase may be because of natural forces, biologists have begun to explore the possibility that man-made pollution may be to blame.
A1  Neediest Cases B3  Business Digest, D1  Sports C1-9  Basketball: Streaks end for Arizona and Kansas.
C2  Not so easy for Knicks now.
C3  Boating: Technology's impact on America's Cup.
C2  Features: Sidelines.
C2  Football: Bills top Broncos, 10-7.
C1  Redskins rout Lions, 41-10.
C1  Bills' defense prevails.
C5  Rypien savors special moment.
C6  Run-and-shoot and Sanders.
C7  Golf: Elkington wins playoff.
C9  Hockey: Rangers fall to Sabres.
C3  Islanders lose to Flyers.
C3  Devils beat Kings.
C3  Olympics: One skater could prevent U.S. sweep.
C4  Pipkins, 18, makes luge team.
C4  Obituaries B11  Robert L. Hess, former president of Brooklyn College Arts/Entertainment C11-16  The Met and its "Ghosts." C11  Paul Simon in South Africa.
C11  Poets take to the VCR.
C11  Music: Handel's "Radamisto" at Mannes College.
C14  Word and Image: Indiana Jones on television.
C11  Jane Fonda on her father.
C14  National Book Critics Circle Award nominations.
C16  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials A14  Buchanan's small world.
Searching for M.I.A.'s.
Why so slow on D'Amato?
Letters A14  Leslie H. Gelb: 3 whine mice . . .
A15  William Safire: The April surprise.
A15  Barney Frank: Race and crime -- let's talk sense.
A15  Jessica Hagedorn: Imelda sings again!
A15


Contradictory Signals Cloud Outlook on Bonds
It has been a wonderful six months for credit market participants, as weak economic data and an increasingly concerned Federal Reserve Board allowed interest rates to move in a predictable downward direction.
The economy remains weak, but some credit market analysts suggest that the buying and selling of fixed-income securities is going to be a bit more complex over the next weeks and months.
Movements in market interest rates will probably become less predictable for a number of reasons, these analysts said.
Chief among these is the still-resonant message sent by the Fed on Dec. 20, when it cut the discount rate by a full point and lowered its target for the overnight Federal funds rate by half a point.


MAKER OF IMPLANTS BALKED AT TESTING, ITS RECORDS SHOW
Scientists within the Dow Corning Corporation urged company officials for years to conduct critical safety studies of its silicone gel breast implants, but the tests were put off for more than a decade, a review of hundreds of company documents shows.
The documents, made available to The New York Times from several sources, also suggest that the studies that had been done were inadequate.
They describe insertion of implants into women before they had been tested in animals, and suggest that Dow Corning Wright breast implants may have been tested in animals but not in animal breast tissue.


Knicks Hit a Slump, but Stay at the Top
During the last three weeks, the Knicks have not played liked a first-place team.
Yet, they have remained in first place in the Atlantic Division.
That fact allowed New York to remain optimistic after its latest lukewarm performance: a 100-96 victory Saturday night over the injury-riddled Boston Celtics.


Lower Rates May Bring Back Perils for Banks and S.&amp; L.'s
The lower interest rates that are benefiting homeowners and other borrowers are a mixed blessing for banks and savings and loan associations and may even be pushing them into a riskier position.
In the short term, the tidal wave of homeowners seeking to take advantage of the lowest lending rates in nearly 20 years by refinancing their mortgages has provided the banks a much-needed increase in income from fees on the new loans.
The lower rates have also widened the spread between the interest rates the banks pay depositors and what they charge borrowers.


Smuggling and Use of Illicit Drugs Are Growing, U.N. Survey Finds
In an annual survey of drug trafficking and abuse around the world, a United Nations agency painted a bleak picture yesterday of expanding drug crops, increased smuggling and greater consumption.
While the International Narcotics Control Board noted that cocaine use appeared to be diminishing in the United States, it described worsening conditions in many countries including those of Eastern Europe, the former republics of the Soviet Union and China.


Race and Crime: Let's Talk Sense
Crime has become -- for conservatives and liberals -- a marker for race.
If America were a racially homogenous country, the crime problem would not be a significant factor in Presidential elections.
For most of this century, crime was not an issue in national elections, and certainly was not the problem for liberals it has since become.
Then came the 1960's, when the growth of violent crime in the cities and active, vigorous civil disobedience by antiwar protesters helped cement the impression that liberals supported the disturbers of the peace.


Reporter's Notebook; The Latest Challenge For Indiana Jones: TV
George Lucas, the film maker responsible for the two most lucrative trilogies in the history of American film -- the "Star Wars" and "Indiana Jones" movies -- has given his latest project to television, and he calls it "the best work I've done."
"The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles," an hourlong ABC series to begin in late February or in early March, surely does not stint on ambition.
The series is Mr.
Lucas's attempt to retell 20th-century history as television entertainment.


Treasury Auction Schedule
This week, the Treasury plans to hold only today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills.
Late Friday, the three-month bills were bid at 3.82 percent and the six-month bills at 3.86.


Dial-a-Hearing for Capitol Watchers
Lobbyists sometimes line the darkened hallways of the Capitol in the early morning hours, hoping for a chance to sit in on a Congressional hearing scheduled to begin hours later.
In the past, if C-Span or the Cable News Network was not broadcasting the hearing, this was their only chance to witness who said what about the subjects that preoccupy their lives.


No Recession for Firearms Industry
Other businesses may feel the gloom of recession.
But at the Shooting, Hunting Outdoor Trade Show, the annual meeting of the firearms manufacturing industry, the glow of prosperity was in the air.
The 1,200 companies that took part in this year's SHOT Show, as those in the gun industry call the four-day gathering, needed 15 percent more space than last year to show their wares, from high-tech rifles and pistols to scopes, decoys and "Bee-A-Tree" camouflage.
Most of the 15,000 manufacturers, gun shop owners and weapons buffs attending the meeting, which ended today, had little to complain about.


Government Service Gets Nasty
When the Comptroller of New York State, Edward V. Regan, announced last week that "there are no philosophical differences or partisan differences" between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the Legislature over the state budget, he drew this snarling response from John E. McArdle, the spokesman for the Senate majority leader and a fellow Republican.
"What is he -- on drugs?"
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., the Connecticut Governor whose high-handed manner almost undermined his crusade to impose the state's first income tax, was asked recently if he had learned any lessons from his heated, ugly fights with the Legislature.
"No," Mr.
Weicker snapped.


Conner and His Merry Band of Sailors
Can the man who lost the America's Cup at the expense of a 100-year winning streak worry anymore about failing?
"No," said DENNIS CONNER, the yachtsman who sailed into a year of oblivion after the 1983 cup loss to Australia.
"I've already survived the worst."


The Line? Ask the Lions
The Detroit Lions should have a good idea of what might happen two weeks from today in Super Bowl XXVI.
They played Washington and Buffalo this season, losing by 45-0 and 41-10 to the Redskins and beating the Bills, 17-14, in overtime.
"Based on today's performance," said Erik Kramer, the Lions' quarterback, "I'd have to say the Redskins. But we played the Bills when they didn't play a lot of their key players. I don't think it's going to be a blowout."


Only the Sports-Minded Need Attend
In one hotel on the same day, sports commissioners, sports agents, sports medicine experts and sports officials will meet, mingle and talk.
It is the annual Sports Summit at the Marriott Marquis in Manhattan.
For $595, anyone can attend the two-day session, which starts tomorrow.


Rypien Savors A Special Moment
The spotlight was shining brilliantly on Redskin quarterback Mark Rypien once again, and this time, after playing a superb game and again establishing himself on the same plateau as Buffalo's Jim Kelly as the most accurate deep passers in pro football this season, Rypien was able to smile and accept his place amid the hoopla in his team's locker room.
Rypien, you see, shys away from nearly any and all attention.


Incumbent Leads Bulgaria's Presidential Vote
President Zhelyu Zhelev appeared to be leading in Bulgaria's first direct presidential vote today but short of a majority, projections based on partial returns indicated.
The projections estimated that Mr.
Zhelev received about 45 percent of the vote, followed by Velko Valkanov, a nominally independent candidate backed by the former Communists, with about 31 percent, said the Bulgarian Association for Fair Elections and Civil Rights.
The group is a nongovernmental organization that conducts separate tabulations of vote results.


Miscellany
*
A television station in Manchester, N.H., has turned down a paid commercial in which Act Up, the AIDS advocacy and protest group, was to present a message aimed at the 1992 Presidential candidates..
WMUR-TV had initially agreed to run the 30-second spot, but subsequently rejected it over its "visual content." On screen during the spot was a series of pictures depicting homosexual, lesbian and interracial heterosexual couples kissing.
Larry Gilpin, WMUR's vice president and general manager, said that while the ad's message, which urged the candidates to speak out about AIDS, was acceptable, he deemed its "blatant portrayal of sexuality" to be inappropriate.


Closing L.I. Poison Center Is a Poor Economy
To the Editor:
As a result of elimination of the county subsidy to Nassau County Medical Center (news article, Dec. 24), the Long Island Poison Control Center may cease operations.
Closing the poison control center is not in the public interest and will cost taxpayers millions more than any short term dollars saved.


China Cracks Down Harder on Christian Activities Outside Official Church
Just before church began one recent Sunday, nearly a dozen plainclothes security policemen swarmed around the courtyard, scrutinizing the churchgoers and eavesdropping on conversations.
"Don't create trouble!" an elderly minister whispered sternly to a young religious leader who had held illegal Bible-study sessions in his home.
"They're all around."


Lalibala Journal; In Ethiopia, Islam's Tide Laps at the Rock of Ages
In the cool dawn air of the Ethiopian highlands, hundreds of priests in white and red robes, their heads swathed in turbans, emerged from one of the 11 churches here to sing psalms and give thanks to the medieval king under whose rule the churches, carved from solid rock, were built 800 years ago.
It was Christmas, which in the Ethiopian Orthodox Church is celebrated according to the Julian calendar, and this year's service was the first held in peace for nearly 20 years.


Absolut Ads Salute States
TBWA Advertising Inc. is working Absolut into a state -- all 50 of them, actually, and the District of Columbia, too.
Beginning Friday, the agency's largest single campaign for the imported Swedish vodka, called "Absolut Statehood," will be introduced in USA Today.
Every other week through December 1993, a full-page advertisement, featuring an artist's salute to his or her home state, will appear in the domestic and international editions of that newspaper.
The 51 ads, which will cost more than $3.5 million, will present the states in alphabetical order.


Pastor of 2,700 Leaves Church And Conflict
A popular minister who increased the membership at Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church but clashed with church elders announced yesterday that he was resigning as the church's pastor.
Amid astonished gasps, angry tears and cries of "Don't go! Don't go!" the Rev.
R.
Maurice Boyd told a stunned congregation, "I will not preach here again."


Results Plus
TENNIS Quiet One Advances The quiet McEnroe, who shook up the Australian Open by reaching the semifinals a year ago in his fiery brother's absence, is stirring excitement again.
Patrick McEnroe, stuck this time on the same side of the draw as older brother John, joined two-time champion Ivan Lendl as an easy straight-sets winner as play began Monday in the year's first Grand Slam championship.


Retirement Is Here, and a Fine Winter's Day Helps Pass Some Time


Karen Horowitz Marries on L.I.
Karen Elise Horowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Siegfried Horowitz of New York, was married yesterday to Seth Lee Starr, the son of Rivoli Starr of Woodmere, L.I., and the late Jack Starr.
Rabbi Michael Strassfeld officiated at Temple B'nai Sholom in Rockville Centre, L.I.
The bride, 32 years old, is the New York district sales manager for the Progress Software Corporation.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received a master's degree in computer science from Columbia University.
Her father is a retired chemical engineer.


2 Weeks After City College Deaths, Many Questions Remain
By 7 P.M., there had already been the Clockwork Orange horror of tired, angry fans shouting "one, two, three, push" and shoving themselves along in a human wave.
The crowd that had been churning for hours on the sidewalk outside a City College gymnasium was heading toward a nightmare.
Before it was over on Dec. 28, nine people were tangled in a fatal crush at the bottom of the gymnasium stairwell, and at least 34 were injured.
What was supposed to have been a charity basketball game pitting teams of rap music stars against one another had turned into a catastrophe.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Frito-Lay and Fox Attempt To Outflank the Super Bowl
EVERY year during the telecast of the Super Bowl advertisers seek to score more points than both teams put together.
Because it is always the most-watched television event of the year, the game has become a showcase for new advertising campaigns.
Now, even making fun of the Super Bowl has become a marketing opportunity.


Russian Scientists to Detail Plans For a Fast Nuclear Space Rocket
Scientists from Russia say they have made important strides over the decades in perfecting nuclear-propelled rockets, enhancing the prospects for faster space travel, and they plan to detail their achievements this week for the first time.
They will also propose a joint venture with the United States to build, test and use nuclear engines for sending humans to Mars, a feat whose distances and dangers might be beyond the powers of conventional chemical rockets.


Lions Tip Their Helmets to Redskins
The Redskins played so well today that the Detroit Lions acted more like appreciative theatergoers than victims.
Only a few minutes earlier, the Redskins had finished off a 41-10 rout of the Lions that gave the hometown heroes the National Football Conference championship and put them in Super Bowl XXVI against the Buffalo Bills.
But when the Lions' locker room was opened to the news media, heads were high.


Dance in Review
K2 Dance and Arts Company Merce Cunningham Studio
K2 Dance and Arts Company celebrated its 10th anniversary with a mixed-media program on Friday night.
But the media never mixed harmoniously.
Kay Nishikawa, the troupe's choreographer, kept allowing dancers to be consistently overshadowed by other aspects of the productions.


Books of The Times; Dr. Delaware to the Rescue, Again
Private Eyes By Jonathan Kellerman 475 pages. Bantam Books. $21.50.
At the opening of Jonathan Kellerman's latest Alex Delaware novel, "Private Eyes," the child psychologist turned detective receives a phone call from a young heiress named Melissa Dickinson from the exclusive San Labrador section of Los Angeles.
Alex immediately recalls how, a decade earlier, he treated Melissa as a fear-ridden 9-year-old particularly haunted by fantasies of a man named Joel McCloskey, who, for reasons never determined, had thrown the contents of a bottle of acid in her mother's face before Melissa was born.


Now Let's Learn Self-Help From the Japanese
To the Editor:
In "Don't Look for Jobs in Japan" (editorial, Jan. 6), you assert that "the number of employed Americans is unrelated to the size of the trade deficit" and invoke the experience of the 1980's, when full employment accompanied the huge trade deficits.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY A FREE RIDE THAT COSTS A LOT
Fare beating has long plagued the New York City subways, but in the last 18 months it has reached epic dimensions.
Despite stepped-up police efforts, parts of the city have become virtual no-fare zones.
One recent day, 11 people entered the 135th Street station in a 15-minute period.
Two paid the fare.
A1.


Essay; The April Surprise
Last week, approaching the first anniversary of Desert Storm, George Bush again called on the Iraqi people to "take matters into their own hands and get  [ Saddam Hussein ]  out of there . . ."
That caused much wincing among the Kurds and Shiites who rose up in the aftermath of our stop-short victory last winter.


PRO FOOTBALL It's a Date: Redskins and Bills to Meet in Super Bowl; No Huddle. No Offense. No Matter. Buffalo Is In.
The Buffalo Bills had relied upon their high-powered, high-scoring no-huddle offense to light their path to victory most of the season, while the Denver Broncos were accustomed to depending upon the scrambling high jinks of quarterback John Elway for their triumphs.
So when the Broncos' defense threw a blanket over Bills quarterback Jim Kelly and receivers James Lofton and Andre Reed and then shuttered running back Thurman Thomas this afternoon in the American Football Conference championship game here at Rich Stadium, Buffalo's offense was left stumbling in the dark.
And when Elway, who eventually left the game with a thigh bruise, was corralled, the Broncos' offense floundered.


Egyptian Sentenced for Novel Called Blasphemous to Islam
Three years after publishing his newest novel, Alla Hamed has been hounded from his job, forced to move out of his apartment because of death threats, and may soon go to prison, along with his publisher and a book distributor.
A special court, hearing charges that Mr.
Hamed's novel, titled "The Distance in a Man's Mind," is blasphemous to Islam, found it to be "a threat to national unity and social peace" and sentenced the author, publisher and distributor to eight years in prison.


Man Is Shot in the Subway
A 19-year-old suspected fare beater was shot and wounded Saturday night by a Transit Police officer who was arresting him at a subway station in Mott Haven in the Bronx, the police said yesterday.
The shooting occurred about 11:10 P.M. in the Brook Avenue station on the No. 6 line.
The man, Anthony Perez, of 600 East 137th Street in Mott Haven, who the police say was unarmed, was reported in good condition yesterday at Lincoln Hospital.


Why So Slow on Mr. D'Amato?
Senator Alfonse D'Amato was engaging in wishful thinking last August when he wrote three million of his New York constituents that a Senate Ethics Committee investigation had found that he "did nothing wrong."
In fact, the committee left one set of allegations unresolved because of continuing criminal investigations.
Moreover, even the notoriously lenient committee rebuked Senator D'Amato for allowing his brother to use his Senate office to lobby the Pentagon on behalf of a military contractor.


Review/Opera; Handel's 'Radamisto,' With Good Guys and Bad
Before beginning to conduct Handel's "Radamisto" at Mannes College of Music on Friday night, Will Crutchfield introduced this rarely heard 1720 work by summarizing critical evaluations of the composer's operas.
There are dozens of such compositions, which were extraordinary popular successes during the first half of the 18th century.
But none were performed for 175 years, the very years in which our musical culture matured.
So they have been transported to our era without a long tradition of interpretation and without any clear critical consensus about their importance.
One view, Mr.
Crutchfield noted, was that these are insignificant showpieces for vocal canaries; another is that these are dramas so awkwardly and primitively constructed that there is no point in even trying to play them straight.
And finally, there is the view that these are remarkable compositions, worthy of being placed beside the best works of the operatic tradition.


Consumers and Pros Pick Same Commercials as Tops
WHENEVER advertising executives gather to bestow honors on one another's campaigns -- in other words, every week or so -- they always ask this question: What do consumers, at whom those award-winning ads are aimed, think of them?
One awards organization was curious enough to seek an answer.
The New York Festivals, which annually presents awards to international television commercials, has inaugurated a Consumers' Choice Award.
At its initial presentation, at the organization's 34th annual awards banquet in Manhattan on Friday, the winner was a humorous spot for DHL Worldwide Courier, created by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in Sydney, Australia.


Uncertainty and Recession Prevail at Electronics Show
The future of television, stereos and video games was on view here at the Winter Consumer Electronics Show, which concluded on Sunday.
But like the direction of the national economy, the course of the industry seemed sluggish and tentative.
That was due, in part, to uncertainty over the shape and cost of new technologies like high-definition television, mini-disks and digital compact cassettes, and compact diskread only memory, which could drastically change the video-game business.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet New York State Theater
The New York City Ballet treated itself and its audience to a sumptuous performance of George Balanchine's "Jewels" on Friday night.
There was a welcome air of proud self-celebration on stage, and it was infectious.


3 Would-Be Heroes Fall Just a Bit Short
With only 1 minute 43 seconds left to play in the American Conference championship game here today, there was still time for Denver's David Treadwell, Gary Kubiak and Steve Sewell to walk out of Rich Stadium as heroes.
This was just after Kubiak, in to relieve injured quarterback John Elway, had just fallen backward into the end zone with a 3-yard touchdown and Treadwell, the Broncos' place-kicker, had booted the extra point that cut the Buffalo lead to 10-7.


Looking for the Democratic Vision
NEW York's 1992 Democratic presidential primary campaign formally begins this week with two factors, besides Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, missing.
So far, this year's abbreviated campaign in New York has been dominated by electoral mechanics rather than by ideological jousting.
No gut issue like the war in Vietnam or the vivid symbolism of a vigorous black candidate divides Democrats.
Hungry after 12 years out of the White House, most want to win.


Paris Is Closing Part of Bois
Interior Minister Philippe Marchand announced today that he was closing part of the Bois de Boulogne park to combat prostitution.
"Certain roads in the woods will be closed to traffic at night," he said in a radio interview.
"I have on my desk a map of the Bois de Boulogne, and it is horrifying the number of prostitutes, men and women, who are there -- more than 500. This can no longer be tolerated." Critics say the closing will merely drive the prostitutes elsewhere.


Memorial Service Is Held for the Victims of the City College Stampede


Connecticut's Tax Agency Is Facing Chaos in Its First Collections
In the shabby, overcrowded building that houses Connecticut's Department of Revenue Services, optimism reigns: The 1.6 million blank tax returns that went out last week under the new income tax
will
be filed in timely fashion by April 15, officials insist. Refund checks, they say,
will
be processed just as smartly.
But some ominous portents say otherwise.


An Increase in Stranded Seals Raises Concerns on Pollution
The grayish-green harbor seal, known only as NY-870, lay all but still on a bed of plywood planks, its whiskers askew, its breathing labored, its eyes unfocused, part of a mystery that is confounding marine biologists.
Samuel S. Sadove, the research director of the Okeanos Ocean Research Foundation in Hampton Bays, L.I., wearing a metal mesh glove to protect his right hand, leaned over NY-870 last week, searching for some sign that a regime of antibiotics, vitamins and intravenous feedings over five frantic days had begun to take hold.


Only Ito Can Stop A Sweep
The 1992 United States Olympic figure-skating team strongly resembles the 1988 team in that its strength is the singles skaters and more women than men are likely to win medals.
While it would be unrealistic to expect Kristi Yamaguchi, Tonya Harding and Nancy Kerrigan to occupy the victory stand next month in Albertville, France, as they did last March at the world championships in Munich and the national championships that ended here Saturday night, they await the Winter Games in much the same way that Debi Thomas, Jill Trenary and Caryn Kadavy did the Calgary Olympics four years ago:


McDaniel Has New Strategy
Xavier McDaniel of the Knicks is expected to exercise the $500,000 buyout clause in his contract, which would make him an unrestricted free agent after this season.
McDaniel and his lawyer, David Falk, have both said that the veteran small forward wants to remain with the Knicks, but that exercising the buyout clause by the deadline Wednesday would give McDaniel more leverage in negotiating a contract in the future.


Fare Beating Is Up and So Is Ire of Paying Riders
Two young men dressed in blue jeans and down jackets jog down the steps and head toward the turnstiles at the 135th Street subway station.
No other passengers are on the uptown platform of the quiet station, a local stop on the B and C lines in Harlem.
Without a glance back at the clerk in the token booth, the men open an exit gate and saunter into the subway.
Over the next 15 minutes, nine other people enter the station -- seven of them also going through the gate to avoid paying the fare.
Most are men, some young and some middle-aged.
But there is also a trio of teen-agers, two of them girls, and a well-dressed woman in her 20's.


Emigre and Son Shot to Death in Brooklyn
A 49-year-old Russian emigre, believed to be connected to Russian organized crime, and his 26-year-old son were shot to death in a hallway outside their apartment in Brooklyn early yesterday, the police said.
Each man had a handgun in his possession when he died but apparently never got a chance to use it as they were shot in a hail of more than 20 bullets shortly after 1:30 A.M. in Brighton Beach, said Lieut.
James Luongo, commander of the 60th Precinct Detective Squad.


Pat Buchanan's Small World
Patrick Buchanan's bid for the Republican Presidential nomination has begun shakily.
William F. Buckley, his philosophical hero, has sadly found him to be guilty of anti-Semitism.
His campaign against President Bush is underfinanced.
His quest may not survive the Feb. 18 New Hampshire primary election.
But there is this to be said for Mr.
Buchanan's odd crusade: He is asking some very good questions.
What is America's proper role in the world, post-cold war?
And what should America be doing to improve the lives of its own people?


Ballet Theater to Mexico
American Ballet Theater is to begin a five-day engagement in Mexico City on Jan. 22, the first time in more than 25 years that the company has appeared in that city.
Among the pieces to be performed are "Giselle," "Raymonda," "Swan Lake," "Sinfonietta" and "The Firebird." The company will first perform at the Palace of Fine Arts and then finish its engagement on Jan. 25 and 26 at the Auditorium Theater.


From a Russian Team to Rangers?
Although NEIL SMITH, the Rangers' general manager, is trying hard to play down the delicate diplomatic situation, scuttlebutt out of the recent world junior ice hockey championships in Germany was that first-round pick ALEKSEI KOVALEV could very easily end up with the Rangers before the start of this season's Stanley Cup playoffs.
Kovalev, who was the only player from the victorious Commonwealth of Independent States in the junior tournament named to the all-star team, is currently trying out for the Russian Olympic team.
After the Winter Games in Albertville, France, the fleet forward will complete the Russian league regular season with Dynamo of Moscow.
At that point, in March, he could receive the O.K. to play for a month or two with the Rangers.


For Kansas and Arizona, Home Became Less Sweet
Kentucky once set a record for winning 129 home basketball games in a row.
But that was from 1943-55, and most good teams today play more balanced schedules, as Arizona and Kansas found out Saturday.
Arizona pitted a 71-game home winning streak against U.C.L.A., not having lost at McKale Center in Tucson since 1987, when Texas-El Paso beat the Wildcats.
And in what was one of the most exciting games ever played at McKale, the Bruins defeated Arizona, 89-87, as Darrick Martin hit a 15-footer with one second left.


Bridge
When players desperately need swings, because a strong stretch drive is needed to snatch a victory, they pray to the gods of the game for wild distribution.
The gods are rarely listening, but they were on the diagramed deal from the Tri-State Regional Open Swiss Teams played on Thursday in Port Chester, N.Y.
Those praying were Roy Welland, Christal Henner, Uday Ivatury and David Feldman, and the gods gave South an 8-5-0-0 hand.
This occurs once in 33,000 deals and produces situations in which science gives way to guesswork.
It is nearly always right to select the eight-card suit as trump, to avoid losing control, but that was not true here.


Bill Paying Is Delayed By Macy's
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company, which has been sorting through the aftermath of a disappointing holiday season, has told its suppliers that it will be late making its January payments, sending a shudder of concern through the retailing community and again calling into question the ability of the department store company to navigate through the difficult retailing climate.
In explaining the delay, Macy cited restrictions in agreements with several banks that require it to reduce its borrowing for a 30-day period ending Jan. 25.
The company said it would resume regular payments after that.


Stephen B. Judelson; 'Junk Bond' Pioneer And Trader Was 56
Stephen B. Judelson, a retired Wall Street executive and a pioneer in the high-yield "junk bond" business, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
Mr.
Judelson, who was 56 years old and had a second residence in Quogue, L.I., died of cancer, his family said.


For Detroit, Time to Buckle Down
With token concessions and little relief from President Bush's mission to Japan, the nation's auto industry enters a new and critical phase in which it must seek its own strategies to keep from being overwhelmed by competitors and a floundering economy.
The negotiations last week over America's access to the Japanese automotive market were mostly a sideshow to the American auto industry's overriding concern: how to fix its operations in this country, which are steadily losing ground to Japanese competition.
To make matters worse, the industry also suffered a public relations black eye last week as it was cast as a supplicant seeking help from the Japanese Government to sell its wares, an image that could repel even more customers.


New Machines by Hewlett
Striking a blow at the dominance of Sun Microsystems Inc., the Hewlett-Packard Company will announce two new work stations on Monday that offer significantly higher performance at lower prices.
Hewlett-Packard said its new model 705, priced at $4,990, outperformed even much higher-priced machines from Sun or the Digital Equipment Corporation, and had twice the performance of Sun's comparably priced model.


Quotation of the Day
"Fare beating is the graffiti of the 90's. It suggests things are not quite in control." -- PETER STANGL, chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.  [ A1:3 ] .


Market Place; Options Soar With Surge In Stocks
Options, the financial instruments that feed on Wall Street excitement, are booming.
Volatility in the stock market is always good for the options business, and the surge in stock prices in recent weeks has been steep enough to make options traders smile broadly.
The daily volume of options contracts traded on the nation's five options exchanges has begun to pierce the one million level regularly, and the daily average so far this month, 980,000, is the highest monthly rate in a year.
It is also one of the highest monthly levels since the options market peaked -- and crashed -- in 1987.


Iowans to Caucus Without Suspense
What always fascinated the country about the Iowa political caucuses was their predilection for underdogs, like George McGovern in 1972, Jimmy Carter in 1976, Gary Hart in 1984 and Pat Robertson in 1988.
But this year, the underdogs have been shut out.
The powers that be have construed the rules in such a way that the Presidential long shots are concentrating on New Hampshire.
When Iowa speaks on Feb. 10, few people elsewhere will listen, because everyone knows precisely what will happen.


A Slide on Wild Side Gets Pipkins in Games
When Robert Pipkins was 4 years old, he would sled down Silver Lake hill in Staten Island on his red plastic toboggan.
Even then, the little boy from Bailey Place was the only child who would dare to jump a narrow creek at the bottom.
"The sled would stick at the edge, and I would keep flying across," Pipkins said.
"I always loved exciting things."


Imports by Rail Cut in Half Amount of Cargo Arriving at Region Docks
The "K" Line's big new container terminal lies right on the Elizabeth seaport shipping channel, yet the last time the thousands of bright red cargo containers moving through it were on a ship, they were approaching the ports at Los Angeles, Oakland or Tacoma, 3,000 miles to the west.
In a trend that threatens to push the New York metropolitan region's maritime industry further onto the sidelines of international trade, half or more of the imports destined for the East Coast arrive not on the great merchant fleets that once crowded the docks of New York and New Jersey, but stacked two deep on high-tech railroad flat cars, hauled by trains often a mile in length that dash in from the West Coast in three days.


Rulers Taking Power in Algeria Halt Elections to the Parliament
The military and civilian leaders who have taken the reins of Algeria's Government put an end to elections today, wiping out voting that had placed an Islamic fundamentalist party on the verge of taking control of the country's Parliament.
The Government of Prime Minister Sid Ahmed Ghozali acted under strong pressure from the Algerian Army, which forced President Chadli Benjedid to resign on Saturday in an attempt to prevent the fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front from scoring further gains in a second round of voting that had been set for Thursday.


Powerful Technology Riding Gentle Breezes
Yachtsmen who grew up sailing with a chilly Atlantic Ocean spray in their face tend to scoff at the idea of an America's Cup series held in the soft, forgiving breezes of sunny California.
Behind the smugness is the belief that competition for yachting's most prestigious prize deserves more demanding conditions.
But Eastern purists have yet to see the thrilling, frightening power of the new class of boats under sail.
The sloops are built to be powerful, and at 75 feet, they can also be unruly.
When the 110-foot mast breaks, the spar snaps like a matchstick and falls like a pillar.
A collision between two of the heavily canvassed yachts can have the impact of a locomotive running into a boxcar.


Communist Supporters in Moscow Demand Resignation of Government


Retail Chains Move Accounts
Two large retail chains have moved their advertising accounts.
Office Max Inc. in Beachwood, Ohio, an office-products retailer owned by the K Mart Corporation, has named the Ross Roy Group in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., as its new agency of record, replacing Sharp Advertising Inc. in Cleveland.


The Shakeout Begins In French TV Stations
As soon as President Francois Mitterrand approved the creation of France's first independent television stations in the mid-1980's, media groups hurriedly sought entry into a business that Britain's Lord Thomson of Fleet once described as "a license to print money."
Now, six years later, La Cinq -- Channel Five -- has become the first of the new television stations to collapse.
With accumulated losses of $550 million, it declared itself bankrupt on New Year's Eve and surrendered control to a court-appointed administrator who will decide its fate.


What You Can Keep Though Bankrupt
To the Editor:
You may have caused some readers to infer that losing one's home and car is a necessary result of insolvency through "New England's Siren Call of the 80's Becomes Echo of Depression" (front page, Dec. 15).
The article does bring home the chilling reality of the economic cycle.


Robert Hess, 59, Historian, Dies; Was Brooklyn College President
Robert L. Hess, who assumed the presidency of Brooklyn College amid campus turmoil and decline in the 1970's and led the era of its resurgence as a top-ranked school, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 59 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of lymphoma, a college spokesman said.
The illness had limited his work since last June.


Worldwatch Report Calls 1990's Decisive Decade for Environment
Two years ago, the Washington-based Worldwatch Institute warned that the world had about 40 years in which to reverse environmental deterioration or face a long decline into economic and social ruin.
But in its latest annual report, the institute asserts that the 1990's are the "decisive decade" for environmental change, declaring that nothing short of an "environmental revolution" will save the planet.


Washington Talk; F.B.I. Shifts Its Course After Cold War Thaw
On the surface, the redeployment of 300 counterintelligence agents at the Federal Bureau of Investigation to combat street gangs represented a small but concrete example of what the collapse of the Soviet bloc can mean at home.
But within Federal law-enforcement circles, the shift announced last week by Attorney General William P. Barr came as a stunning break with the past.
It represented the first substantial contraction of the F.B.I.'s counterespionage operations in 50 years and is the largest single reallocation of resources in the bureau's history.


CHRONICLE
In a sense, the fate of the planet is a continuing drama.
What will happen to the ozone layer, to the rain forests, to air and water quality?
Tune in during the next century for some clues.
So it does not seem too incongruous that the folks who specialize in cliff-hangers of a different sort -- soap operas -- should have some interest in the environment.


E. C. Anderberg, 76, Retired Bank President
Edward C. Anderberg, the retired president and chief administrative officer of Green Point Savings Bank, died Thursday at North Shore University Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 76 years old and lived in Laurel Hollow, L.I.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Karen Schwarz, Writer, Is Wed
Karen Schwarz, a writer in Alexandria, Va., and Jeffrey Mark Peisch, a vice president of Time-Life Video and Television there, were married yesterday at the Rainbow Room in New York.
Rabbi Charles Lippman officiated.
Ms.
Schwarz, 34 years old, will keep her name.
She is the author of "What You Can Do for Your Country: An Oral History of the Peace Corps," published in July by William Morrow &amp; Company.
A graduate of Skidmore College, she is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Schwarz of New York.
Her father is the president of Pathway Optical Products Inc., which makes eyeglasses in Long Island City, Queens.


Poetry Finds a New Forum: the Videocassette
In the age of "Yo!" and the nutritionless sound bite, poetry is fighting back with new technology.
Riding a surge of interest in live poetry readings, Norman Rose, a New York City actor and poet, has created Off the Page, the first poetry magazine on videocassette.
The first issue is to go on sale Friday at Brentano's bookstore, 597 Fifth Avenue, at 48th Street, which will celebrate with an after-hours party.
Monitors will allow guests to watch 72 minutes of readings by poets like Richard Wilbur, Robert Pinsky, Carolyn Forche and Amy Clampitt, as well as a performance of Willa Cather poems set to music and four short plays by the poet Kenneth Koch.


Lasker Rink Ice Hockey Revives Harlem Meer
To the Editor:
I live near the north end of New York City's Central Park and have used this part of the park for strolling and jogging for 25 years.
In recent years the low level of park use in the area of the Harlem Meer has caused me concern.
Especially during renovation of the Meer, drug dealing has replaced more legitimate park uses at the Lenox Avenue-110th Street entrance to the park.


Despite Grief, Thinking of Neediest
People find many reasons to contribute to The New York Times Neediest Cases, but among the most touching are those that move people to give despite their own difficulties.
"With my marriage falling apart and my work very stressful because of the economic difficulties," wrote a Manhattan man, who gave $1,000, "I am thankful I have a job and a place to live. This contribution is the beginning of my efforts to give back more to the world this year."


Paul Simon Begins South Africa Concerts
Paul Simon brought the driving rhythms of his acclaimed "Graceland" album home to South Africa Saturday night, beginning a controversial series of concerts that effectively ends a long era of cultural isolation.
The American singer's visit drew protests from a small but vociferous minority of radical black groups, who contended that apartheid was not sufficiently dismantled to justify lifting the boycott on tours by foreign artists, as the United Nations decided last month.


Avoiding Confrontations In Wake of Racial Attack
The day after her two children were attacked by four young white men who squirted them with a white liquid in what the police say was a bias assault, Nellie Wilson was deluged with telephone calls.
Mayor David N. Dinkins wanted to know if the two black children, a 14-year-old boy and his 12-year-old sister, needed the aid of city counselors.
The Rev.
Al Sharpton wanted to know if he could call on the family.


Rangers Aren't Bad; LaFontaine Is Better
In the past six months, Pat LaFontaine has endured a contract dispute, a bitter holdout, a major trade, a broken jawbone and a cut artery.
To protect his healing face, LaFontaine wears a helmet and shield that make him look like one of the early astronauts of the Mercury space program.
Despite the setbacks and the extra headgear, LaFontaine is rocketing up the league scoring chart, and his Buffalo Sabres are in orbit behind him.
He scored twice and set up another goal tonight to lead the Sabres to a 6-3 victory over the Rangers at Memorial Auditorium.


TRANSACTIONS
Hockey National Hockey League  MONTREAL CANADIENS -- Recalled Andre Racicot, goaltender, from Fredericton of the American Hockey League.
DEVILS -- Acquired Troy Mallette, left wing, from the Edmonton Oilers for David Maley, left wing.
Called up Alexander Semak, center, from Utica of the American Hockey League.
ISLANDERS -- Signed Rick Green, defenseman, for the remainder of the season.


U.S. SEEKS REFUNDS OF RESEARCH COSTS
Federal auditors have found that 14 research universities inappropriately billed the Government several million dollars for housing, personal expenses, travel, entertainment, fund raising and other activities unrelated to research.
A report on the auditors' findings, for the Department of Health and Human Services, provides the first detailed indication of how widespread such overcharges are among universities conducting research for the Government.
The audits, undertaken after last year's disclosures of overcharges at Stanford University, surveyed 14 research universities and found overcharges or questionable charges at all of them, though on a smaller scale than those reported at Stanford.


New Season Will Probably Be a Spinoff of '91
On the court and off, tennis took a tumultuous turn in 1991, where breakthroughs, break-ups and breakdowns were circuit staples.
Jimmy Connors, a United States Open semifinalist, and Henri Leconte, the ringer on France's championship Davis Cup team, were resurrected from tennis' terminal unit.
Martina Navratilova tied Chris Evert's record of 157 career titles, but failed to defend her record ninth Wimbledon title and found herself on trial for real in Texas.
Monica Seles made state-of-the-art money but made people mad with anti-establishment escapades.
France stole away the United States' Davis Cup in a rollicking final.
Boris Becker and Stefan Edberg were slowed to a standstill by injuries when the endless tennis season finally ended.


Elkington Wins a Sudden End to Infiniti
Smooth-swinging Steve Elkington rebounded from some erratic ball striking and a botched putt to seize the Infiniti Tournament of Champions in a sudden-death playoff with Brad Faxon.
Elkington, who missed an eight-foot birdie putt that would have given him a victory on the 72d hole, drained a 10-footer on the first playoff hole for a winning birdie.
He shot a final-round even-par 72 over a tough La Costa course for a 72-hole total of nine-under-par 279.


INSIDE
R. H. Macy Tells Suppliers Its Payments Will Be Late
The big retailing company, which operates Macy's, Bullock's and I. Magnin, said it had delayed payments to suppliers for about two weeks because of borrowing limits imposed by its banks.
But it again denied it was headed for bankruptcy.
Page D1.
A Stillness in Iowa
Past Iowa caucuses propelled some dark horses to the head of the Presidential field.
But this year there are no dark horses, and hardly anyone is paying attention.
Page A13.


A Familiar Team May Be Out
The careers of two of the most familiar and successful advertising characters of the 1980's, Frank Bartles and Ed Jaymes, seem at an end.
David Rufkahr, an Oregon rancher who played Bartles, the talkative pitchman for Bartles &amp; Jaymes wine coolers, told The Associated Press last week that contracts for him and for his partner, Dick Maugg, a California contractor who played the silent Jaymes, expired and were not renewed.


Florio Is Expected to Sign Fiber Optic Legislation
Legislation that would allow New Jersey Bell to install a fiber optic network and provide a video billboard service statewide is expected to be signed by Gov.
Jim Florio, possibly as early as this week.
The legislation, which was passed by the Legislature last week, was staunchly opposed by newspaper and cable television executives, who said that it would give the telephone company an unfair competitive advantage.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Allied Health Care Products, 2 million shares. Montgomery Securities.
Cardiopulmonics Inc., 2 million shares. Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood.
Chemed Corp., 1.3 million shares, a secondary offering through First Boston.
Granite Broadcasting Corp., 2.75 million nonvoting shares. Alex. Brown &amp; Sons.
International Paper Co., 8 million shares, with 6.4 million to be sold in the United States through First Boston.
Medical Diagnostics Inc., 1.35 million shares. First Albany.
Michaels Stores Inc., 3 million shares. First Boston.
Mutual Risk Management Ltd., 2.15 million shares. Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
Outback Steakhouse Inc., 1.95 million shares. Alex. Brown &amp; Sons.
Precision Optics Corp., 1.175 million shares. Kennedy, Mathews.
Strategic Global Income Fund Inc., 5 million shares. Paine Webber.
Syspower Technologies Inc., 1.1 million units. First New England.
Tocor 11/Centocor Inc., 1.5 million units. Paine Webber.
USX-Marathon Group, 20 million shares, global offering. Lehman Brothers.
Whole Foods Market Inc., 1.25 million shares. Robertson, Stephens.


Corrections
A sports article about the Washington Redskins yesterday misspelled the name of the team's defensive coordinator.
He is Richie Petitbon.


Nassau County Officials Feuding Over Cutbacks
As Nassau County Republicans feud over recent election losses and budget woes, Democratic leaders are flexing their newly won strength and are closely monitoring the impact of 3,000 county layoffs and painful cuts in services.
All sides agree that the county is faced with a grave financial crisis because of the recession, and that old approaches, like raising taxes, are no longer politically acceptable.
But they remain at odds over how to deal with the execution and aftermath of the fiscal blood-letting.


E. B. Horowitz Dies; Manhattan Novelist And Ex-Teacher, 61
Eugene B. Horowitz, the author of five published novels, died on Friday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack, said Stan Herman, his companion for the last 39 years and president of the Council of Fashion Designers of America.


Foreign Affairs; Three Whine Mice ...
The Bush mission to Japan was so ill conceived and executed as to raise fundamental doubts about the President's capacity to manage U.S. foreign policy in the post-cold war world.
Here's what the trip shows about Mr. Bush:


Mann Turns Kramer and Game Around
Although the game wouldn't turn in Washington's favor until the third quarter, the Redskins' defense sent an ominous message to Detroit before the contest was even 50 seconds old.
The message, delivered by Charles Mann, the Redskins' veteran defensive end, planted seeds of doubt that would sprout into misgivings and finally into shattered confidence by the third quarter.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Charleston, S.C., had $198.2 million in water and sewer refunding bonds repriced by the underwriter, Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc., which lowered yields by 5 basis points for securities due 1994 through 1999 and 2003 through 2008 and by about 7 basis points for maturities from 2000 through 2002.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.
Common Stock  *
Scholastic Corp., New York, filed for 4.3 million common shares to be sold by the co-managers, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. and Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.
Ratings  *
International Paper Co.'s $200 million of 7 5/8 percent notes due in 2007 received an A- rating from Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
The company is based in Purchase, N.Y. *
Caesars World Inc.'s $241 million in subordinated debt was upgraded to BB+, from BB-, by S.&amp; P., reflecting an improved operating performance by the casino company, which is based in Los Angeles. *
Du Pont Co.'s $400 million of 8 1/4 percent debentures were rated AA by S.&amp; P. based on good earnings and strong cash flow from its chemicals and energy businesses.
The company is based in Wilmington, Del.


PROTEST IN RUSSIA OVER PRICE RISES
About 10,000 Communist supporters took to the streets today to angrily protest rising prices and demand the resignation of the Russian Government.
The rally, held under a wet snow on the same square outside the Kremlin where anti-Communist forces used to gather for mass demonstrations, also heard protests from military officers against the fragmentation of the army.





A Credible Search for M.I.A.'s
The Bush Administration may have buried the "Vietnam syndrome" in Kuwait, but another legacy of the Vietnam War keeps corroding public confidence in government: the M.I.A.'s.
There is little responsible support for the idea that Americans missing in action are still being held against their will in Indochina.
Yet polls show that a majority of Americans thinks they are.
That popular view is now being reinforced by sensational allegations from Gen.
Oleg Kalugin, a former top K.G.B. official.
General Kalugin claims that U.S. prisoners of war were interrogated by K.G.B. agents inside the Soviet Union years after Hanoi supposedly returned all living prisoners to the United States.
He'll meet with Administration officials this week.


Louis Armstrong on Film
"Wynton on Pops: Films of Louis Armstrong," a program of films and videos featuring Louis Armstrong, is to be shown on Thursday at 6:30 and 9 P.M. at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, at Lincoln Center.
The screenings, sponsored by the Film Society of Lincoln Center, include clips from the 1938 film "Jeepers Creepers" and from other films and television shows.
The programs will be introduced by the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis, who is artistic director of Jazz at Lincoln Center.
Tickets are $7.
Information: (212) 875-5600.


Defiance by Several Surgeons Is Reported
Dr.
Sidney M. Wolfe of the Public Citizen Health Research Group said today that his office had found several plastic surgeons who were willing to continue to insert breast implants in defiance of the Food and Drug Administration and their own professional societies.
Dr. Wolfe called the doctors "ghouls" and said he would release their names on Monday.


Falling Into Early Rut Ruins Islanders Again
The Islanders earned a share of last place in the Patrick Division with Philadelphia tonight by losing to the Flyers, 4-3, before 17,186 spectators at the Spectrum.
The victory for the Flyers, who like the Islanders now have 36 points in a disappointing season, was the 600th home victory in franchise history.


Social Security Tax
To the Editor:
Ron Greenberg (letter, Dec. 29) wants to reduce the Social Security tax on employers and employees alike to 3.1 percent and increase the amount subject to the tax to $106,800.
Halving the tax rate and doubling the amount subject to the tax will free dollars for employers and employees alike, but why stop at a number like $106,800 for the tax base?


PRO FOOTBALL It's a Date: Redskins and Bills to Meet in Super Bowl; Washington Passes Send Lions Packing
The Washington Redskins found their running game snuffed much of the afternoon and their special teams not particularly special.
So, to make the most of a big-play defense that sparkled and shut out the Detroit Lions in the second half, the Redskins turned to a deep passing game that burned the Lions as quickly as a torch applied to a kerosene-laden wick.
Mark Rypien heaved second-half touchdown passes of 45 yards to Gary Clark and 21 yards to Art Monk to spark the Redskins to a 41-10 rout of the Lions in the National Football Conference championship game before 55,585 fans at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium.
Washington, with the league's best record of 16-2, earned a trip to Super Bowl XXVI on Jan. 26 in Minneapolis where the Redskins will meet the A.F.C. champion Buffalo Bills.


The Trouble With Big Science Projects
To the Editor:
The debate between big science and little science in the United States, discussed in your Dec. 19 letters, has been argued by policy makers and politicians.
I would like to add my observations as a scientist in a small research and development company that has done contract research for both types of programs.


Pastor Aids in Suspect's Arrest
The pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem knew his part-time handyman as a young man from a fine churchgoing family.
But one day last week, the police told him that the man, Joseph Wigfall, was wanted in a robbery that left an ice-cream store manager shot in the head.
Two New York City detectives asked for the pastor's help in arresting the man.
And yesterday, Mr.
Wigfall turned himself in to the pastor, the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d, telling him that he was ready to surrender.


25 Books Nominated for Awards
"Maus II," Art Spiegelman's cartoon account of his father's life in Nazi Germany, and "Patrimony," Philip Roth's memoir about his father's last years, are among 25 books nominated for the National Book Critics Circle Awards.
The awards for books published in 1991 are in five categories: fiction, general nonfiction, biography and autobiography, poetry and criticism.
The winners are to be announced Feb. 13 at the National Arts Club in New York, and a ceremony honoring the winners is to be held in March at the New-York Historical Society.


Devils Trade for Zip, Then Plod Past the Kings
While the Devils' coaches held meetings with the players to discuss underestimating opponents, the actions of the president of the team spoke louder than words.
Devils President Lou Lamoriello turned some heads before tonight's 5-2 triumph over the Los Angeles Kings here by trading Dave Maley to Edmonton for Troy Mallette.


Linda Ellenbogen, 43, Lawyer in Westchester
Linda L. Ellenbogen, who was the first woman lawyer in the law department of the New York State Supreme Court in Westchester County, died on Thursday at Rosary Hill Nursing Home in Hawthorne, N.Y.
She was 43 years old and a resident of White Plains.
She died of a brain tumor, her family said.


Accounts
*
Comedy Central, New York, the cable television network, to Schnurr &amp; Jackson Associates Inc., Troy, N.Y., for trade, consumer and affiliate advertising with a budget of $6 million, from Fred/Alan Inc., New York. *
Burroughs Wellcome Co., Research Triangle Park, N.C., to Kallir, Phillips, Ross Inc., New York, to advertise its Zovirax line of prescription medicines.
Billings are estimated at $5 million.
The account was previously at Sudler &amp; Hennessey, New York.


CHRONICLE
JERRY HALL, wife of MICK JAGGER, the lead singer of the Rolling Stones, gave birth yesterday to the couple's third child, a girl, in London, the family's public relations representative told The Associated Press.


D'Amato Proposes Bill for Criminal Aliens
Saying that New York and a handful of other states were bearing too much of the cost of incarcerating foreign-born criminals and illegal aliens, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato yesterday proposed that the Federal Government hold these prisoners in unused military bases.
At a news conference outside the Immigration and Naturalization Service Detention Center at 201 Varick Street, Senator D'Amato said he would introduce a bill allowing for the conversion of three closed military bases into correctional centers.
He did not say which bases could be used.


World Economies


A Neighbor's Death Ignites Activism in Brooklyn
For the last 13 years, Michael Tartakovsky, a Soviet immigrant, has lived quietly in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn, taking little notice of anything other than his work and family.
For newcomers to survive in a new land, reclusivity is necessary, he reasoned.


Bills (Barely) and Redskins (Easily) Advance to the Super Bowl


CHRONICLE
WOODY ALLEN may be a recluse, but he comes out for his chums.
And there he was, little as life, hunched in a corner at the swell soiree given Friday night by JAQUI SAFRA, the international financier, after a private screening of "The Ox," a Swedish film produced by his long-time companion, JEAN DOUMANIAN.
Ms.
Doumanian is a former producer of "Saturday Night Live."
He was surrounded by a crush of folks from film and beyond, including NAN and GAY TALESE, DICK CAVETT, BYRON JANIS and MARIA COOPER (daughter of Gary), PETER MAAS, the cinematographer CARLO di PALMA, ELAINE STRITCH and ELAINE KAUFMAN of Elaine's.
The party was held in Mr.
Safra's elegant East Side partyhouse, where he neither lives nor works.


BOSTON TRIAL SET ON KING'S PAPERS
A state judge ruled today that Boston University and the widow of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. must go to trial to determine who has lawful right to more than 83,000 documents that the slain civil rights leader left to the university in his lifetime.
His widow, Coretta Scott King, sued Boston University in 1987 demanding the return of the papers, which include about a third of all Dr.
King's letters, manuscripts and other papers and form the centerpiece of the university's collection of personal archives.
She said the papers belong with other archival material of Dr.
King's at the King Center for Nonviolent Social Change, in Atlanta.


Liquidation Set For B.C.C.I.
Britain will soon begin liquidating the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, selling assets and settling accounts six months after the scandal-ridden bank was shut down, its provisional liquidator said today.
"It is almost certain to go into liquidation" on Tuesday, said Christopher Morris of the accounting firm Touche Ross.


ISRAELIS IN ACCORD WITH PALESTINIANS ON BASIS FOR TALKS
Israel and the Palestinians began face-to-face talks today after ending a monthlong procedural dispute.
The talks, the first substantive negotiations ever between the two sides, are considered the first, still-tentative step toward devising a plan for Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories.
After reaching agreement this morning on a negotiating formula that would accommodate both the Israeli demand that the Palestinians be considered part of a joint delegation with Jordan, and the Palestinian preference for a separate status and agenda, all three delegations met together this evening for about half an hour.


Mego Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


The 'Logic' in I.R.A. Zealotry
The bomb that exploded in central London last week was not meant to kill but to serve as a calling card for the Irish Republican Army.
The blast near the Defense Ministry followed weeks of incendiary bombing in Britain and Northern Ireland designed to cause maximum disruption with minimum loss of life.
The relative lack of bloodshed is a minimal concession to public relations for which minimal thanks are owed.
But the real aim of the attacks is malign: to provoke reprisals that will undermine attempts to deal rationally with one of Europe's most intractable quarrels.


Mallette to Give Devils a Rough Edge
The trade of Dave Maley to Edmonton for Troy Mallette, the resurgence of Chris Terreri and the promotion of Aleksandr Semak made the Devils a better team this morning than a day earlier.
The 21-year-old Mallette will provide the physical presence the Devils lacked on the left side of their attack, a role that Maley filled in his first four years with the Devils but failed miserably in this season.


Alitalia Head to Lead European Airline Group
Giovanni Bisignani, managing director and chief executive of the Italian state airline Alitalia, has been named chairman of the Association of European Airlines.
Mr.
Bisignani, 45, succeeds Bernard Attali, 48, chairman of the Air France Group, the airline said last week.


Cogeco reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Staff Builders Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Bush Raises Trade Issue In Bid for Farm Support
In a speech laced with patriotic slogans, promises of economic recovery and defensiveness about his recent Pacific trip, President Bush appealed for support from American farmers in the first of several ventures before the start of the Presidential primaries.
Appearing before the American Farm Bureau Federation's annual meeting here, Mr.
Bush previewed the themes of his re-election campaign, presenting himself as the candidate "savvy" enough to maintain America's position of leadership in the world.


Softech Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Big Denver Cattle Show Reflects Sunset on West
Al Rose, a tall, craggy 66-year-old rancher, leaned an elbow against a fence post and watched a handsome Hereford strut past the reviewing stand at the National Western Stock Show.
"Used to be, almost everyone I knew was a rancher," he said, tipping back his Stetson.
"But there just aren't many of us left out in the country anymore."
But even as so many cowboys fade from the range, this most powerful of American myths only grows stronger.
To many urbanites who rope their paychecks from behind computer terminals and glass-covered desks, the ranch has become the nation's most exotic place.


Evaluator of Insurers Alters Its Rating System
A.
M.
Best Company, the insurance rating firm, announced yesterday that it would add several levels to its rating structure and eliminate its contingency warnings that signaled to consumers that an insurer's financial position had deteriorated.
The company, which has been criticized for being lenient in its grading over the last year as increasing troubles emerged in the industry, said it had decided to do away with the contingency warnings because they had caused confusion among consumers.


Collaborative Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Corrections
A chart yesterday showing population growth since the 1990 census mislabeled figures for three states in some copies.
Alaska grew from 550,000 to 570,000 between 1990 and 1991, an increase of 3.7 percent; Arizona grew from 3,665,000 to 3,750,000, an increase of 2.3 percent, and Arkansas grew from 2,351,000 to 2,372,000, an increase of 0.9 percent.


Israel Is Said to Expect Less In Loan Aid for Immigrants
Israel's leaders are increasingly resigned to the likelihood that they will have to settle for far less than the $10 billion in United States loan guarantees that they are seeking to resettle new immigrants, Government officials and representatives of American Jewish groups say.
Although the Israelis are formally pressing ahead with their request -- $2 billion worth of annual loan guarantees spread over the next five years -- "they are accepting the inevitable," an official of one Jewish group said.


Grocers' Own Fancy Brands Are on the Rise
A.&amp; P., like a growing number of the nation's largest supermarket chains, is pushing a fancy new line of cookies, pastas and olive oils: its own.
Store brands have been around for years, but the latest generation is a far cry from A.&amp; P.'s plain, and now defunct, Ann Page bargain line of canned goods.
The new ones feature olive oil laced with garlic essence, champagne mustard packaged in handsome ceramic pots and blue corn tortilla chips with sesame seeds.
They are likely to be called President's Choice, Sensational or World Classic.


U.S. Ship to Investigate Damage From Oil Pollution in Persian Gulf
A YEAR after immense oil spills fouled the waters of the Persian Gulf during the war against Iraq, the United States this week is dispatching an oceanographic research vessel for the most comprehensive look so far at the damage to the marine environment there.
Dozens of scientists from several countries, including Iran, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and other gulf states, as well as the United States and Europe, will take part in studies for about 100 days as the Mount Mitchell, operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, investigates the oily wounds of the shallow gulf.
Most of the oil was spilled when Iraq sabotaged oil facilities, although shelling and bombing by both sides contributed to the pollution.


Rehabcare Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Federal National Mortgage Association reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Unless We All Speak Up for Salman Rushdie
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb, purporting to defend Salman Rushdie in "Rushdie's Death Foretold" (column, Dec. 29), makes the astonishing assertion that he was offended by what "The Satanic Verses," the novel for which Mr.
Rushdie is under death threat from the mullahs of Iran, had to say about Islam.
It strains credibility that those who have supported Mr.
Rushdie all along have to say again that the supposedly offensive passages represent the thoughts of a fictional character, not just any fictional character, but one who is clearly identified as mentally ill, on medication, hallucinating freely, and that these passages are not just his thoughts, but his dreams.


High-Tech Trials
There's a new sound in the Federal courtroom of Judge Alfred Wolin these days, the whisper of fans cooling banks of electronic equipment.
The high-tech trial is at hand.
Testimony is aided by elaborate video displays that pop up on several screens around the courtroom at the press of a button.
As each word is spoken, it is displayed on computer monitors in the courtroom and in distant law offices where witnesses are being prepared to appear.
Stacks of laser disks are as much in evidence as yellow legal pads.


TRC Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


T. Eric Embry, Defense Lawyer In Historic Libel Case, Dies at 70
T.
Eric Embry, a retired justice of the Alabama Supreme Court, died Sunday in Birmingham.
He was 70 years old and lived in Birmingham.
Justice Embry, who as a trial lawyer represented The New York Times in what became the landmark libel case New York Times Company v.
Sullivan, died of cancer, said Robert G. Esdale, the clerk of the Alabama Supreme Court.


PNC Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sandwich Chef Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Maker of Silicone Breast Implants Says Data Show Them to Be Safe
Officials of the Dow Corning Corporation, buffeted by criticism of its silicone breast implants, today reasserted their belief that the implants are safe and defended the tests they say prove it.
"The cumulative body of credible scientific evidence shows that the implants are safe and effective," Robert T. Rylee, chief of Dow Corning's health care businesses, said at a press conference here today.


Hubble Observations Bring Some Surprises
Observations by the Hubble Space Telescope, including the surprising discovery of boron in an ancient star and the most precise measurement so far of heavy hydrogen in space, have given astronomers new insights about early cosmic history and perhaps a clue to the fate of the universe.
Astronomers using the orbiting telescope have also found that clouds of primordial hydrogen, thought to be randomly distributed in the most distant reaches of space, may be nearby as well and actually associated with galaxies and clusters of galaxies.


Genetics Institute Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY A NEW SOURCE OF HEROIN
Colombia's drug lords, who flooded the United States with cocaine in the 1980's, have added a new product line, heroin, and are now shipping it to New York and other cities.
The Colombians' venture into the heroin trade has many law-enforcement officials concerned because the Colombian traffickers operate a maze of international smuggling routes and distribution networks throughout the country.
A1.


Profit Off 30% at Chase as Loan-Loss Reserve Is Built Up
The Chase Manhattan Corporation reported a 30 percent drop in earnings in the fourth quarter, but returned to profitability for the full year.
Analysts said attempts by the bank to reduce costs and improve the quality of its loans appeared to be slowly working.
And the PNC Financial Corporation of Pittsburgh reported a profit for the quarter, compared with a loss a year earlier.
In the fourth quarter, Chase, the nation's sixth-largest bank holding company, earned $135 million, or 80 cents a share.
This compares with $193 million, or $1.32 a share in the previous fourth quarter.
The 1990 fourth quarter, however, included a one-time gain of $51 million, or 39 cents a share.


Observer; Bunkhouse Follies
History is a problem.
Just a few months ago nobody knew any.
"It's awful that nobody knows any history anymore." Such was the lament on every street corner.
Now the world is suddenly swarming with people who know history.
Boy, do they know history!
And they don't just know history, they know the history the rest of us know is all wet.


Redlaw Industries reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Campaign Will Seek Child Nutrition Labels
Seizing an idea advanced by the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, a private group said today that it was starting a voluntary campaign to develop food nutrition labels designed to help children better understand what is in their food.
The group, Kidsnet, outlined its plans at a conference attended by the commissioner, Dr.
David A. Kessler.


Unless We All Speak Up for Salman Rushdie; True Believers
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb's complaints about pussyfooting diplomats (column, Dec. 29) are legitimate, but the true issue is religion, not government.


Immucor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Moffat Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Video Display Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING;
For many mega-marketers, the Super Bowl still provides a glitzy backdrop for extravagant advertisements and promotions.
But others that once thought the game as super for them as for the football teams that play in it intend to sit out Super Sunday this year.
The game's diminution, which began after several ho-hum matches in the late 1980's, has accelerated for three reasons: the relentless rise in the cost of a commercial, to more than $28,300 a second; the sluggish economy, and a sense that Super Bowl hyperbole might be just another example of the excesses of the 80's.


Miscellany
*
T.
L.
I.
International Corp., in association with Trans World International, has secured rights to broadcast Super Bowl XXVI, with commercials, in the countries of the former Soviet Union.
An edited version of the game will appear in March.
For the last five years, T. L. I. has broadcast the Super Bowl, with commercials, in China. *
The Media Center, a media marketing and sales training company, is being started in New York by three former executives at the Television Bureau of Advertising, Timothy P. Cornillie, Charles A. Hanson and Barbara A. Zeiger.


Castro Cracking Down As the Hardships Grow
With Cuba's economy spiraling sharply downward, leading ever-larger numbers of citizens toward desperate efforts to flee the island, the Government of President Fidel Castro has stepped up efforts to crush internal opposition.
At the same time, it is seeking to forge greater unity by raising the specter of invasion by the United States.
After a year in which more than 2,000 Cubans escaped the island on makeshift rafts, the largest number of refugees since the Mariel boatlift in 1981, the New Year began with a spate of spectacular new efforts by its citizens to flee a life where annoying shortages have given way to grinding hardship in the wake of the dissolution of the Soviet Union.


A Long, Circuitous Course
The start of the defenders' trial races Tuesday will be the beginning of a three-month ordeal for two American teams.
At the end of it, in April, one boat will have claimed the right to defend the America's Cup in May for the San Diego Yacht Club.
The schedule for the defense trials at first calls for four sets of match races, with each series lasting about two weeks.


Student Loan Marketing Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Correction: The Race of the Sexes
A chart last Tuesday abaout the running speeds of men and women misstated projections of the years when women would theoretically catch up with menm in major events.
The corrected chart above shows average running velocity for record-holders of both sexes in major events in meters per minute; the historical trend is extrapolated to the point where women would catch up with men.


D'Amato Cleared in Roosevelt Raceway Sale
The New York State Investigation Commission said today that it had found no criminal wrongdoing in the publicly financed purchase of Roosevelt Raceway by private investors in 1984 or in Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's efforts to secure Federal tax relief for the raceway.
The commission's report, issued after an 18-month inquiry, was another victory for Senator D'Amato, who was cleared last August by the Senate Ethics Committee after accusations that he had violated Senate rules and Federal laws to help campaign contributors and political associates.


A Critical Exchange for Skating
Dick Button knows that criticizing the performance of a popular figure skater can jangle a raw nerve.
But the ABC analyst and two-time Olympic gold medalist says his critique of Christopher Bowman last weekend at the United States championships was designed to help, not hurt, Bowman.
Button labeled Bowman's calculatedly stodgy program "ordinary, boring, slow, conservative and sedate" -- the kind of analysis that doubles as provocation for those disinclined to agree.


Taylor Devices Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cloth Diaper Closings Set By Gerber
Citing declining consumer belief in the environmental benefits of cloth diapers, as well as foreign competition, the Gerber Products Company said yesterday that it would close three cloth-weaving operations.
The move will result in 900 layoffs and a $16 million charge against earnings in the company's third quarter, which ended on Dec. 31.
Gerber said its cloth diaper sales were likely to be about $30 million in the year ending on March 31, off about 40 percent from the previous year.
The company, by far the largest supplier of cloth diapers, said declining sales had forced it to buy cloth from low-cost domestic and foreign textile weavers.


Attica Jury Is Still Out
As the jury in the trial to determine four New York State officials' liability in the 1971 Attica prison insurrection completed its third day of deliberations today, a verdict seemed ever less imminent.
The nine-member panel again viewed videotapes of the retaking of the prison on Sept. 13, 1971, and asked to rehear more than 40 hours of taped testimony by New York State troopers who were involved in quelling the five-day siege at the maximum-security prison 30 miles east of here.
Meanwhile, the judge, John T. Elfvin, is scheduled to leave on Wednesday for a three-week vacation in Barbados, though court officials said the judge would turn the case over to a magistrate and follow proceedings from the Caribbean.
Lawyers for the 1,281 inmates filed the civil-liability suit against the state officials in 1974.


Parker Drilling Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Marion Merrell Chief Braces for Patent Fight
Fred W. Lyons Jr., Marion Merrell Dow Inc.'s new chief executive, calls the company's achievements in preparing for the future more important than its formidable 20 percent earnings gain in 1991.
Mr.
Lyons, 56 years old, was promoted on Jan. 1, succeeding Joseph G. Temple Jr., 62, who is staying on as chairman.
Mr.
Lyons is girding for a tough challenge as patent protection for Marion Merrell Dow's two main drugs expires.
The expiration this month for Cardizem, a blood-pressure drug with annual sales of $900 million, threatens a product that accounts for 36 percent of the company's total sales, which were $2.5 billion last year.
And Seldane, a non-sedative antihistamine that had $700 million in worldwide sales, faces the loss of patent protection in April 1994.


Lithuanians Pause to Honor Those Killed in Soviet Crackdown a Year Ago


Dow Off 13.86, to 3,185.60, on Heavy Volume
Blue-chip stock prices fell yesterday, while secondary issues held onto gains in choppy but heavy trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed down 13.86 points, to 3,185.60.
Traders said the market consolidation that began late last week was aided by several factors, including soft bond prices, a sharp overnight decline in the Tokyo market and growing investor concern that the Fed will not lower interest rates any time soon.


Careers; For M.B.A.'s, Dim Outlook This Spring
MORE than 70,000 M.B.A.'s will be awarded this spring, but many proud holders of those degrees will find slim pickings in the job market.
Recession has stripped away whole layers of middle management, and even companies that are hiring aggressively, like financial firms, are taking experienced people who have been laid off elsewhere.
Those who are lucky enough to find jobs will have to settle for less than the $60,000 to $70,000 typically offered by many large companies in the New York area.
And many will end up with small- to mid-sized companies.
William E. Mayer, dean of the William E. Simon Graduate School of Business Administration at the University of Rochester, suggested one possible outcome of this fierce competition for jobs.
"We see many fewer graduate business schools in the future," he said, citing about 900 currently, which might eventually evolve into 75 or so.
"Only the best ones will survive."


Maxwells Won't Talk In Parliament
Responding to subpoenas, Ian and Kevin Maxwell appeared with their lawyers today before a committee of the House of Commons but refused to testify.
The lawyers said the brothers would not answer questions at such a televised hearing.
One big reason, they said, was that such public testimony would violate their clients' right not to have to say anything that might be self-incriminating.
They noted that civil legal proceedings in the Maxwell scandal were already under way and that it was possible that criminal charges would be filed against one or both brothers.


Iona Appliances reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
APAC Inc., Ashland, Ky., the highway construction unit of Inc., named Charles F. Potts president of the unit and corporate senior vice president.
Mr.
Potts succeeds G. William Jones, who is retiring.
*
Bachman Information Systems Inc., Burlington, Mass., a software supplier, announced that Paul K. McGrath, vice president for finance and administration and treasurer, had been named to the additional post of chief financial officer.


Sherwood Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Moses Prefers Hurdles
EDWIN MOSES has decided he will pass up a second chance to make the United States Olympic bobsled team, instead saying yesterday in Los Angeles that he would concentrate on training for the 400-meter hurdles in the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
An arbitrator ruled over the weekend that the bobsled team wasn't picked fairly and ordered a new round of tryouts.


Anthony Garvan, 80, Architecture Historian
Dr.
Anthony N. B. Garvan, an architectural historian, died on Friday at Chestnut Hill Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 74 years old and lived in Spring House, Pa.
He died of heart failure, said his wife, Beatrice.


Picked Up by Buffalo And Enjoying the Ride
Earlier this week Bills cornerback Kirby Jackson didn't speak with bitterness when he discussed being drafted and then cut by the New York Jets in 1987.
He wanted to concentrate on his tenure with Buffalo, which will be making its second consecutive trip to the Super Bowl after defeating Denver, 10-7, on Sunday.


Hispanic Boy Attacked By 3 Whites in the Bronx
Three white teen-agers attacked a 12-year-old Hispanic boy on his way to school in the Bronx yesterday morning, punching him and smearing white makeup on his face in what the police said was a copycat crime.
The attack occurred on a grassy strip along Pelham Parkway South near White Plains Road, south of the Williamsbridge neighborhood where a black brother and sister were beaten up in a bias attack last week by a group of youths who claimed to belong to a gang calling itself "A.B.I.," for Albanian Boys Inc.


Unilens Optical Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MGM-Pathe Communications Co.  reports earnings for 13wks to Sept 28


Candidate With U.S. Citizenship Blocks Clear Victory in Bulgaria
The surprising third-place finish of a dark horse candidate who holds United States as well as Bulgarian citizenship was being credited today with siphoning off votes that would have given President Zhelyu Zhelev a clear victory in this country's first direct presidential elections on Sunday.
In tallies reported today Mr.
Zhelev, the candidate of the Union of Democratic Forces, received almost 45 percent of the vote.
Velko Valkanov, the candidate of the Socialist Party, which evolved from the former ruling Communist Party, received 30.6 percent of the vote for a strong showing in a field of 21 contenders.
Mr.
Zhelev and Mr.
Valkanov will now face off in a second round, since neither won a majority.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-14  WAY IS CLEARED FOR MIDEAST TALKS
Palestinian and Israeli negotiators settled a procedural dispute that has stalled the start of talks between them for more than a month.
Talks can now also begin between Israel and Jordan.
A1  ISRAEL AND THE LOAN GUARANTEES
Israel's leaders were said to be increasingly resigned to the likelihood that they will get far less than the $10 billion in United States loan guarantees that they are seeking to resettle new immigrants.
A14  A Palestinian pleaded his case against deportation in public.
A14  Hopes are high for an Israeli-Lebanese prisoner exchange.
A14  UPRISING IS URGED IN ALGERIA
Islamic fundamentalists called upon Algerians to rise up against the military and civilian leaders who canceled parliamentary elections that were sure to give the fundamentalists a majority in Parliament.
A1  France expressed concern about developments in Algeria.
A7  KUWAITI MILITARY LITTLE CHANGED
The invasion by Iraq has done little to disrupt the patronage system and incompetence of the Kuwait military, Western diplomats say.
A4  RUSSIAN PRICE PROTESTS GROWING
With the harsh fact of price rises sinking in across Russia, the Speaker of the republic's Parliament called for the resignation of the Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin.
A3  UKRAINIAN POINTS TO CONCILIATION
President Leonid M. Kravchuk said Ukraine was smoothing out its sharp political and military disagreements with Russia.
A3  WALESA DISCUSSES POLAND'S WOES
If he were still a shipyard electrician instead of President of Poland, Lech Walesa said, he would be out leading anti-Government protests.
A2  JAPAN ADMITS A WAR ATROCITY
Japan admitted that its army had forced Korean women to have sex with its soldiers during World War II, and hinted at compensation.
A8  Cuba has stepped up efforts to crush internal opposition.
A10  Canada granted refugee status to a persecuted homosexual.
A10  The language issue has arisen again to vex Canadians.
A10  The Vatican formally recognized Croatia and Slovenia.
A3  A dark horse kept Bulgaria's President from winning a majority.
A2  Trade disputes with Washington worry Chinese businesses.
A9  National A16-19  LABOR AND POLITICS OF '92
Stung by election defeats in the 1980's, labor unions are avoiding endorsements of candidates in Presidential primaries in 1992 and are telling their state and local affiliates to pick their own candidates, a strategy that could pay early dividends for Gov.
Clinton of Arkansas.
A1  COMPANY DEFENDS IMPLANTS
Dow Corning defended its silicone gel breast implants and called critical news reports "a total mischaracterization of the facts." A1  REVIEW OF VEHICLE SAFETY
The Federal highway safety agency has begun reviewing how to prevent accidents in which a vehicle goes tumbling out of control, and it could lead to mandatory design changes in many small cars, pickups and off-road vehicles.
A16  General Motors recalled 1.5 million cars for an engine defect.
D2  RISE, AND DECLINE, OF WEST
The West is hot in music, movies, tourism, fashion.
But for all the popularity of cowboys, ranchers said they were under siege.
A16  WINTER OF DISCONTENT
As the Presidential campaign begins in earnest, the mood in New Hampshire small towns and villages is one of almost unrelieved gloom.
A18  FRONT-RUNNER, BEWARE
What momentum there currently is in the Democratic Presidential campaign is clearly with Gov.
Clinton, but if history is a judge, Mr.
Clinton should be wary.
A18  THE 'NEW' LOUISIANA GOVERNOR
Edwin Edwards is again Governor of Louisiana, but many people still wonder if the high-rolling politician has really settled down.
A19  BUSH ON THE ATTACK
Previewing the themes of his re-election campaign, President Bush presented himself to farmers as the candidate "savvy" enough to maintain America's position of leadership in the world.
A19  PRESSURE ON DEATH PENALTY
The Supreme Court strongly rebuked a Federal appeals court that has blocked an execution in Washington State for more than two years.
A19  Trial ordered in dispute over the Martin Luther King papers.
A16  Metropolitan Digest, B1 2D BOND DOWNGRADING
A week after the censure of another Wall Street monitor, Standard &amp; Poor's yesterday lowered its rating on a wide range of New York State securities.
Because the downgrading affects virtually all of the state's debt, it is considered far more damaging than the previous one.A1  MORE CHILDREN, NO MORE BENEFITS
The New Jersey Senate approved and sent to the Governor a package of welfare revisions that would cut off additional benefits to welfare mothers who have more children and cut or eliminate payments to those who refuse to train for work or go to school.
A1  NOW, FROM COLOMBIA
Colombia's drug lords, who flooded the United States with cocaine in the 1980's, have added a new product, heroin, and are now shipping it to New York and other cities, to the dismay of law-enforcement officials.
A1  Neediest Cases B3  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-10  In Russia, secret weapons laboratories struggle to survive.
C1  Debate on buildings: to scrub off the grime or not.
C1  Computers help Chilean dead tell their tales.
C1  Obituaries B6  T. Eric Embry, retired jurist and lawyer  Sports B7-13  Basketball: Tulane stays unbeaten.
B9  Football: Redskins had eye on Bills.B7  Bills seek redemption.
B7  Column: Berkow on the Super Bowl.
B7  Hockey: Mallette to give Devils rough edge.
B8  Fashion Page A20  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Oscar push for "Europa." C11  Music: "Turandot" with Hockney sets.
C11  Word and Image: "Today at 40." C11  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  The excuse maker.
Algeria: democracy betrayed.
"Logic" in I.R.A. zealotry.
Still abusing Legal Services.
Letters A22  Russell Baker: Bunkhouse follies.
A23  A. M. Rosenthal: Detesting the haters.
A23  Ian Shoales: Get a life, not a gadget.
A23  Richard Preston: Lean, mean and American.
A23


Qume Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


How to Curb Campus Alcohol Abuse
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 31 front-page article on abusive campus drinking mentions that more and more institutions ban the serving of alcohol on campus.
This tempting extreme risks pushing drinking underground or into off-campus sites, from which students often drive away inebriated.
Another approach, evolving in the last five years at places like Connecticut College, bears consideration.


Pioneer Hi-Bred International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Nassau Board Democrats Call Hearings, and G.O.P. Cries Foul
The Republican majority on the Nassau County Board of Supervisors today accused the Democratic minority of "using the worst kind of political smoke and mirrors" as a "veiled prelude for a call for higher taxes."
The Democrats quickly fired back, accusing the Republicans of "insensitivity to the voters" and "playing politics at the expense of county employees who will be laid off" because of budget cuts.


Doctor With Revoked License Is Arrested in Abortion Case
A Queens gynecologist whose medical license was revoked after state health officials found he had performed abortions in a "grossly incompetent manner" was arrested yesterday preparing to perform another abortion, law-enforcement authorities said.
The doctor, Ming Kow Hah, lost his license in August for cases that included leaving the head of one fetus inside his patient.
He was arrested yesterday after he agreed to perform an abortion on an undercover investigator, the authorities said.


Snows of Yesteryear
To the Editor:
If every mom had been persuaded not to trash all those comic books, now worth thousands of dollars, that you lament in "Wow! Zap! Ugh!" (editorial, Dec. 23), there would be no market for them today, and attics and garages would be overrun with comic books of no value.
I never collected them, so I don't care much.


Long Gone, Largely Forgotten, and Yet Such a Memorable Life
DOES Brando do TV?
Because the life of this dead guy from New Rochelle would make a fantastic mini-series.
On Monday night, see, the hero, a teen-ager in England, runs away to become a pirate -- sea battles, sword fights, the works.
On Tuesday, he falls in with a revolutionary underground plotting against the king -- secret midnight meetings, etc., O.K.?
On Wednesday, he crosses the Atlantic, finds the revolution flagging.
It's winter, Valley Forge, that whole bit.
What?
Right, the times that try men's souls, very good.


Corrections
A chart in Science Times last Tuesday about the running speeds of men and women misstated projections of the years when women would theoretically catch up with men in major events.
A corrected chart appears today on page C3.


Crestar Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Southern National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FOOTBALL: The N.F.L.'s Ideal Couple Prepares for Battle; One Objective Left for Buffalo: Super Bowl Title
All year long, the Bills kept a tight reign on their emotions and a sharp eye on their goals.
They maintained a businesslike approach to each game, never getting too high or too low after victories or defeats.
That attitude helped them reach their goals of winning the American Football Conference Eastern Division and the A.F.C. championship.
In the wake of Sunday's 10-7 victory over Denver, the Bills are hoping that same attitude will help them accomplish the last objective on their list, which is winning the Super Bowl.
And they will get their chance when they play Washington in Super Bowl XXVI at Minneapolis on Jan. 26.


Shirt-Sleeve Weather in January


The 1992 Campaign
A daily report on national politics begins today. Page A18.


National Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jets Hire a Coach for Their Quarterbacks -- Make That Nagle
Bruce Coslet finally let the other shoe drop yesterday in his plans to prepare Browning Nagle to take over the Jets' quarterbacking job next season.
The Jets announced the hiring of Walt Harris, head coach at the University of the Pacific, as Coslet's new quarterbacks coach.
Only a week ago the Jets announced they would not renew the contract of Joe Daniels, who had been the quarterback coach for the first two years of the Coslet regime.


Surgical Scorecards: Can Doctors Be Rated Just Like Ballplayers?
For patients facing a heart operation, a crucial question is: how good is my surgeon?
Until recent weeks, there was no objective way to answer that with statistics giving a surgical batting average.
But now the questions are taking on new importance following the New York State Health Department's reluctant disclosure of death statistics for each heart surgeon.
A New York State Supreme Court order resulting from Newsday's request under the freedom of information law forced health officials to release data they had been collecting over recent years.
They revealed wide variations between hospitals and among surgeons within the same institution.


Electro Rent Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Russian Is Sky-High in U.S.
A year ago, when Maksim Tarasov came to the United States from Russia to pole-vault, he stayed for a month with the family of Eugene Dall, the track coach at North Rockland High School in Thiels, N.Y.
Dall's son, Bryan, learned enough from his father and their house guest to vault 14 feet, a New York State record for a sophomore.
Tarasov is staying with the family again for five weeks.
At age 21, he is the world's third-ranking vaulter, with a career best of 19 feet 2 1/4 inches.


Bank Ruling Is Let Stand
The Supreme Court let stand today a ruling allowing state-chartered units of banks to sell insurance if allowed under state law.
The move dealt a blow to insurers' efforts to keep banks out of their business.
The Court, without comment, denied an appeal by a number of insurance groups of a ruling last June by a Federal appeals court in New York.
The ruling and its affirmation were expected to encourage banks to move into insurance nationwide.


Changes in Canada By 2 Big U.S. Shops
Two American agencies are making changes in their Canadian advertising operations.
J.
Walter Thompson North America, New York, said the Montreal office of its Canadian unit had merged with Blouin Coulombe Dube in Montreal.
Jacques Blouin, a former principal at Blouin Coulombe Dube, has been named the president of the new agency, to be called Blouin Coulombe Dube Thompson.
No terms were disclosed.


Comprehensive Care Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Intervoice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Clayton Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; A Mountain Out of A Super Hill
ONLY 12 more shopping days until the Super Bowl.
Only 12 more days to buy your Redskin headdresses, or war paint, or hog snouts ("hogs" being the nickname within the nickname for the team's offensive linemen).
Only 12 more days to buy your buffaloes, Bill, and hoofs and horns and other beasty accessories in order to highlight your affection for one of the participating teams in this great corporate enterprise.
Now in its 26th year, the Super Bowl has become something beyond a game.
It is a national institution, a cash-flow operation like the Treasury Department; and a national momument, like Grant's Tomb or Mount Rushmore, or at least Disneyland.


G.M. Announces Recall To Repair V6 Engines
The General Motors Corporation confirmed today that it was recalling about 1.5 million cars to repair defective V6 engines.
The announcement comes at an awkward time for G.M. as it tries to win back American customers by saying that the quality of its cars matches that of Japanese autos.


Patterns
It's Already a Long Winter
Like it or not, new and strangely difficult times are upon us.
It's time for the traditional January clearance sales, but most consumers will hardly notice, since the stores have been running sales since before Thanksgiving.


Mr. Bush, Still Abusing Legal Services
President Bush has once again deviously resorted to a device known as the recess appointment to weaken the Legal Services Corporation -- a valued Federal agency that provides legal help to poor people who have no other means of defending their rights.
On Friday, with Congress out of session, Mr.
Bush renamed 10 board members whose previous recess appointments had expired.
The 11th member, appointed during last summer's recess, continues to sit.
Few of the 11 support a vigorous poverty law program and some have worked to kill it.


A Preliminary Gun Sounds Today for America's Cup 1992
On Sunday night, the San Diego Yacht Club threw a pep rally that looked more like a Desert Storm send-off than a prelude to Tuesday's start of elimination races for its two America's Cup defense teams.
Young children of yachtsmen wearing red, white and blue uniforms waved red, white and blue flags as if their little arms would fall off.
But the enthusiasm did little to disguise the fact that the two teams are America's Cup underdogs.


First Commerce Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


McCormick &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


United Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


T.W.A. to Lure Business Class With Fare Cuts and Rebates
In a challenge to American Airlines, which recently announced business-class service on domestic flights, Trans World Airlines this week will begin offering round-trip business-class fares of $1,100 on its coast-to-coast flights.
In addition, T.W.A. will rebate at least 12 percent of the fares, in the form of credits that can be exchanged for cash.
The new, unrestricted fares are almost $900 lower than the $1,976 round-trip fare between New York and Los Angeles that American said it might charge when it introduces business-class service on that route next month, and $300 less than T.W.A.'s current lowest unrestricted business-class fares on transcontinental flights.


Jury Change Sought
Lawyers for MIKE TYSON asked a judge in Indianapolis yestserday to broaden the pool of potential jurors for his Jan. 27 rape trial, contending that the Marion County system drew too few members of minority groups to jury duty.
The lawyers representing the 25-year-old former heavyweight champion filed a motion asking Marion Superior Court Judge PATRICIA GIFFORD to add names from utility customer lists, motor vehicle licensing files or telephone directories.
Potential jurors in Marion County are drawn from voter registration lists.


If the Need Is to Knot
After designing custom clothes for a few seasons, Gene Meyer turned his attention a year ago to scarfs.
His designs proved so original and his colors so cheerful that stores suggested that he try his hand at men's ties, whose sales were booming. (They were one of the few fashion areas that saw increases in the recent holiday selling period.)
But there was a wrinkle: Stores began asking for ties to sell to women.


Cordero Injured
ANGEL CORDERO JR., the most seriously injured of four jockeys involved in a chain-reaction spill Sunday at Aqueduct, remained in intensive care yesterday at Long Island Jewish Hospital.
Cordero, 49 years old, broke his right arm and three ribs in the accident in the second race.


An Unruffled Look For Stormy Times
Look at the shirtdress as an antidote to the exaggerated feminine styles that have paced fashion since Christian Lacroix successfully introduced his bubble-shape dresses five years ago.
Or consider it the counterpoint to the underwear-as-outerwear, skin-baring, hauntingly-low-neckline styles that are flourishing for spring.
Shirts and shirtdresses offer a neat, tailored alternative to flouncy, transparent, obviously seductive clothes.


SI Handling Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 1


Trenton Democrats Go Home Kicking
After a raucous two-year term that produced a record $2.8 billion tax increase, revolutionized the way the state finances secondary education, changed the way its drivers are insured and established one of the nation's toughest bans on assault weapons, the 204th session of the New Jersey Legislature ended today.
And with it died Democratic legislative control.
The 205th Legislature convenes at 12:01 P.M. on Tuesday, when Republican majorities take over in both the Assembly and the Senate.
In a frenzied final burst of activity, the outgoing Legislature completed its official business today, racing through 156 bills.


Market Place; Making a Case For U S Sprint
IF MCI is David to A.T.&amp;T.'s Goliath, then U S Sprint is David's smaller brother.
As 1991 ended, Robert B. Morris of Goldman, Sachs estimates, U S Sprint had 9.8 percent of the market for long-distance calls, based on minutes of use, up slightly from 9.5 percent the year before.
That is about half of MCI's 19 percent, which was up from the 18.4 percent a year earlier.
He estimates A.T.&amp;T. had 67 percent, down from 68.2 percent in 1990.


Alamo Limiting Car Rentals
Alamo Rent-a-Car Inc. said yesterday that because of excessive damage by people who rent in their hometowns, such local renters in some cities would have to apply in advance for a "safe driver" card.
Applicants would pay $10 and have their driver's license records examined; those with a moving violation in the last 24 months would be rejected.


Short (C.A.) International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Morgan (J.P.)&amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Seaway Food Town reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Vatican Formally Recognizes Independence of Croatia and Slovenia
Reversing earlier indications that it would await diplomatic cover from European governments, the Vatican formally recognized the independence of Croatia and Slovenia today, underscoring Pope John Paul II's desire to show strong support for the predominantly Roman Catholic republics.
In recent days, Vatican officials said behind the scenes that the Catholic Church would delay its symbolically important recognition of the two separatist states until Jan. 15, the European Community deadline for replying to requests for recognition from the component parts of the crumbling Yugoslav federation.


Jansko Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Business Scene; Getting the Most From Each Ruble
MINDFUL of Russia's destructively high inflation, the Savings Bank of Russia announced higher interest rates last week for the millions of people who keep their savings in the bank's numerous branches.
Rates on passbook accounts went to 3 percent from 2 percent, while the returns on certificates of deposit now range as high as 15 percent for a five-year certificate, up suddenly from 9 percent.
That is not much help when the annual inflation rate is more than 300 percent and a 15,000-ruble account -- for many middle-class Russians a once-handsome sum that two years ago could buy a country dacha -- is now barely enough to keep a family in food and other necessities for a few months.


Script Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Line Is Forming for Title Shot
Things change.
Just recently, Evander Holyfield seemed so close to signing for a March 20 heavyweight title rematch with George Foreman at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev.
But suddenly, Riddick Bowe has moved center stage in the backroom maneuvers that have arisen in response to the the position taken by Jose Sulaiman, the president of the World Boxing Council.
Late last week, Sulaiman said that Mike Tyson and only Mike Tyson would get the next shot at Holyfield's title.
Sulaiman said he had spoken to Tyson, who had assured him that he would be training before, during and after his Jan. 27 rape trial in Indianapolis.


TV Guide to Cut Rate Base Again
TV Guide will cut its rate base, the circulation guaranteed to advertisers, for the second time in eight months.
The weekly magazine will also raise its cover price and reduce its advertising rates.
Effective with the March 7 issue, the rate base will drop by 7.9 percent, to 14 million from 15.2 million.
The cover price, now 79 cents, will rise to 85 cents or 89 cents, depending upon the outcome of tests in local markets, TV Guide said.
Ad rates will be reduced by 4 percent; a four-color ad page, for example, will drop to $112,700 from $117,350.


William Range, 86, Salvation Army Aide
Col.
William Range, a former director of Greater New York operations for the Salvation Army, died on Jan. 6 at Community Hospital in Chelsea, Mich.
He was 86 years old and lived in Asbury Park, N.J., before moving to Chelsea last fall.
He died from complications following gall bladder surgery, the Salvation Army reported in New York.


Review/Dance; Mazowsze in Selection of Polish Regional Works
The costumes were exquisite, the performers were charming and the dances and musical interludes were nicely balanced between the lilting and the vigorous when Mazowsze, the Polish State Ensemble of Folk Song and Dance, performed on Sunday afternoon at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College.
But the greatest -- and much rarer -- virtue of the program was its integrity.
Mira Ziminska-Sygietynska, the director of the 44-year-old troupe, knows how to put together a fast-paced and entertaining program.
But with one shameless though enjoyable exception -- a suite of American traditional songs -- there seemed to be little thought of enticing the audience with unwarranted glitter and razzle-dazzle.
Some amount of theatricalization is necessary to bring any folk art to the stage.
But here were dances and songs from most of the regions of Poland, alluding to most of the important ceremonies of Polish life and culture, and one felt free to take from them what one would.


Digital Back in PC Market With Bold Mail-Order Plans
Nearly 10 years after the first of several forays into the personal computer market, the Digital Equipment Corporation is starting a major campaign to sell the desktop machines -- this time, through mail-order channels.
Digital is slashing the prices of its current PC line by up to 50 percent, going head to head with companies like Dell Computer Inc. and Gateway 2000 for a slice of the nearly $1.5 billion mail-order market for personal computers.
According to the International Data Corporation, the mail-order business makes up 5 percent of the $26.9 billion market.


People
*
Mary Conrad, 39 years old; Steve Seyferth, 37, and Martin Sherrod, 37, senior vice presidents at Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago, have been named to the new positions of group account directors, supervising account management. *
Mitch Lurin has been named president at Mendelsohn Media Research Inc., New York, succeeding Fred Engelman, whose contract expired.
He had been vice president and director of marketing services at The Ladies' Home Journal.


Facing Strikes, Walesa Laughs at History's Joke
With the Polish Government facing threats of a national strike from the increasingly assertive Solidarity trade union, President Lech Walesa, who founded the union, grinned puckishly today as he reflected on how history had heaped paradox upon paradox.
Mr.
Walesa, the only chief of state in the recently post-Communist world to have begun his career as a worker among what were once called the masses, said that "only after the revolutions in Moscow, Prague and Budapest," were the working-class ideals cited by the previous rulers gaining real force.


As Redskins Progress, Gibbs Stays a Constant Amid the Transitions
The Redskins are headed for their fourth Super Bowl in nine seasons.
They have achieved that with three quarterbacks -- Joe Theismann in the 1982 and 1983 seasons, Doug Williams in 1987 and Mark Rypien now -- and, except for the offensive line, other interchangeable parts.
One constant has been the coach, 51-year-old Joe Gibbs.
In his 11 years, the Redskins have the National Football League's best playoff record (14-4) and the second best overall record (127-57 to the San Francisco 49ers' 136-50-1).


Sudbury Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Natural Lawn Product
A corn protein in chicken feed is the first plant product found to be effective as both a weed killer and a turf fertilizer, a researcher says.
The researcher, Dr.
Nick Christians, a professor of horticulture at Iowa State University, said the protein, corn gluten, when applied to lawns in early spring, prevented crabgrass and other weeds from forming roots.
At the same time, it fertilizes the lawn.


More Drilling Set in Colombia Oilfield
In its most direct confirmation to date of a huge oilfield discovery in Colombia, the British Petroleum Company said today that it would sharply increase drilling activity this year in the Cusiana field, about 100 miles east of Bogota.
Many analysts say the Cusiana field holds more than three billion barrels of recoverable crude, which would make it the largest discovery in the Western Hemisphere since Prudhoe Bay in Alaska, with 10 billion barrels, was recorded in 1968.


The Talk of Hollywood; 'Europa' Surfaces In Oscar Angling
As Academy Award fever seizes this town, the angriest and most emotional controversy is not over Oliver Stone's "J. F. K," but instead over a foreign film called "Europa, Europa." And the ramifications reach far beyond Hollywood.
The startling and highly acclaimed movie is based on the autobiography of Solomon Perel, now 65 years old and living in Israel, who survived World War II by hiding his Jewish identity in Poland, slipping into the German Army invading Russia and finally attending an elite school for Hitler's youth.
Terrified of being revealed as a Jew, the boy encounters, on a nightmare journey that is sometimes darkly funny, a German Army officer and a woman who learn his identity but protect him.


New York Needs Anti-Auto Theft Authority
To the Editor:
"Gloria Yellin was getting into her car in a parking lot near her office," you report Dec. 23, "when she was suddenly grabbed from behind by a man with a gun. He took her keys, jumped into the car and sped away."


Oneok Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Unless We All Speak Up for Salman Rushdie; Rules of Peace
To the Editor:
I do not believe that Salman Rushdie's situation should be considered a conflict between the right to protect and defend one's religion versus free speech, as a United Nations official suggests to Leslie H. Gelb (column, Dec. 29).
While in no way diminishing these freedoms, I believe the issue is over the right of the government of one country to control an individual over whom it has no jurisdiction.


Colgate Selects Murphy
MARK MURPHY, who went from free agent to All-Pro defensive back for the Washington Redskins, was named yesterday as athletic director at Colgate, his alma mater.
Murphy, 36 years old, replaces FRED DUNLAP, his former coach at Colgate, who is retiring after 16 years as athletic director. (AP)


Illness, Injury and McEnroe Triumph
Steffi Graf, seeded No. 2 at the Australian Open, withdrew from the Grand Slam event today because of illness hours before her scheduled opening match.
Suzette Betteridge, a representative of the Kraft women's tour, said that Graf was suffering from a viral illness and had been advised to withdraw by a physician.
Her withdrawal came a day after Pete Sampras, the sixth-seeded men's player, withdrew because of a shoulder injury.


France Voices Concern on Algerian Situation
France, which for more than a century was Algeria's colonial master and to this day is home to 800,000 of its people, expressed concern today about developments in Algeria but pointedly avoided condemning the cancellation of the country's electoral process.
"It's not up to France to judge these events," Daniel Bernard, chief spokesman at the French Foreign Ministry, said.
"It is up to the Algerian people to decide their future."


Laidlaw Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Classical Music in Review
The Bronx Opera
Lehman Center for the Performing Arts
Carlisle Floyd's "Susannah" not only delves into American folk art; it is, in a way, folk art itself.
Hymns and ballads are picked up and carried almost whole into the middle of the 20th century.
Mr.
Floyd's work has been to synthesize and expand.
Taken on its own terms, the opera works affectingly and deserves the busy life it has led since 1955.


To Take a Step Against the Tide
Denim sneakers with silver mesh sides, thongs decorated with multicolor flowers, high platform wedges with cutouts under the arch: These are some of the fanciful shoes that Stuart Weitzman is offering for spring and summer.
The only basic pump he shows has a modest platform sole.
Mr.
Weitzman is not particularly interested in classics.
Bucking the tide, he has managed to sell his shoes to stores in 29 countries, becoming one of the very few American designers to sell abroad.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Citicorp said it would report a quarterly loss of $125 million to $150 million, mostly because of bad real estate loans, but would earn a profit this year.
There is little Citicorp can do quickly to cure problems with bad loans, but it said it was making progress in reducing expenses in corporate and consumer banking.  [ Page D1. ]


Secom General Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CFCF Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.62
6.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.83
3.80
6.12
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.87
3.86
6.21
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.66
6.35
8.03
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.50
7.45
8.35
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.70
8.65
9.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.67
6.65
7.51
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Classical Music in Review
New York Chamber Symphony
92d Street Y
The Dutch conductor Hans Vonk, a large man accustomed to working in grand halls, seemed an outsize presence on the tiny stage of the 92d Street Y on Saturday evening.
And the image proved apt to the big, burly sonority Mr.
Vonk drew from the New York Chamber Symphony in the overture to Mozart's "Impresario," which opened the program.


Florio Sees Jobs in $418 Million Bond Measure
Gov.
Jim Florio signed legislation today authorizing the state to issue $418 million in bonds to revise the debt of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, to build a new convention center in Atlantic City and to expand Rutgers University's football stadium.
"This bill is about jobs and it's about investing in our state's future," Mr.
Florio said.


Market Place; Making a Case For U S Sprint
IF MCI is David to A.T.&amp;T.'s Goliath, then U S Sprint is David's smaller brother.
As 1991 ended, Robert B. Morris of Goldman, Sachs estimates, U S Sprint had 9.8 percent of the market for long-distance calls, based on minutes of use, up slightly from 9.5 percent the year before.
That is about half of MCI's 19 percent, which was up from the 18.4 percent a year earlier.
He estimates A.T.&amp;T. had 67 percent, down from 68.2 percent in 1990.


By Design; For Hiking Cement Trails
These boots were made for hiking in the country, but this winter they have become a big-city hit.
Usually with uppers of brown waterproof leather or suede, and made with sturdy corrugated soles, they lace snugly up to just above the ankle.
The boots give a new proportion to above-the-knee swingy coats or thick tights, leggings or trim-line stirrup pants.
They can be worn with an extra pair of socks poking out over the top, but they look most elegant when the pants or other leg coverings tuck cleanly into them.


Mid Am Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


It May Be Elusive but Moth With 15-Inch Tongue Should Be Out There
IT may never have been seen by human eyes, and it certainly has never been described in the scientific literature, but somewhere in the dense tropical highlands of Madagascar there must flutter a moth with a tongue that measures 15 inches in length, a scientist says.
Speaking recently at an entomology meeting in Reno, Nev., Dr.
Gene Kritsky of the College of Mount St.
Joseph in Ohio said that there was no alternative but to posit the existence of a giant moth with a six-inch wingspan and a longer proboscis than any yet seen on an insect.
He made his prediction based on the existence of a rare orchid in Madagascar, a flower that could only be pollinated by a moth able to stick its tongue way down a tube where a pool of tempting nectar is hidden.


Chess
The recession is having its effect on Swiss-system open tournaments in the United States.
Entries are down, and since entry fees are almost always the source of financing for this type of competition, so are the prizes.
The American Open at the Marriott LAX Hotel in Los Angeles at Thanksgiving was typical: only 320 players turned out when 500 were needed to sustain the hoped-for prize list.
Thus, the winner, Joel Benjamin, was awarded $1,800 instead of the intended $3,000.
Benjamin, a New York grandmaster, had scored 7-1 in the eight-round event to finish a half-point ahead of the grandmaster Patrick Wolff and the international master Douglas Root, who tied for second place.


Help in Making a Point
MANY people would like to prepare an occasional business presentation, perhaps a series of color slides or overhead transparencies, without learning the ins and outs of one of the leading graphics programs.
Harvard Graphics and Freelance Graphics, the feature-packed and expensive leaders, may be just too powerful for someone who does a handful of presentations a year, or whose responsibilities rule out spending much time on them.
Express Presenter, from Power Up Software of San Mateo, Calif., is meant to fill that person's needs.
Type in the data, and it makes the charts in a consistent style that gives the presentation a professional, planned look.
The difference is that the planning is largely built into the program, and the user will remember how to make another presentation a month or two later.


Prisoner Exchange Expected Soon Between Israel and Muslim Groups
Efforts by the United Nations to arrange an exchange of prisoners between Israel and Shiite Muslim factions in Lebanon have made significant headway and a trade could soon take place, Shiite informants and reports published here today said.
Groups who say they are holding the remains of missing Israeli soldiers have said they are prepared to cooperate.
And an Israeli spokesman reiterated that his Government was willing to free all the Lebanese prisoners it was holding in return for its own men or their remains.


AmSouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Star Multi Care Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Deciding Whether to Renew or Buy
TO buy or to upgrade, that is the question.
Almost all personal computer owners face this decision eventually.
Upgrading a personal computer is not the same thing as fixing it, although a failure often prompts the former.
If the hard disk breaks and has to be replaced anyway, why not add a few dozen megabytes of storage?
If the monitor burns out, it is a good excuse to buy a bigger and more colorful display.


Ex-Backer of Yeltsin Now Attacks Him
With the harsh fact of price rises sinking in across the nation, the Speaker of the Russian Parliament called today for the resignation of the Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin for having enacted "uncontrolled, anarchic" economic reforms.
The call by the Speaker, Ruslan Khasbulatov, was quickly rejected by a spokesman for the Russian Government, which denied as well that Mr.
Yeltsin might resign his second job as Prime Minister in reaction to the growing political protest over price rises.
Mr.
Khasbulatov is a popular politician who had made it clear lately that he was breaking away from Mr.
Yeltsin.


Accounts
*
Lotus Development Corp., Cambridge, Mass., will consolidate its marketing communications at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Boston, which handles its consumer advertising.
Direct-marketing accounts, with billings of more than $13 million, will be shifted from Bronner Slosberg Humphrey, Boston, and from Barry Blau &amp; Partners, Fairfield, Conn., bringing Hill, Holliday's Lotus billings to more than $35 million.


Tide West Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Good Times Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Cruyff to Coach If Dutch Qualify
Johan Cruyff, the Dutch soccer star who was the European player of the year in 1971, 1973 and 1974, has agreed to become coach of the Netherlands national team if it qualifies for the 1994 World Cup, the Royal Dutch Soccer Federation said today.
Cruyff, currently coach of Barcelona in Spain's first division, told Dutch newspapers that only his salary still had to be worked out.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about James P. Willse, the publisher and editor of The Daily News, misstated the position he held in San Francisco with The Associated Press in 1979.
He was news editor, not bureau chief.


Nutramax Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Senate Sends Florio Welfare Bill That Limits Benefits for Mothers
The New Jersey Senate approved and sent to the Governor tonight a package of welfare revisions that would cut off additional benefits to welfare mothers who have more children and cut or eliminate payments to those who refuse to train for work or go to school.
Gov.
Jim Florio is said to favor the basic intent of the legislation, to reduce welfare dependency, but he has not said whether he will sign it.
If he does, and the Federal Government approves, New Jersey will become the first state in the nation to ban welfare benefits for additional children.
At least two other states are considering such a policy.
Strong Opposition
Even with Governor Florio's signature, the sweeping welfare revision, which contains incentives as well as punitive measures, cannot take effect without waivers of some Federal regulations.
Among the provisions that would require waivers are the end of benefits for additional children born to welfare mothers and modifications in grant formulas for married couples or women who marry while in the welfare program.


Debate on Buildings: To Scrub Or Not
FOR the next three to five years, the Lincoln and Jefferson Memorials in Washington, those soaring marble arias to democracy and inspiration for thousands of tourists each week, will be partly obscured by decidedly unpoetic girdles of scaffolding, fences and thick green nets, as workers struggle to shore up the crumbling monuments and restore a bit of their dimming grandeur.
The monuments are suffering, not so much because they have been battered by grit, grime and acid rain or even because pigeons shamelessly roost on the heads of the Presidential statues within, but because in the half century since the monuments were built they have been kept so meticulously clean.
To help assure the appearance of unsullied timelessness at the monuments, the National Park Service hoses down the entire structures twice a year and swabs off the Lincoln statue with detergent and water every other day.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Labor; Big Labor Seeks Ways to Regain Campaign Clout
The major labor unions, seeking to recapture some of the influence they lost in the Presidential elections of the 1980's, are avoiding endorsements in the primaries and telling their state and local affiliates to pick their own candidates.
The unions, which have historically supported Democrats, are important not only because they influence members' votes, but also because they can deliver organizational help to their favored candidates: telephone banks, voter registration drives and campaign mailings.


EXPULSION APPEAL HEARD BY ISRAELIS
As Israeli and Arab negotiators sat down for another round of peace talks in Washington, Marwan Afanah stood before an Israeli military panel today to appeal against his deportation.
Mr.
Afanah, one of 12 Palestinians ordered expelled by the Israeli Government, pleaded his case in public after the High Court of Justice ruled on Sunday that the appeals hearings should be opened, for the first time, to reporters and the deportees' relatives.


Japan Admits Army Forced Koreans to Work in Brothels
Three days before Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa takes his first official trip to South Korea, the Government admitted today that the Japanese Army forced tens of thousands of Korean women to have sex with Japanese soldiers during World War II, and hinted that women who are still alive might receive some kind of compensation.
Until today, Japan's official position has long been that the "comfort girls" were recruited by private entrepreneurs, not the military.


Central Fidelity Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2d Wall St. Agency Downgrades Bond Rating for New York State
Going beyond the censure issued last week by another Wall Street credit monitor, Standard &amp; Poor's today lowered its rating on a wide range of New York State securities, including the bonds regarded as the state's safest investment.
The downgrading will force a state that is struggling to close multibillion-dollar budget gaps to pay millions of dollars in additional interest costs on the sale of new bonds.
Just as damaging, it may also affect the creditworthiness of bonds sold by dozens of school districts from East Islip to Niagara Falls.


Review/Dance; Designs in Space Turning Into Embraces
Although the Peter Pucci Plus Dancers kept reveling in bright ideas on Saturday night at the Joyce Theater, the program -- an attraction of the Altogether Different series -- was most satisfying when Mr.
Pucci's choreography had depth as well as surface sheen.
Mr.
Pucci was particularly eloquent in his new "Love Duets," a work performed in silence by all four members of the troupe: Miguel Aviles, Maureen Mansfield, Ellen Sirot and Mr.
Pucci.
They kept pairing off for choreographically similar duets in which, when the dancers were apart, their poses were impressive for their sculptural beauty.
But as they drew near, their designs in space turned into embraces.


Officer Hurt In a Shooting In Brooklyn
A police officer responding to a landlord-tenant dispute was shot in the head and critically wounded at a house in Brooklyn last night by an enraged tenant who holed up in his attic apartment.
The gunman held off a cordon of police firepower for more than two hours, the police said, then shot himself to death.
Shortly after the 33-year-old officer was shot just above the left eye at 6:45 P.M., police cars swarmed into the Bath Beach neighborhood and heavily armed officers surrounded the house at 181 Bay 31st Street, between Cropsey and Bath Avenues.
The wounded officer was then pulled out and taken to a hospital.


Western Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Alberta's Chief Fans Language Fight
Officials in Ottawa are sensitive to the language struggles that have been almost a constant since the British victory over the French at Quebec in 1759.
So in its latest proposal for a new constitutional arrangement to keep Quebec in Canada, Ottawa has put forward a plan that deals with other strains within the confederation but leaves existing language rights untouched.
But if many of the country's politicians seemed prepared to set the issue aside this time, they had not counted on Premier Donald Getty of Alberta.
Mr.
Getty, facing restiveness among Alberta's mainly English-speaking voters, made a speech in Edmonton last week describing official bilingualism -- the policy guaranteeing the equality of English and French as languages of the federal Government -- as one of the "irritants" vexing Canadians and urging that laws enforcing it be scrapped.


CHRONICLE
DICK HYMAN, the jazz pianist and composer, will be the host of a gala evening of "Broadway Jazz" on Jan. 22 at the 92d Street Y to benefit the Y's School of the Arts.
Joining him will be the pianist and singer BOBBY SHORT, the singer and actress DOROTHY LOUDON and the clarinetist KEN PEPLOWSKI, along with VINCE GIORDANO and the Nighthawks and the young tap dancer TARIK WINSTON, who was featured "Black and Blue."


Treasuries Down 3d Day in a Row
Prices of intermediate- to long-term Treasury securities posted big declines yesterday in moderately active trading.
Traders attributed the downturn, the market's third in a row, partly to a continued reaction to Friday's Congressional testimony by the Federal Reserve Board's chairman, Alan Greenspan.
And new rumors that the Treasury intends to pare the size of its quarterly bond auctions and make up the difference by selling seven-year and ten-year notes on a monthly basis battered prices of all long-term issues.


Big Bank Set To Increase Divestitures
The BankAmerica Corporation, bowing to antitrust concerns expressed by state and Federal regulators, said today that it would sharply increase the amount of deposits to be divested after it completes its proposed acquisition of the Security Pacific Corporation.
The San Francisco banking giant says it will sell branches with $7 billion of deposits in communities where the combined operations of BankAmerica and Security Pacific would have a market share so large as to be a potential limit to competition.
Until now, the bank had been proposing to divest $4 billion of deposits.
BankAmerica said the revised divestiture plan would not alter the terms of the acquisition.


On My Mind; Detesting The Haters
In Moscow a writer of renown, visiting from the United States, asked some questions, of himself and about 50 Russians, other Europeans and Americans listening to him.
It was a full month later before I understood that they were among the most important questions human could ask of human.
I understood it in New York, when I read that four young white men had squirted white paint on two black children.
I asked myself -- what made these men so ugly of soul as to do this thing?


Review/Television; 'Today' Celebrates Itself, at Night Yet
The 40th anniversary of NBC's "Today" show warrants acknowledgement.
The mix of news, interviews, chatter and stunts first seen at 7 A.M. on Jan. 14, 1952, was the prototype for what soon became an American institution.
The format was adjusted over the years, especially after ABC and CBS entered the flakes stakes, but "Today" was the first and for a long time the most popular breakfast show in the land.
It is not too grand a claim to say that it changed the way families got through the morning.
"Today at 40," the birthday party at 10 tonight on NBC, should tickle nostalgics as it briskly recalls the early black-and-white shows, presided over by Dave Garroway with the help of the talented chimpanzee J. Fred Muggs.
These shows were much more spontaneous, not to say erratic, than the elaborate productions that followed, but the pictures here of early risers watching in diners, barns and factories as well as in kitchens confirm the program's continuing appeal.


Chase Manhattan Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Almanac: New Hampshire's Voters
Total 1990 population: 1,109,252 Voting age population: 830,497 Registered voters: 648,716 REGISTERED VOTERS, 1990 Republicans: 253,972 (39.1%) Democrats: 192,217 (29.6%) Independents and others: 202,527 (31.2%)


Jumping Caterpillar Defies Anatomy
WHEN the caterpillar that is destined to become a Mediterranean fruit fly feels threatened, it does not just slink slowly away.
It takes a flying leap to safety.
The scientist who discovered the phenomenon, David P. Maitland of South Africa, said the larval stage of the fruit fly was the only soft-bodied, legless organism known to jump.


Gunmen Seize Van and Hold Up a Bank
Four armed men hijacked a telephone company van in Brooklyn yesterday, drove to Queens and, posing as telephone repairmen, stole more than $100,000 from a bank in Rosedale, the police said.
The gunmen began the crime spree at 10:30 A.M. when they swarmed onto a New York Telephone Company van at 819 Ashford Street in East New York and took two phone company workers captive.
They then drove to the Home Federal Savings Bank, at 145-15 243d Street in Queens, and entered wearing phone company work belts.


Compaq and Dell May Use the Nextstep Operating System
The Compaq Computer Corporation and the Dell Computer Corporation are considering whether to sell machines that would run the Nextstep operating system developed by Next Computer Inc., industry executives said today.
An agreement with the two personal computer makers would give a big lift to Next, the company started by Steven P. Jobs, the co-founder of Apple Computer Inc.
Next is about to adopt a new strategy, seeking to sell its key software for use on machines other than its own.


Frenchtex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Court Backs Postal Curb On Politics
A Postal Service regulation prohibiting political campaigning on post office grounds does not violate constitutional guarantees of free speech, a Federal appeals court in Manhattan ruled yesterday.
The Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit also ruled that "embroiling the Postal Service in partisan politics" violated the absolute political neutrality Congress intended when it established the Postal Service in 1970.


Equimark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An obituary on Dec. 24 about James C. Fletcher, former administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, misstated the affiliation of Dr.
John M. Logsdon, an aerospace authority.
He is director of the Space Policy Institute at George Washington University.


FOOTBALL: The N.F.L.'s Ideal Couple Prepares for Battle; From Very Start, Redskins Had Eye on Bills
Joe Gibbs can admit it now: The Buffalo Bills were in his subconscious all season long.
Even as Washington ground up opponents en route to a 14-2 regular-season record, the Redskins' head coach admitted this afternoon that not a week went by that he didn't glance over his shoulder.


Net Jumps 17% At Fannie Mae
Fannie Mae, the housing finance corporation, said today that earnings rose 17 percent in the fourth quarter amid surging growth in mortgage-backed securities.
The Federal National Mortgage Association, as the company is formally known, reported net income of $361 million, or $1.31 a share, compared with $308 million, or $1.19 a share a year earlier.
Its stock gained 62.5 cents a share, to $68.75.


Met-Coil Systems Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Intermetrics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cherry Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


The Parlay: Super Bowl and Super Horse
You don't have to tell Ralph Wilson that winning the Super Bowl is a neat trick.
He is the owner of the Buffalo Bills, and he saw them lose to the New York Giants last January by one point.
Now the Bills are back for a second attempt. and people are telling Wilson that Buffalo figures to lose this time to the Washington Redskins by 6.
But in a world of frequently forbidding odds, Ralph Wilson reaches for the stars with the best of them.
He not only was the architect of the Bills but also was the breeder of the race horse Arazi, who already ranks as the favorite to win the Kentucky Derby, three months after the Bills try to upset the odds in the Super Bowl.
So, Wilson is standing on the brink of distinction in both sports.


F&amp;C Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sonic Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Pension Fund's Housing Effort
California's public-employee pension fund said today that it would invest up to $225 million to build homes as part of an effort to help the state's depressed housing market.
Officials said it was the first time the California Public Employees Retirement System, the nation's largest public pension fund, with an investment portfolio of nearly $60 billion, had budgeted money to invest in residential real estate, a field that pension funds generally avoid.


Unitel Video Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Invention, Design, Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Congress Street Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


In Russia, Secret Labs Struggle To Survive
TEN previously unknown cities of the former Soviet Union have suddenly emerged from the mists of the cold war, prompting anxious speculation about their fate.
The cities, with code names like Tomsk-7 and Arzamas-16, formed the heart of the Soviet military's vast industrial complex for the design and production of nuclear arms.
Their disintegration is now seen as threatening to send scientists and materials flying into foreign hands in a new kind of international peril.


ALGERIA MILITANTS CALL FOR UPRISING
The political party of Islamic fundamentalists broke two days of silence tonight and urged Algeria's people to rise against the military and civilian leaders who canceled elections that seemed sure to give the party a strong majority in Parliament.
"We call upon veteran fighters, intellectuals, religious leaders, senior army officers and soldiers, sons of martyrs, social organizations and all those who love Algeria to take a stand against this oppressive clique of foreign agents that has usurped power," the party, the Islamic Salvation Front, said in a statement in Arabic issued here.


Market Place; Making a Case For U S Sprint
IF MCI is David to A.T.&amp;T.'s Goliath, then U S Sprint is David's smaller brother.
As 1991 ended, Robert B. Morris of Goldman, Sachs estimates, U S Sprint had 9.8 percent of the market for long-distance calls, based on minutes of use, up slightly from 9.5 percent the year before.
That is about half of MCI's 19 percent, which was up from the 18.4 percent a year earlier.
He estimates A.T.&amp;T. had 67 percent, down from 68.2 percent in 1990.


Electro-Catheter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Mentor Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ukraine Sees a Smoothing of Issues With Russia
President Leonid M. Kravchuk said today that Ukraine was in the process of smoothing out its sharp political and military disagreements with Russia.
The 57-year-old former Communist leader, who was elected President of Ukraine five weeks ago, also said that he was about to replace a number of old-line Cabinet members with younger officials who favor a quick transition to a market economy.


Unless We All Speak Up for Salman Rushdie; What Algeria Chose
To the Editor:
The headline "Algeria Chooses Islam" (editorial, Jan. 3) betrays an ignorance of the Islamic world, which the fundamentalists, anti-modernists and anti-democratic elements love to exploit to silence enlightened, modernist and democratic Muslims.
What Algeria chose is not Islam, but a fanatic and authoritarian strain in the Islamic world that thrives on the failure of the secular governing elites and the unfair treatment meted out to the Muslim world by the West.


Hi-Shear Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Microcom Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


S. &amp; P. Cuts Rating For Macy's Bonds
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation lowered its credit ratings on R. H. Macy &amp; Company's junk bonds yesterday in response to the company's announcement over the weekend that it would be two weeks late in paying suppliers.
In explaining the downgrade, the ratings agency said: "The critical element in Macy's avoidance of default until now has been Macy's good relationships with its suppliers and banks. With the recently announced moratorium on vendor payments, Macy has jeopardized those relationships, substantially increasing near-term risks."


Data Translation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Kuwait Journal; The Runaway Army Is Back, but Standing at Ease
Kuwaiti soldiers, armed with assault rifles and heavy machine guns, leaped from the back of trucks and moved toward three mock buildings set up in the desert.
The rattle of automatic fire, smoke from red and yellow flares and fires from old vehicles hit by rocket-propelled grenades gave the exercise the smell and cacophony of battle.


Justices Warn Court Panel Over Long Stay of Execution
In a display of its growing impatience with protracted death-penalty appeals, the Supreme Court today issued an unusual rebuke to a Federal appeals court panel that has blocked an execution in the state of Washington for two and a half years.
In an unsigned opinion, from which Justices John Paul Stevens and Harry A. Blackmun dissented, the Court said that the state had "sustained severe prejudice by the two-and-a-half-year stay of execution," for which the appeals court judges had failed to provide "any plausible explanation."


Royal Palm Beach Colony L.P.  reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Colombia's Drug Lords Add New Product: Heroin for U.S.
Colombia's drug lords, who flooded the United States with cocaine in the 1980's, have added a new product line, heroin, and are now shipping it to New York and other cities.
The Colombians' venture into the heroin trade has many law-enforcement officials concerned because the Colombian traffickers operate a maze of international smuggling routes and distribution networks stretching throughout the country.


Schulman (A.) Inc. (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Computers Help Chilean Dead Tell Their Tales
SHUTTLING between far-flung graveyards, laboratories and the families and acquaintances of victims, a team of Chilean anthropologists is reconstructing the murky details of hundreds of executions carried out in this country during the military dictatorship that ended in 1988.
In the course of their detective work, the group is honing scientific procedures expected to prove useful in many countries where similar massacres have taken place.


Quotation of the Day
"We call upon veteran fighters, intellectuals, religious leaders, senior army officers and soldiers, sons of martyrs, social organizations, and all those who love Algeria to take a stand against this oppressive clique of foreign agents that has usurped power." -- THE ISLAMIC SALVATION FRONT OF ALGERIA.  [ A1:5. ]


Redskins' Gibbs Is High on His Hogs and Horses
Eleven years ago, Jack Kent Cooke found the man who would direct his Redskins to two Super Bowl titles, and possibly a third on Jan. 26, when Washington battles the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXVI.
Joe Gibbs was the San Diego Chargers' offensive coordinator in 1981 when Cooke, the Redskins' owner, saw the qualities in him that would make a superior head coach.
Chief among them must have been Gibbs's flexibility and creativity in the art and nuances of the game.
The Redskins' players say that Gibbs is a master motivator, a superb organizer and a remarkable visionary in selecting players and coaches and drawing off their strengths.
They say he is a brutally honest communicator.


Q&amp;A
Soap Bubbles
Q.
Is the surface of a soap bubble a liquid or a solid?
A.
A soap bubble has some properties of a liquid and some of a solid, said Dr.
Alan Friedman, director of the New York Hall of Science in Queens, showing the difficulty of using everyday language to define a complex phenomenon.


Classical Music in Review
American Symphony Orchestra
Carnegie Hall
Catherine Comet's program with the American Symphony Orchestra on Sunday afternoon struck a balance between the commonplace and the just slightly unusual.
She began with the suite from Aaron Copland's "Appalachian Spring," certainly one of the most popular works in the American orchestral canon.
But instead of using her full orchestra, Miss Comet conducted a small ensemble in Copland's revised chamber version.


Arnsparger to Chargers
BILL ARNSPARGER resigned as athletic director at the University of Florida yesterday to become the defensive coordinator of the San Diego Chargers.
Arnsparger, a former head coach of the Giants and Louisiana State, will be an aide to BOBBY ROSS, the former Georgia Tech coach, who has replaced the dismissed DAN HENNING.


Square Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Vacation Spa Resorts reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Ponder Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


James I. Loeb, 83, Former Envoy And Organizer of Liberal Group
James I. Loeb, a former Ambassador to Peru and Guinea and the first national executive secretary of Americans for Democratic Action, died on Friday at the Alice Peck Day Extended Care Facility in Lebanon, N.H.
He was 83 years old and was a resident of Hanover, N.H.
He died of pneumonia, said Ralph Knight of the Knight Funeral Home in White River Junction, Vt.
Amy Isaacs, national director of Americans for Democratic Action, a liberal public-policy organization, said Mr.
Loeb had been suffering from Alzheimer's disease.


BRIEFS
*
Aquarion Co., Bridgeport, Conn., a testing concern, said it would take a fourth-quarter after-tax charge of about $15 million, or $2.87 a share, relating to its environmental testing laboratory subsidiary, which would result in a loss for the year. *
Arkla Inc., Shreveport, La., an energy concern, announced its intent to merge its subsidiary Enscan with Itron Inc., Spokane, Wash.


Review/Opera; For a New 'Turandot,' Sets by Hockney
I missed Mr.
Hockney's "Tristan und Isolde" in 1987 in Los Angeles, but to this roster may now be added other images: the red wall of the Forbidden City of China, seeming to vibrate with ominous passion against an aquarium-blue sky and the green sweep of a pagoda roof; or the tangled heart of the Emperor's palace, a bewildering space of angular and curved strokes hanging in air.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Economy, Not Politics, Is Focus in New Hampshire
The bulletin board by the entrance to Daniel's Restaurant and Pub displays the usual assortment of small-town business notices for house painting, massage therapy and firewood.
Recently the offerings have been updated with a flier advertising a consumer seminar on "foreclosure, bankruptcy and alternatives."
That such a seminar could be useful is a given among the early evening patrons at Daniel's, much the same way falling real estate prices are now seen as normal.
Touched briefly by the boom of the 1980's, Henniker is now settling back, albeit somewhat sullenly, into just getting by.


Nonstate Plants in China at Risk in U.S. Talks
As American and Chinese negotiators wrangle over trade issues this month, the credit or blame for China's growing surplus with the United States goes to people like the 1,400 Chinese working at a factory here to assemble coffee-makers and ship twice as many to the United States this year as in 1991.
The workers, mostly young women hunched over assembly lines, earn about $74 a month -- dazzling salaries in China -- and the ethos here is capitalism rather than Communism.
The factory is financed by Taiwan, which lies just across the Taiwan Strait from this city in Fujian Province, and there are no political study classes as there are in most Chinese companies.


Langer Biomechanics Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


MAI Systems Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A chart on Jan. 5 listing advisers to Presidential candidates misstated the year of Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s last Presidential campaign.
It was 1984, not 1988.


Results Plus
HOCKEY Flames Tie Canadiens Joe Nieuwendyk's power-play goal midway through the second period gave the Calgary Flames a 2-2 tie with the Montreal Canadiens in a goaltenders' duel in Montreal.
The Canadiens' Patrick Roy and Calgary's Mike Vernon both excelled as the Flames outshot Montreal, 36-34. (AP) Oilers 7, North Stars 4: Vincent Damphousse broke a 4-4 tie with 4:06 left and Joe Murphy scored three goals as Edmonton won on the road against Minnesota.
Damphousse beat Jon Casey with a slap shot from the right circle for his 26th goal of the season, extending his goal-scoring streak to five games. (AP) PRO BASKETBALL Dumars Does It Joe Dumars sank a 3-point shot from the top of the circle with 1.8 seconds left, giving the Detroit Pistons an 84-81 homecourt victory over the Dallas Mavericks, who lost their eighth consecutive game.
Dumars, who finished with 14 points but had not scored since the opening minutes of the second half, took an inbounds pass, dribbled for several moments and released his game-winning shot. (AP)
Nuggets 111, Kings 109: Reggie Williams' 3-pointer with 14 seconds left wiped out a two-point deficit and propelled Denver to a homecourt victory over Sacramento.
Williams scored 26 points and teammate Greg Anderson 22 points and 16 rebounds.
Denver's rookie center, Dikembe Mutombo, had 22 points and 11 rebounds.
Wayman Tisdale had 29 points for the Kings. (AP) Suns 131, Timberwolves 111: Jeff Hornacek and Kevin Johnson dominated the first three quarters and Phoenix got its 10th victory over visiting Minnesota.
Hornacek had 10 points in the third quarter, when the Suns outscored the Wolves by 40-23 to take a 97-67 lead, and finished with 26.
Johnson had 19 points and 13 assists. (AP)


Neediest Cases Helps Wage Depression War
Roberta Newman clearly remembers her first step on the road to recovery from major depression: It was on an early morning in July 1990, when her oldest son arrived at her doorstep with two orderlies from New York Hospital.
"He asked me to sign myself in voluntarily or they would carry me in," she said.
"I said O.K."
Today, with the help of the Westchester Jewish Community Services and The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, Ms.
Newman, who likes to be called Bobbie, is receiving treatment and therapy that has helped turn her life around.


4th-Quarter Loss Seen By Citicorp
Citicorp, at the midpoint of a two-year plan to restore its financial equilibrium, said yesterday that it would report a loss of $125 million to $150 million for the fourth quarter of 1991, mostly because of bad real estate loans, but would earn a profit this year.
There is little Citicorp can do immediately to cure its problems with bad loans, but the company said it was making good progress in reducing expenses in its far-flung network of corporate and consumer banking businesses.


Nantucket Industries reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 30


When a Penchant for Cleanliness Can Be Bad for One's Complexion


Mort Shuman Services
A memorial service for the composer Mort Shuman is to be held on Monday at 8 P.M. at the Village Gate, Thompson and Bleecker Streets, Manhattan.
Mr.
Shuman, who produced the Off Broadway musical "Jacques Brel Is Alive and Well and Living in Paris," died on Nov. 3 at the age of 52.
Cast members from the original show, which opened in 1968 at the Village Gate, will perform at the memorial.
The service is free and open to the public.


Randolph Linsly Simpson, Voice Teacher, 64
Randolph Linsly Simpson, a voice teacher and collector of black Americana, died on Jan. 6 at Veterans Hospital in West Haven, Conn.
He was 64 years old and lived in Northford, Conn.
He died of lung cancer, said his brother, Josiah, of South Salem, N.Y.


McDaniel's Decision Won't Be a Surprise to Knicks
They got him to fill a position that has been spiritually vacant since Bernard King blew out a knee.
They got him to take a scoring load off Patrick Ewing, to give themselves another go-to guy down the stretch of a close game.
"We did not trade for X to have him go to another team," the Knicks' president, David Checketts, said yesterday of Xavier McDaniel.


Johnson Is Determined To Play in Olympics
MAGIC JOHNSON reiterated yesterday that he intends to play for the United States Olympic team at the Barcelona Games this summer.
Johnson was picked for the team before he announced on Nov. 7 that he had tested positive for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, and retired from the Los Angeles Lakers.


Books of The Times; Through a Microscope, the Customs of the Rich
FALSE GODS By Louis Auchincloss 214 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $21.


The Excuse Maker
Why, it's all Japan's fault, barks Chrysler's chairman, Lee Iacocca.
Fresh from President Bush's dismal trip to Tokyo, he insists that "We do not have idiots running General Motors, Ford and Chrysler, or our suppliers. And our workers are not lazy and stupid." Detroit has declined, he says, because of unfair Japanese trade practices and "insidious Japanese economic and political power within the United States."
These accusations are worse than wrong.
They're reckless.
For someone so well known to make them is to incite chauvinism, even xenophobia.
Something
is
wrong in Detroit, and for Mr.
Iacocca to blast Japan is to dodge his, and his industry's, shortcomings.


City of Lost Illusions
Stunned by three murders on two Sunday mornings in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn, Leonid M. Ruben yesterday glumly compared Brooklyn with its violence to the Ukraine he left behind and found himself almost longing for a Soviet-style strong hand.
"America with these problems is like there. It's bad there and it's bad here," the 76-year-old emigre said in Russian, as he sought help from a block association to read a notice in English about food stamps.
"You need death to answer death."


Market Place; Making a Case For U S Sprint
IF MCI is David to A.T.&amp;T.'s Goliath, then U S Sprint is David's smaller brother.
As 1991 ended, Robert B. Morris of Goldman, Sachs estimates, U S Sprint had 9.8 percent of the market for long-distance calls, based on minutes of use, up slightly from 9.5 percent the year before.
That is about half of MCI's 19 percent, which was up from the 18.4 percent a year earlier.
He estimates A.T.&amp;T. had 67 percent, down from 68.2 percent in 1990.


Meade Alcorn Jr., 84, G.O.P. National Chief
Hugh Meade Alcorn Jr., the Republican national chairman from 1957 to 1959 during the Eisenhower Administration, died yesterday at his home in Suffield, Conn.
He was 84 years old.
The cause of his death was a stroke, his daughter said.


Departure at Treasury
Robert R. Glauber, a senior Tresury official who was an architect of the Administration's banking and savings and loan proposals, said today that he would leave Government this week to return to teaching at Harvard University.
Mr.
Glauber, 52 years old, has been a Treasury Under Secretary since May 1989 and helped write the law to bail out hundreds of savings associations.
He also crafted the Administration's plan to reorganize the nation's banking system by lifting restrictions that limited banks' expansion across state lines and into the securities and insurance businesses.
The proposal was rejected by Congress two months ago.


U.S. Reviewing Ways to Prevent Flipping of Cars
The Federal highway safety agency has begun reviewing how to prevent thousands of the most dangerous automobile accidents, those in which a vehicle tumbles out of control and rolls over.
The review could lead to mandatory design changes in many small cars, pickup trucks and sporty off-road vehicles.
Depending on what changes are required, prices of these vehicles, including some of Detroit's hottest sellers in recent years, could increase by hundreds of dollars.
Some models might even be discontinued if they could not be made safer.


Southtrust Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


It's Asians' Turn in Silicon Valley
Asian immigrants have long made up a large proportion of the engineers in Silicon Valley.
Now, a growing number are starting high-technology enterprises, eager for more responsibility and frustated by opportunities for advancement at many companies.
These entrepreneurs, particularly those of Chinese descent, are setting up networks of contacts and forging business links to East Asia.
In some cases, they are creating companies that successfully compete in areas dominated by foreign companies, like making computer monitors.


National City Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


EDWARDS SWORN IN AS NEW GOVERNOR
Edwin W. Edwards was inaugurated today for a fourth term as Louisiana Governor, but doubts remained about whether he had turned over the new leaf he promised during the bitter campaign against David Duke last fall.
"We have come out of the exacting turmoil and tumult of a political campaign," Mr.
Edwards told the inauguration crowd in the Baton Rouge convention center, "and it is time for us to join hands, work together and start anew."


Cruyff to Coach If Dutch Qualify
Johan Cruyff, the Dutch soccer star who was the European player of the year in 1971, 1973 and 1974, has agreed to become coach of the Netherlands national team if it qualifies for the 1994 World Cup, the Royal Dutch Soccer Federation said today.
Cruyff, currently coach of Barcelona in Spain's first division, told Dutch newspapers that only his salary still had to be worked out.


Town &amp; Country Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Bridge
The year's first tournament in the metropolitan area, the Tri-State Regional Championships in Port Chester, N.Y., was well attended, with an encouraging growth in the number of beginning tournament players competing in "newplicate" games.
These are winners of major titles on the last day of play:


Bank Move Is Backed
The plan by the Northeast Savings Corporation to acquire and reopen four Rhode Island banks and credit unions was formally approved by its board today.
The deal, which still requires approval from various state and Federal agencies, would give 86,000 depositors access to $350 million for the first time since Jan. 1, 1991.


State-O-Maine Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


G.M. Allison Unit To Be Reviewed
The General Motors Corporation has hired consultants to determine the value of its Allison Transmission division, which produces automatic transmissions for trucks, Allison's general manager, Robert Clark, said.
"Our boss, Bob Stempel, told the whole world that General Motors would divest itself of its non-core businesses," Mr.
Clark noted.
"And you don't have to be Sherlock Holmes to know we're not part of the core business of making automobiles."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; If Clinton Leads Pack, Teeth Are at His Heels
If the buzz inside the Capital Beltway can be believed, the Democrats may well have a candidate before they ever have a real campaign.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, by virtue of his early strength in organizing and fund raising, not to mention message-making and pundit-stroking, has become the hot candidate of the post-Cuomo period.
Some of the more cautious Democrats note that at this point in 1984, Walter F. Mondale was a much more prohibitive front-runner and former Senator Gary Hart barely showed a pulse, yet Mr.
Hart proceeded to win New Hampshire and nearly destroy Mr.
Mondale's campaign.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Classical Music in Review
Audubon Quartet
Merkin Concert Hall
The Audubon Quartet walked a fine line in the first half of its program last Tuesday at Merkin Concert Hall.
Performances of Haydn's String Quartet in B flat (Op. 50, No. 1) and Shostakovich's First Quartet (Op. 49) were flawed throughout in intonation and ensemble, but each was redeemed in one major respect.


Pirates Freeze at Line And Lose in Overtime
Villanova won the battle at the free-throw line tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena and went on to upset Seton Hall, 73-68, in overtime.
The Pirates shot poorly all evening, connecting on just 19 of 37 free-throw attempts and 23 of 61 field-goal attempts.
Nevertheless, Seton Hall led by 11 points after Terry Dehere made a pair of free throws with 2 minutes 20 seconds left in the game.


Central Park Bandshell Has Become Irrelevant
To the Editor:
The Naumburg Bandshell in New York City's Central Park has seen its day (news article, Dec. 20).
It was designed for the band concerts popular in the 1920's and 30's.
Its heavy shell-like shape reflected and amplified their rich tones.
Now we have other musical groups playing at more spacious park sites, using a portable stage and electronic amplification.
The bandshell has become irrelevant and intrusive.
In its time, it gave audiences much pleasure and wonderful memories.
But now it is outmoded and in the way for recreational and landscaping purposes.


Water-Jel Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Bank of Granite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shearson Suspends 2 Equity Executives
Shearson Lehman Brothers has suspended two executives who worked for Peter Da Puzzo, the former co-head of stock trading who was suspended in September after being accused of manipulating stock prices.
Shearson executives said yesterday that Mitchell Meisler, head of over-the-counter sales and marketing, and Michael Dobin, the department's chief operations official, had been told to "go on vacation," with pay, until the firm could determine their status.
No Formal Accusations
One Shearson official said the suspensions were related to poor work performance, not any violation of policy.


Chemfix Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Algeria: Democracy Betrayed
Algeria's army did its best on Saturday to destroy democracy in the name of saving it, forcibly intervening to interrupt an election that an Islamic fundamentalist party appeared certain to win.
Western Governments, the Bush Administration included, have been shamefully reluctant to condemn an illegitimate and unwise move sure to heighten political tension.
The Islamic Salvation Front, cheated of the decisive electoral triumph its strong first round showing seemed to assure, has now called on Algerians to rise up and defy the army's decrees.


Mets Find a Place for Harrelson as a Scout
When the Mets dismissed a beleaguered Bud Harrelson as manager last September, the organization termed it an act of basic decency.
Yesterday, the Mets named Harrelson a special scout, and the club described it as an act of basic intelligence.
"I don't believe you can ever have enough quality people," Al Harazin, the general manager, said in a statement announcing Harrelson's appointment.


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Stock prices were firmer in Tokyo today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues finished the day up 78.27 points, or less than 1 percent, to 21,775.13.
At midday, the Nikkei was up 275.68 points.
On Monday, the index lost 685.04 points.
The Tokyo Stock Exchange will be closed on Wednesday for a national holiday.


Argentine Homosexual Gets Refugee Status in Canada
For the first time in Canada, a homosexual fearing persecution in his homeland because of sexual preference has been granted refugee status, under a Government decision that could have broad ramifications in North America.
The case, involving a 28-year-old Argentine named Jorge Alberto Inaudi, was decided by a panel of the Immigration and Refugee Board, an independent, quasi-judicial agency under the Minister of Immigration.
Its rulings are usually final, although they can be appealed to federal courts.


Galtaco Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Corrections
A chart on Saturday listing politicians running as delegates in the New York Democratic presidential primary misidentified two of them.
Joseph Ferris and May Newberger are both former members of the Assembly.


CHRONICLE
ARTHUR MILLER, who directed a Chinese-language production of his "Death of a Salesman" in Beijing four years ago, will take off for Stockholm soon to direct it in Swedish at the Royal Dramatic Theater.
He says his Swedish is better than his Chinese.
Actually, he speaks neither.
What the playwright meant was that, unlike his experience in Beijing, he will be dealing mostly with people who can speak English.


Afghan Musician Heals Wounds of Exile
He is tall, balding and scholarly looking and his name, Nashenas, means "unknown" in Persian.
But on Saturday night, when Nashenas gave his second major public concert of his 40-year singing career and his first in New York, the 2,000 Afghans and Pakistanis in the audience knew exactly what his presence meant.
Men sat ramrod-straight and cried silently.
Despite the heavy security in the Queens College auditorium in Flushing, others tried to dance in the aisles.
The crowd roared approval and screamed out song requests.
Video cameras and tape recorders were neatly camouflaged under coats.


INSIDE
Inquiry Clears D'Amato
A New York State inquiry found nothing criminal in the publicly financed purchase of Roosevelt Raceway or in Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's efforts to get tax relief for it.
Page B1.
Citicorp Sees Loss and Gain
Citicorp expects a loss of $125 million to $150 million in the last quarter of 1991 but a profit this year.
Page D1.
New Focus on Auto Safety
A Federal review of deadly accidents in which vehicles roll over could result in mandatory changes in the design of cars and trucks.
Page A16.
Secret Soviet Cities
Ten previously unknown cities that made Soviet nuclear weapons now face anxious speculation about their future.
Science Times, page C1.
Officer Shot in Brooklyn
Responding to a landlord-tenant dispute, a police officer was shot in the head and critically wounded by an enraged tenant.
Page B1.


Silicon Valley Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Time and Patience Are Running in Short Supply in Moscow
City officials warned today that industry was coming to a standstill throughout the Russian capital as the national economy unraveled and raw materials were no longer being supplied from the other republics.
Most industrial enterprises have supplies for only two or three more weeks of work while the makers of the city's prefabricated concrete housing may stop work in the next five or six days, according to Boris Nikolsky, first deputy premier of the Moscow city government.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about an Afghan singer's concert in Queens misidentified the organizer.
He is Mark Ginsburg of Voice Pictures.


INB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chile in Quandary Over Protecting Honecker
Erich Honecker, the former East German Communist leader, is now in his second month holed up in the Chilean Embassy in Moscow.
But his desire for protection from German prosecutors has touched off an intense debate here and has raised concerns for Chile's relations with Germany, perhaps its closest ally in the industrialized world.
"This is a major problem for the President," said Juan Enrique Vega, assistant director of the Legislative Assistance Program, a research center closely associated with President Patricio Aylwin's Christian Democratic Party.
"He has some of his most senior ministers saying we should give Honecker asylum. And I think so far Aylwin has vacillated."


Cuomo Attacked on Pay Offered for Health Chief
Republican senators used a confirmation hearing today to mount an angry attack on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo for circumventing the Legislature in offering his nominee for state health commissioner a salary of $160,000 a year, the highest ever offered a commissioner.
Dr.
Mark R. Chassin, a California businessman, health researcher and emergency-room physician, spent nearly 45 minutes before the Senate Health Committee fielding questions about the appropriateness of his proposed salary.
Only after the committee's Republican members made their case on the salary issue did they ask Dr.
Chassin for his views on the state's health policy.


Family Dollar Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Learonal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Salem Carpet Mills Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Importing Immigrants, Exporting Jobs
To the Editor:
"Accepting the Harsh Truth of a Blue-Collar Recession" (front page, Dec. 25), on the loss of more than one million blue-collar jobs in the current recession, correctly points out that not all of those jobs will return after the recession is over.
While some have been lost because of increased efficiency, many are non- and low-skill manufacturing jobs.
Where have those jobs gone?


Economic Scene; The Experts Talk, But Who Listens?
WEEK after week, many of America's best-known economists are being summoned before Congressional committees for expert advice on what to do about the economy.
But while given respectful hearings, their counsel is almost certain to be rejected, to the continued frustration of a profession that has long suffered such indignities.
A tax cut for the middle class?
A bad idea, say an overwhelming majority of economists of various political inclinations.
A tax credit for capital investments?
It distorts capital flows, they respond, particularly if the credit is temporary.


First Federal of Alabama reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Computer Sales Accords Set
Two computer companies announced plans yesterday to sell supercomputers made by other manufacturers.
The Control Data Corporation said it would sell supercomputers of the NEC Corporation of Japan to its European and North American customers, primarily in the automotive and aerospace industries.


Market Place; Upturn Awaited For Columbia Gas
COLUMBIA GAS SYSTEM INC. has had its share of problems.
Now operating under bankruptcy court protection, it has stopped paying dividends and taken steep write-offs, and its stock, which sold as high as $47.50 in the last year, is languishing.
Even in yesterday's market surge, it lost 25 cents, to $16.50.
Still, some analysts say that the company is fundamentally sound and that once its problems are worked out, the stock price will rise.


Hilton Hotels Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Study Detects Chronic Fatigue Abnormality
The largest study yet of chronic fatigue syndrome has found evidence of inflammation in the brains of patients, the first documentation of a neurological abnormality connected with the mysterious ailment.
But the findings detected on magnetic resonance imaging scans were not specific enough for such scans to be used as a diagnostic test for the syndrome, the authors report today in The Annals of Internal Medicine.


Quotation of the Day
"If he speaks out and says that it's out here and he cares and he cares about our nation in terms of this epidemic and then people will listen, whether it'll be old, young, black, white. I am going to try to do my part, but I think that the higher source -- and that's the President -- can have a better effect than I can." -- MAGIC JOHNSON, on what President Bush can do to fight AIDS.  [ A17:1. ]


New Campaigns
*
Offbeat radio commercials by Anne Winn, the co-star of a series of distinctive radio spots for Molson beer, will introduce Beaute Benetton, a cosmetics line from the new Benetton Cosmetics Corp.
To a background of sitar music and a choir, women discuss the line's prices ("seven bucks, that's all") and variety.
Print advertisements photographed by Oliviero Toscano, who creates Benetton's clothing ads, are also planned. *
For the first time, the BASF Corp. is running television commercials to promote its carpet fibers group.
The spots are based on a corporate image campaign created by Geer, DuBois Inc., New York, which carries the theme "We don't make a lot of the products you buy. We make a lot of the products you buy better." For these spots, which were also developed by Copeland Design, Atlanta, the theme becomes: "We don't make the carpet. We make it better."


Martin Dibner Is Dead; Writer and Official, 80
Martin Dibner, a novelist and arts administrator, died on Saturday at his home in Casco, Me.
He was 80 years old.
He died of heart failure, said his son Stephen.


Theater in Review
Job: A Circus  One Dream Theater 232 West Broadway Manhattan Through Feb. 2  Conceived and directed by Elizabeth Swados; producing director, Wickham Boyle; clown routines created by Gabriel Barre, Mary Dino, Michael Gunst, Jeff Hess, Alan Mintz and Stephen Ringold; music by Ms.
Swados; vocal arrangements by Ann Marie Milazzo, Cathy Porter and Michael Sottile; production stage manager, Tori Evans; set and costumes designed by Nephelie Andonyadis; lighting by Kristabelle Munson.
Presented by Under One Roof.
WITH: Ms.
Dino, Ms.
Evans, Mr.
Gunst, Mr.
Hess, Ms.
Milazzo, Mr.
Mintz, Mr.
Neiden, Paul O'Keefe, Mr.
Ringold and Mr.
Sottile.


Magic Johnson Urges Bush to Lead AIDS Battle
Magic Johnson, the newest member of the National Commission on AIDS, met privately today with President Bush and said afterward that the President needed to exercise greater personal leadership in the battle against the disease.
"If he speaks out and says that it's out here and he cares and he cares about our nation in terms of this epidemic and then people will listen, whether it'll be old, young, black, white," said Mr.
Johnson, who recently disclosed that he had tested positive for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.


Is It Art or Just a Toilet Seat? Bidders to Decide on a de Kooning
Is a used toilet seat worth $1 million? Or even a couple hundred thousand dollars?
The owners of one seat think so.
That's because it's a three-holer.
And not just any three-holer, but an Abstract Expressionist three-holer.


Deal to Sell Lehman Is Hinted Again
Eager to take advantage of the rising market value of brokerage firms, the American Express Company is again exploring ways to sell Lehman Brothers, its investment banking and trading arm, executives at the firm said yesterday.
One possibility under discussion is for members of Lehman's management to buy back control of the investment bank, possibly in combination with a public sale of stock.


Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Knicks Not Back in Sync but They're Getting Closer
Considering how much trouble the Knicks have had winning here in the past, their victory over the Magic tonight was a pleasant change for them.
And considering how erratically they have played since Christmas, the Knicks will accept victories these days against anyone, anytime, anywhere.
New York (22-11) won its second consective game and snapped a losing streak in Orlando Arena at two games, defeating the Magic, 115-111.


Review/Dance; Men in the Forefront In City Ballet Cast Shifts
Debuts and cast changes are already studding the New York City Ballet's current repertory season.
Interestingly, all the dancers stepping into new roles over the weekend were men.
On Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater, Peter Boal was seen as the lone man in the feminine world of George Balanchine's "Raymonda Variations." Inspired by Marius Petipa's 1898 "Raymonda," Balanchine used excerpts from Glazunov's ballet score (conducted here with fine verve by Maurice Kaplow) to hark back to the Russian classical tradition of his boyhood.
The purity of Mr.
Boal's classical style made him, as might be expected, a natural for Balanchine's reworking of Petipa.
In his first solo, Mr.
Boal offered a contrast between the sharpness of his larger leaps and the cascade of small leg beats, especially those known as brises voles.
A greater, even brasher assertiveness would compensate for the throwaway modesty that crept into this variation.
In his second solo, however, Mr.
Boal picked up markedly, ending his turns with a flourish.


Jones Intercable Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Burlington Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Fidelity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vehicle Sales, Weak in '91, Keep Falling
Sales of domestically made cars and light trucks remained at recessionary levels in early January, declining 4.1 percent from a dismal period a year earlier, the auto makers reported today.
The seasonally adjusted annual selling rate for the period was 5.3 million -- among the lowest figures reported in 1991 -- reinforcing a bleak outlook for the industry.


Personal Health
MAGNESIUM, an essential mineral in the human diet, has been all but ignored by nutrition enthusiasts who tout an alphabet-soup of supplements to correct purported deficiencies, to counter various ailments and to enhance overall health.
Unlike calcium, which few Americans get enough of to sustain healthy bones throughout life, or selenium, which may help to prevent cancer, magnesium was not considered to play a major role in nutritional problems nor was it regarded as a "sexy" nutrient.
But recent research may soon change magnesium's image and thrust it into the nutritional limelight.
The findings indicate that magnesium deficiencies can play an important role in several major health problems, including heart disease, high blood pressure and diabetes, as well as some less-threatening problems like premenstrual disturbances and chronic fatigue syndrome.


Man Charged in Prostitute Slayings in California
A county worker paroled after serving nearly 10 years in prison for killing his infant daughter was charged today with the murder of two women, the police announced in the first major break in the serial slayings of 19 prostitutes.
The police said they arrested the 41-year-old county worker, William L. Suff, after a routine traffic stop on Thursday night.


On Teaching History When It Changes Every Day
With the sudden collapse of Soviet Communism and the union of states that practiced it for more than 70 years, teachers in the United States find that the ever-shifting face of that part of the world has brought new opportunities and challenges to the classroom.
"It's great when a history lesson becomes so closely related to what is happening now," said Ruth Wattenberg, coordinator for the Education for Democracy Project, a partnership of the American Federation of Teachers, Freedom House and the Educational Excellence Network.
The project was formed last spring to help teachers understand and convey information about the major changes that have swept through Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Romania in the last few years.


Boston's New Mayor Faces Painful Task on Police Chief
Raymond L. Flynn, one of the most popular mayors in the city's history, was placed in an agonizing position today when a special panel advised him against retaining the police commissioner, who is a boyhood friend of the Mayor and one of his closest associates.
The special commission, which was appointed by the Mayor himself to look into Police Department procedures, recommended that the commissioner, Francis M. Roache, be replaced when his term expires in April.
The panel also sharply criticized the handling of civilian complaints by the police.


Musical America Ceases Publication
Musical America, the oldest magazine in the United States devoted to classical music, ceased publication yesterday, just hours after its annual awards party.
The January-February issue is to be the bimonthly magazine's last.
Gerry M. Ritterman, the magazine's owner, said yesterday that Musical America had lost $700,000 in 1991, and that he decided to close it when he realized that advertising income was not likely to pick up this year.
Mr.
Ritterman said that the annual Musical America International Directory of the Performing Arts would continue to be published.


Edward Doherty, 77, Foreign Service Officer
Edward Woods Doherty, a retired Foreign Service officer and foreign affairs adviser to the United States Catholic Conference, died on Friday at Washington Hospital Center.
He was 77 years old and lived in West River, Md.
His family said he died of a heart ailment.


Conner Starts Off By Losing
Today was just the first day of the 1992 America's Cup defense trials, but there has already been a startling turn of events: Dennis Conner, the kingpin of America's Cup racing, looked down the stern of another boat for virtually an entire race.
Conner's yacht, Stars &amp; Stripes, lost to Defiant, skippered by Buddy Melges, by 1 minute 34 seconds.
And although Conner, the defending America's Cup champion skipper, has plenty of time to turn the tide, given a trials schedule spread over the next three months, William Koch's America 3 syndicate had reason for jubilation this afternoon.


Great Bay Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Children Learn to Share With Gifts to Neediest
Every Friday the 17 members of the Bunny Rabbit class at the Central Synagogue in Manhattan drop coins into the tzedakah box.
Understanding the meaning of tzedakah, the Hebrew word for charity, is part of the 4- and 5-year-olds' curriculum, said Lenore Memeth, a teacher at the nursery school.
A letter attached to a $10 contribution to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund suggests that the youngsters have learned their lesson well.
"We put coins in it as a way of saying thank you for what we have and sharing it with others," they wrote in a class letter.


CUOMO SEEKS DELAY IN 5-YEAR PROGRAM FOR TRANSIT FUNDS
Faced with chronic budget problems, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has decided that New York State cannot now afford to commit itself to pay for another five-year program to overhaul subways, buses and commuter rail lines, his aides said yesterday.
The decision signaled a major change in the approach to upgrading mass transit, with the Governor withdrawing the state's commitment, maintained over all of the last decade, to finance long-term capital plans to buy subway cars and buses, rebuild tracks, fix signals and improve all the elements of mass transit.


Celebrations Are Revived, but It's Easy on the Glitz
A year ago, it was a low-key, nervous event.
The war was on in the Persian Gulf and many Americans looked to the National Football League to see what face it would put on the Super Bowl.
Essentially, it was somber.
But while the N.F.L. isn't kicking up its heels this year, it has brought football back to the game.


Summit Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


UConn Defeats Pittsburgh
Chris Smith, Connecticut's basketball treasure, once again showed the Huskies the way tonight.
Whenever Pittsburgh closed in on UConn during a turbulent second half at the Civic Center, the cool senior guard found the right shot, made the right pass.
He was the game's scoring leader with 28 points and its catalyst in an 87-77 Big East victory for Connecticut that was closer than that.
The defeat was the first for the Panthers in conference play, the fifth in 16 games.
The triumph was Connecticut's 12th in 13 games, its third in four conference contests.


DEMOCRATS BEGIN HEALTH OFFENSIVE
House Democrats held meetings with their constituents at 285 sites around the country today to publicize their proposals for sweeping changes in medical insurance and to underscore what they describe as a slow response from President Bush.
The events highlighted the emergence of health care as a potent Presidential campaign issue, one that Democrats say they are well-positioned to exploit.
In his State of the Union Message on Jan. 28, Mr.
Bush is expected to propose new tax incentives to extend private health insurance.
But Democratic strategists contend voters will not be satisfied until the Government controls escalating medical costs and expands coverage to the unemployed and all women and children.


Buchanan's Alternative: Not Kinder or Gentler
The candidate of political incorrectness was on a tear.
Speaking to a packed auditorium of largely appreciative Dartmouth students in Hanover, N.H., the other night, Patrick J. Buchanan called the senior leader of China, Deng Xiaoping, an "85-year-old chain-smoking Communist dwarf."


Barkley Hearing Set
A Milwaukee judge set a March 23 pretrial hearing date for Philadelphia 76ers forward CHARLES BARKLEY on misdemeanor battery and disorderly conduct charges stemming from a December incident in which he broke a man's nose.
Barkley will not enter a plea in the case until the day of the trial.
Barkley will not have to attend the pretrial hearing. (AP)


Eating Well
One child who was asked to describe cholesterol said, "It's a condition that makes you eat salad."
When Benjamin Kessler, 6 years old, was asked by his father, Dr.
David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of the Federal Food and Drug Administration, to define fat, he said, "Fat is fat." The Commissioner's 9-year-old daughter, Elise, added that children could eat fat but should cut down on it by the time they are 12.


Detroit's Real Competitors Are Ohio, Illinois . . .
Ford, G.M. and Chrysler would have us believe that their main problem is lack of access to the Japanese market.
As last week's debacle in Japan helped demonstrate, no one seriously believes that the Big Three can sell more than a handful of cars there under any rules.
Even Honda has to scramble to hold on to a 10 percent market share in Japan.
The real problem is that the Big Three can't compete in the U.S. against cars produced by Japanese-owned plants in Kentucky, Tennessee, Ohio, Illinois and Indiana.
These plants sprang up in part because of quotas on Japanese imports that the Big Three requested in the early 1980's.


Car Rentals Hide Welcome Mat
In a market too competitive to permit higher rates or an easy increase in market share, two car rental companies have been driven to extremes in trying to improve profitability: turning away the customers most likely to cost them money.
Alamo Rent a Car Inc. says people who rent cars in their hometowns have a far higher rate of accidents and loss than those who rent while traveling.
That is because business customers on the road are generally safer, and because people who rent a car with the intention of selling it or sub-renting it for profit usually do so locally.


Sunair Electronics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


International Paper reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wounded Police Officer Was Symbol of Department's New Approach
The officer who was shot in a Brooklyn home Monday night was a literal symbol of the new way the New York City Police Department is trying to fight crime, a "poster boy" chosen for an advertisement promoting community policing.
But Officer Richard DeGaetano was critically wounded while responding to the old-fashioned type of dangerous situation that police officers have always faced.
And after a second operation yesterday at Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan, surgeons said the 33-year-old officer's chances of survival were good, but that he would probably lose an eye.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Retail sales fell 0.4 percent in December, the Commerce Dept. reported, and what had been a November advance was revised to a decline.
Consumers have now spent less at retail stores for three straight months, and the rise for all of 1991, 0.7 percent, was the slimmest in 30 years.  [ Page A1. ]


Dora Inselbuch, 93, Who Served On Hadassah Board for 16 Years
Dora R. Inselbuch, a longtime national board member of Hadassah, the women's Zionist and charitable organization, died on Thursday at the Hebrew Home for the Aged at Riverdale.
She was 93 years old and had lived in Manhattan until eight years ago.
Her family said she died of natural causes in her sleep.


Zytec Systems reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Southern National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
His arm is raised exuberantly.
In fact, that's all you see, except his handkerchief, more than 6 feet of it, flowing freely from the 15-by-10-foot banner.
Even if his name did not appear, it would be clear that the arm belongs to LUCIANO PAVAROTTI, who will sing on the 100th performance of "Live From Lincoln Center," to be broadcast on Feb. 24 on public television.
The banner will flutter outside Avery Fisher Hall for a week before the telecast.
But next Wednesday it will fly from the porch of Gracie Mansion.


Rev. John B. Sheerin Dies at 85; a Catholic Editor and Columnist
The Rev.
John B. Sheerin, a Roman Catholic editor, columnist and pioneer in interfaith relations, died on Monday at St.
Joseph's Nursing Home in Totowa, N.J., after a long illness.
He was 85 years old.
From 1948 to 1972, Father Sheerin was editor of The Catholic World, a monthly journal published by the Paulist Fathers, the religious order of priests that he had entered after receiving a law degree and embarking on a legal career.


Z-Seven Fund Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Senior Management Is Shifted at Y.&amp;R.
Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York yesterday announced a reshuffling of senior management that included a consolidation of creative control for all Y.&amp; R. companies under Joseph E. DeDeo.
Mr.
DeDeo, who had previously directed the company's worldwide advertising efforts as president and chief executive of the Y.&amp; R. Advertising operations, has been promoted to the newly created positions of vice chairman and chief creative officer at Y.&amp; R. Inc.
Mr.
DeDeo, who continues to report to Alex Kroll, the company's chairman and chief executive, adds responsibilities for overseeing work at units including Burson-Marstellar (public relations), Wunderman Worldwide (direct marketing) and Landor &amp; Associates (corporate identity).


IMC Fertilizer Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wisconsin Pharmacal Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
It happened "nonchalantly," JOHTJE VOS recalled the other day.
First, a friend asked if she and her husband, Aart, would keep a little suitcase for him in their home near Amsterdam because the Germans were confiscating his home and possessions.
Of course, they said.
And then, would you take my little boy?
Certainly.
It was the autumn of 1940.
"By and by, we became aware of the dangers," she said, and they asked themselves, "Shall we go on with this, or stop?"


ACM Managed Income Fund reports earnings for As of Nov 30


The U.N. Today
General Assembly PALESTINE RIGHTS COMMITTEE -- 10:30 A.M.
STATES PARTIES TO THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON THE ELIMINATION OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION -- 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


60-Minute Gourmet
JUST because it is midwinter does not mean you can't enjoy simple and colorful pastas enhanced with vegetables.
In my supermarket last week, I found firm red peppers, baby zucchini, fresh garlic, fresh ginger and plum tomatoes, plenty to make a good sauce.
Plum tomatoes are the best option at this time of year, since most of the regular tomatoes brought in from California or Mexico lack flavor.


Salvadoran Foes Settle Details of Peace Pact
After three weeks of negotiations, the Government of El Salvador and rebel leaders agreed early today on the final details of an accord to end the 12-year civil war.
With the peace settlement expected to be formally signed in Mexico City on Thursday, the United Nations Security Council this afternoon approved the sending of a 1,000-strong United Nations peacekeeping force to El Salvador to monitor the accord.
Secretary General Boutros Ghali recommended the dispatch of the peacekeepers in a report last week.


Wine Talk
THERE are a dozen good wine magazines, probably more.
Decanter, published in England, unblushingly calls itself "the world's best wine magazine." The editors of The Wine Spectator, probably the best-known American wine publication, might dispute that.
So too might the editors and readers of the many German, Italian, Spanish, Swedish, Australian and Japanese -- yes, Japanese -- wine magazines whose readers may have never heard of Decanter.


IRAQ ADMITS BUYING GERMAN MATERIALS TO MAKE A-BOMBS
In a new disclosure about President Saddam Hussein's nuclear weapons program, Iraq has admitted buying large quantities of German components for a previously unknown uranium enrichment complex that could have produced enough explosive for four or five weapons a year, officials said today.
The admission was made in Baghdad on Monday to a team of United Nations nuclear inspectors assembled by the International Atomic Energy Agency, based in Vienna, the United Nations officials said.
The inspectors had flown to Baghdad on Saturday after learning that German companies had sold Mr.
Hussein some of the parts needed to build up to 10,000 uranium gas centrifuge enrichment plants and after receiving a tip-off about where those parts might be concealed.
Special Magnets
The United Nations team drew a blank when they raided the suspected site just north of the Baghdad area on Sunday, officials say.
But Iraqi nuclear officials later admitted under questioning, the team reported, that they had bought enough special magnets and housings from German companies before the Persian Gulf war to build up to 10,000 centrifuges, although they asserted that these were all destroyed immediately after the cease-fire.


Automatic Data Processing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Swindon Journal; In Tory Bastion, Discontent Grows
In the 1980's this aging, blue-collar town emerged as one of Britain's fastest growing cities, a booming outpost of high-tech industry, modern British enterprise and nascent Conservative political sympathies.
The sudden rush of white-collar workers to the county of Wiltshire, west of London, not only stretched the population to more than 175,000, but also helped give a new shape to a political landscape long dominated by the Labor Party.
In 1983 voters sent a Conservative to Parliament for only the second time since World War II.
Four years later they returned him to office, with a slightly larger margin.


Juilliard School to Receive A $10 Million Endowment
Irene Diamond, the president of the Aaron Diamond Foundation, has announced a $10 million gift to the Juilliard School for a fund that is to be used for scholarships and faculty salaries, with a special focus on minority students and teachers.
The gift is the largest single donation Juilliard has received in its 87-year history, said Joseph W. Polisi, the president of the school.
Mrs.
Diamond, who is 81 years old, gave the school the first $5 million on Monday.
The other $5 million is to be left to Juilliard in her will.


Where Blame Lies in the City College Tragedy
To the Editor:
The City College crowd disaster is no mystery from the traffic engineering viewpoint.
A single door has a movement capacity of 60 people per minute under normal circumstances.
If tickets are checked at the door, or "stop and frisk" procedures are used, the capacity is much less.
A 12-foot-wide stair has a movement capacity of 240 people per minute in the down direction.
Simple arithmetic shows that critical crowding can occur quickly at a single door under these conditions.
Inadequate door capacity has caused loss of life in many crowd incidents and fire emergencies.


Primerica Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2-Step Method Helps Restart Hearts
PATIENTS whose hearts stop while they are being treated in the hospital have better survival rates if a new chest-abdominal compression technique is used to resuscitate them, a new study has found.
In a small study conducted over six months, doctors at St.
Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center in Paterson, N.J., applied rhythmic abdominal pressure along with the standard method of chest compression, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, or CPR.


Rangers Flex Muscles and Find the Sabres' Net
At long last, here was a Tie Domi sort of hockey game.
Three fights and 72 penalty minutes, all in four seconds on the scoreboard clock.
A parade of illegal stick checks and misconducts.
A concussion.
Revenge, served up best on ice.


Theater in Review
Explosions  La Mama E.T.C. 74 East Fourth Street Manhattan Through Sunday Created by Virlana Tkacz and Wanda Phipps; directed by Ms.
Tkacz; music by Roman Hurko; set and lights by Watoku Ueno; movement by June Anderson; costumes by Yuko Yamamura.
Presented by La Mama E.T.C. and Yara Arts Group.
WITH: Richaro Abrams, Jessica Hecht, Ralph B. Pena, Jeffrey Ricketts, Sean Runnette, Dawn Saito, Olga Shuhan and Jeff Sugarman.


RPM Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Shelton Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A bakery listing in The Living Section last Wednesday with an article about the popularity of biscotti misstated the telephone number for La Tempesta Bakery Confections in San Francisco.
It is (800) 762-8330.


Motorola Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


GAINS SEEN IN FIGHT TO CUT DRUG TRADE
Marking moderate progress in the fight against drugs, security forces in Central and South America seized 143 tons of cocaine in 1991, about 15 percent of world production, the region's top American military official says.
New radar, spy planes and information sharing between historically hostile nations like Peru and Ecuador increased seizures, the official, Gen.
George A. Joulwan of the Army, said in an interview here on Friday.


Miscellany
*
Advertising and promotional spending by the nation's cigarette makers rose 10 percent in 1989 from 1988, to $3.6 billion, the Federal Trade Commission reported, as domestic sales dropped 6.3 percent.
For each carton of cigarettes sold in 1989, the latest year for which figures were available, tobacco companies spent an average of $1.37 on ads and promotions, which the commission said was more than double the amount spent in 1980, about 58 cents a carton, when adjusted for inflation.


China's Premier Plans Visit to United Nations
Prime Minister Li Peng is scheduled to visit the United Nations in New York at the end of this month, Western diplomats and the official New China News Agency said today.
The visit will mark the first time a top Chinese leader has been in the United States since the military crackdown against the Chinese democracy movement in 1989.
Mr.
Li's one-day visit, to take part in a summit meeting of the 15 members of the Security Council, will coincide with a five-nation European trip that is seen as a sign that China is slowly restoring normal relations with much of Europe.


A Break in the Storm


Don't Pull the Plug On N.Y. Mental Health
To the Editor:
Most of us understand the economic pressure to cut spending in virtually every area of state government, including mental health.
It is essential that while legislators decide the size of the cuts that have to be made, they leave program managers maximum flexibility to decide how to manage with less.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.00
6.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.80
3.83
6.06
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.86
3.87
6.16
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.76
6.66
8.04
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.53
7.50
8.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.71
8.70
9.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.69
6.67
7.51
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


U.S. Told to Ban Tuna Imports to Protect Dolphins
A Federal judge has ruled that the Commerce Department must ban much of the nation's tuna imports to protect dolphins, a move that could result in higher canned tuna prices for American consumers.
The ban will cover $266 million worth of imports from about 30 countries, or slightly more than half of the 266,000 metric tons of tuna imported each year by the United States, Roddy Moscoso, a spokesman for the Commerce Department, said today.
The ban applies only to imports that include yellowfin tuna, sold as "chunk light tuna" in grocery stores.


City College Is Said to Miss Danger Signs
City College officials responsible for the celebrity basketball game at which nine people were killed should have known from a similar event the week before that the game would feature rap stars and draw a large crowd, but the officials nevertheless failed to take sufficient precautions, a report by a City University investigator has concluded.
City College officials have said that for several years now they have had an informal policy prohibiting rap performers in campus events because of a fear that college security guards would be overwhelmed by large crowds.


As Formal End Nears, Some Lament Passing of the Yugoslavia They Knew
As Germany prepares to recognize the end of Yugoslavia on Wednesday, paving the way for similar action by the rest of the European Community, some people from all corners of this fragmented land today lamented the passage.
"I'm sorry for the Yugoslavia I knew intimately," said Ksenija Pergar, an unemployed woman from Slovenia who just a year ago escorted foreigners on package tours through her republic's snow-capped alps, Sarajevo's mosques and Dubrovnik's limestone piazzas and palaces.
"But I understand in my mind, that it had to come to an end."


Fingerhut Cos. Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Dec 27


Oriental Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 10
Jan. 3
Jan. 11
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.1
6.6
Distillate production, daily
2.9
3.1
2.9
Gasoline stocks
224.5
221.7
220.3
Distillate stocks
142.1
143.4
126.8
Crude imports, daily
6.7
5.5
5.4
Product imports, daily
1.3
1.7
2.2
Crude stocks
333.5
328.7
323.0
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
86.4
85.6
80.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


All Is Scarce in Trenton Except Republicans
A jubilant Republican majority took control of both houses of the New Jersey Legislature today, bent on undoing much of what Gov.
Jim Florio and the Democrats accomplished over the last two years, including cutting at least part of their $2.8-billion tax increase.
But behind the Republican euphoria lies a sobering fiscal reality: The new Legislature will probably have to find about $2 billion in new money just to keep the budget at this year's level, and the problem could get much worse.
The bleak fiscal outlook emerges from three factors: The economy is stagnant or declining, and the prospects for an upturn are bleak; politically, the Republicans are locked into a tax cut of at least $590 million, and $550 million in "one-shot" revenues that were in this year's budget won't be available again next year.


Marshall &amp; Ilsley reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article on Monday about poetry readings on videotape misstated the telephone number for Off the Page, producer of the tapes.
Its number is (201) 808-8933.


Cal Names Gilbertson
KEITH GILBERTSON, offensive coordinator for undefeated Washington, was named head coach at the University of California yesterday.


Peoples Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dinkins Fills 2 Top Administration Posts
Mayor David N. Dinkins has chosen Emily Lloyd, the chief business strategist of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and a longtime transportation and environmental expert, to be New York City's sanitation commissioner, making her the first woman to hold the post.
The Mayor has also filled another vacancy in his administration, naming Herman L. Jenkins, 51 years old, a former college administrator and civil rights worker, to be the city's personnel commissioner, in charge of hiring, job testing and affirmative action policies.
Both appointments are to be announced at City Hall today.


For the 90's, Lavish Amounts Of Stinginess
BACK in the 80's, that designer decade, Anita Cleary of Cranbury, N.J., considered herself a typical middle-class suburban shopper of moderate means.
She and her husband at the time, an engineer with a six-figure salary, owned three cars, two homes and two planes.
She also foraged daily in Lord &amp; Taylor, skied regularly at Vail and dined out as frequently as a restaurant critic.
"I was a yuppie," said Ms.
Cleary, now 41 years old, whispering the Y-word as though it were synonymous with substance abuse.
"I had no awareness; I just spent money. I had an addiction for clothes and costume jewelry."


Recession Is Foregoing Link Between Newspaper Groups
In the American newspaper industry, the right hand, at long last, is about to grasp the left.
The two largest associations in the industry, one representing its business and editorial interests, the other its advertising sales efforts, announced yesterday that they intended to combine forces after more than four decades of separate operations.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day yesterday omitted the parent company of APAC Inc.
It is Ashland Oil Inc.


U.S. Underestimated Soviet Force In Cuba During '62 Missile Crisis
The Soviet Union had 43,000 troops in Cuba during the 1962 missile crisis, not 10,000 as reported by the Central Intelligence Agency, Robert S. McNamara said today upon returning from Havana and the final meeting of an American-Russian-Cuban series of conferences on the crisis.
Mr.
McNamara, who was Secretary of Defense from 1961 to 1967 under Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, said in an interview that Soviet officials also disclosed that they had sent Havana short-range nuclear weapons and that Soviet commanders there were authorized to use them in the event of an American invasion.
The initial report appeared today in The Washington Post.
The short-range nuclear weapons were in addition to medium-range nuclear weapons that would have required authorization from Moscow to use.


DIALOGUE: Should Congress Investigate the 'October Surprise'?; Don't Waste Time On This Wild Tale
For 10 years, arms smugglers, convicted felons, frauds and fugitives from justice have unsuccessfully peddled allegations of a so-called October surprise to the Iran-contra independent counsel, Iran-contra Congressional investigating committees, Senate Intelligence Committee and the public.
After hearing detailed testimony from Gary Sick, the Senate properly rejected a bill to spend $600,000 to pursue charges that he is now selling in a book.
Some will argue an investigation should be conducted just to lay the issue to rest.
But what would a new investigation do, on top of the ones already undertaken?
There will always be one more conspiracy-minded partisan who will come up with another titillating date, detail or account of events, particularly in an election year.


The Surge In Stocks Resumes
After a two-day breather, stock prices resumed their advance with feeling yesterday, with many indexes again bounding to new highs.
In heavy trading, the Dow Jones industrial average, which had set 8 records in the previous 12 trading days, repeated the feat, rising 60.60 points, or nearly 2 percent, to 3,246.20.
A chief factor cited by analysts for the market's surge was the weak retail sales report for December, which was disturbing but not unexpected.
The reason such bad news appeared to please investors is that it raised hopes of yet another move by the Federal Reserve to lower interest rates, which in the long run could help to lift corporate earnings.


Trenton Not Sunny About Runny-Egg Rule
A new issue has hatched in the Legislature.
Hours after being sworn in today, the Senate minority leader, John A. Lynch, a Democrat from New Brunswick, denounced a rule about runny eggs.
A state regulation effective Jan. 1 forbids restaurants and other businesses selling prepared food to serve uncooked or runny eggs because of the risk of salmonella bacteria.
The State Health Department issued the ban at the urging of the Federal Food and Drug Administration.


Prime Federal Bank FSB reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Israeli Parties Vow to Quit Coalition Over Peace Talks
The shift from procedural matters to substance in the peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians threatened today to bring down the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir.
Two far-right parties with enough seats between them to deny Mr.
Shamir his parliamentary majority said they were ready to quit the governing coalition because of reports that on Monday Israeli negotiators in Washington offered a plan for Palestinian self-rule in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Advanced Promotion Technologies Inc., Deerfield Beach, Fla., an electronic advertising service, named John A. Morton chief financial officer. *
ASA Tire Systems Group, Westborough, Mass., a division of ASA International Ltd., named Eli Szklanka president.


Ugly Ideas, and Democracy
Bradley Smith is a Californian who acknowledges that the Nazis were cruel to Jews but who denies that the Holocaust ever happened.
He has tried to expound his views in a 4,000-word essay submitted as an advertisement to several college newspapers -- giving headaches and heartaches to student editors.
In the process he gives the public some valuable, if unintended, lessons in the workings of a free press.
Many readers would blanch if they came upon Mr.
Smith's pseudo-scholarly tract.
Yes, he concedes, Jews were mistreated by the Nazis, and "many tragically perished in the maelstrom." But the idea that Nazi Germany exterminated six million Jews, Mr.
Smith contends, is an irresponsible exaggeration.
Gas chambers?
A myth.
Those actually were "life-saving" fumigation shelters to delouse clothing and prevent disease.


State Street Boston Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


DIAGLOGUE: Should Congress Investigate the 'October Surprise'?; An Official Inquiry Might Crack the Case
Will we ever know what happened during the so-called October surprise in the 1980 Presidential elections?
Or is this story fated to become a permanent mystery?
Congress may soon be in a position to answer that question.
Last August, House and Senate leaders announced their intention to investigate charges that members of the Reagan-Bush campaign in 1980 met secretly with Iranians to manipulate the timing of the release of the 52 U.S. hostages held in Iran.
President Bush and former President Ronald Reagan said they would welcome a bipartisan investigation.


Triton Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  FOR THE POLICE, A WOUNDED SYMBOL


Lansbury Considers New Role
Angela Lansbury may give up her role on the long-running hit series "Murder, She Wrote" to star in a television series based on the Oscar-winning film "Driving Miss Daisy," a CBS executive said today.
Peter Tortorici, the executive vice president for programming for CBS, said the network and Ms.
Lansbury have agreed to end the run of "Murder, She Wrote" should Ms.
Lansbury like the initial script for the "Daisy" series, which would be a weekly half-hour comedy-drama.


Attica Jury Is Still Out, But Judge Plans Holiday
Judge John T. Elfvin may be on vacation in Barbados when the jury in the Attica trial finishes deliberations, but he will still be among the first to know the verdict.
Judge Elfvin of Federal District Court announced today that he would leave Buffalo on Wednesday as planned, but that any verdict reached in his absence would be sealed until he returns on Feb. 10.


Israelis and Palestinians Hit Snag On Agenda for Peace Negotiations
Israelis and Palestinians, having resolved the shape of the table for their negotiations on Monday, immediately deadlocked today over the agenda for their talks.
Israel and Jordan, Israel and Syria, Israel and Lebanon, and Israel and the Palestinians all resumed negotiations at the State Department.
The results seemed to be mixed.


Pennsylvania R.E.I.T.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Nation's Retail Sales Take Fall, But Investors Push Dow to High
Retail sales in 1991 were the flattest in 30 years, finishing with three straight monthly declines, the Commerce Department reported today.
But the gloomy economic news raised expectations of further cuts in interest rates, an outlook that sent the stock market to a new high.
Retail sales fell four-tenths of 1 percent in December, the Commerce Department reported, adding that what had been an advance in November had been revised to a decline.


Bills' Treacherous Journey Winds Up Where It Started
Thurman Thomas knew in September that the Buffalo Bills' season would be measured in only one way by the team's fans: there could be no alternative to success.
"There's going to be a flood in Buffalo come January if we don't get to the Super Bowl," the Bills running back said then.
"And it's going to be from all the tears from these Buffalo fans.


Coleman Returns in Style
Derrick Coleman proved that he was 100 percent recovered from his concussion tonight as he came off the bench to score a team-high 20 points and grab 8 rebounds in leading the Nets to a 97-88 victory over the Dallas Mavericks at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
It was only the third-best scoring effort of the night as Derek Harper and Rolando Blackman paced the Mavericks with 28 and 24 points, respectively, but Coleman's output was enough to help the Nets improve to 15-21 on the season and boost them over the .500 mark at home at 11-0.


King World Productions Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Mets Not in the Ball Park In Negotiations With Cone
The Mets and David Cone, who exchanged proposals yesterday on a multiyear, multimillion-dollar contract, were termed "a long way apart" on an agreement, General Manager Al Harazin said.
"We're not close, but that was not unanticipated by me," said Harazin.
"These dealings follow a pattern, and that they opened high and that we opened low isn't a surprise."


Push for Better Schools In Memphis Takes On Importance for Nation
If President Bush's vision of the future of American schools has a shape, it is beginning to emerge in Memphis.
Memphis was the first major city to answer President Bush's call to become an "America 2000" community by drawing up a plan to fix its schools.
Slowly and laboriously, parents, educators, business leaders and civil rights advocates are working to build sturdy coalitions for change.
To win agreement, they have already had to jettison one of Mr.
Bush's key planks -- public money for private schools -- and add several different goals to make Mr.
Bush's plan their own.


Home Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ruptured Water Main Dumps 20 Million Gallons of Water on Washington


Food Notes
Thinking Green
At this time of year when fragile lettuces and herbs are costly and in short supply, it's good to know that a wholesale company that specializes in these items for restaurants will ship relatively small quantities to retail customers.
Fines Herbes (pronounced Feen-ZAIRB) in TriBeCa offers fresh baby lettuces, frilly loose salad greens in sweet and spicy flavors plus fragrant herbs and edible flowers.
Among the items are 13 different lettuces like baby Romaine, baby red Boston and frisee that are $4.75 a half-pound (from 6 to 12 heads, depending on the variety).
Assortments of salad greens, $3.75 a quarter pound (three to four servings), include sharp mustard greens, pungent cress, spicy Asian greens like tat soi and mizuna, and mesclun containing 18 varieties of leaves.
There are 23 kinds of fresh herbs, from dill and parsley to herbs like chervil and thyme that are harder to find to exotics like epazote for Mexican cooking and lemon grass for Thai and Vietnamese dishes.
Fines Herbes also has purple opal basil, lemon thyme and long branches of rosemary to use as skewers for grilling.
The herbs are sold in one-ounce lots for $1.50 to $3, a nice sized bunch.
Because the herbs, lettuces and flowers arrive fresh and in excellent condition, they will hold up for several days refrigerated.
Some varieties can even last up to a week.
They are shipped overnight.
The minimum shipping and handling charge is $14.
For information: call (800) 231-9022.
Sweets and More
Valentine's Day is still a month away but the French Culinary Institute, 462 Broadway (at Grand Street), has scheduled two courses with the day in mind in its expanded list of classes for nonprofessionals.
On Jan. 25 from 9 A.M. to 2 P.M., the class will cover two dinner menus.
One features lobster bisque and pheasant for two.
The other is a party menu with cornish hens and a sumptuous chocolate dessert.
At a class from 9 A.M. to 2 P.M. on Feb. 8, students will learn how to work with chocolate and make truffles and assorted filled chocolates.
The full-participation classes cost $160 each.
For information: (212) 219-8890.
Chili: A Global View
"The Great Chile Book" by Mark Miller with John Harrisson (Ten Speed Press, 1991, $14.95) is a colorful directory to 90 kinds of fresh and dried chilies, both sweet and hot.
It is the most concise, comprehensive guide to chilies to appear in print.
Unlike many books that concentrate on Mexico and the Southwest, it does not ignore European, Asian and Caribbean varieties.
Each type of chili (the authors prefer the Spanish spelling) is shown in a color photograph along with a description of its size, flavor and uses.
The chilies are also rated for hotness, using Mr.
Miller's own scale of 1 to 10.
A history of chilies, some recipes and listings of chili sources are included.
Culinary Connecticut
The visitors bureau in the Farmington Valley west of Hartford has come up with an enticing list of early American culinary events in historic houses and taverns in the region.
On Saturday from 11 A.M. to 1 P.M., participants will cook a colonial lunch on an open hearth at Noah Webster's Homestead in West Hartford.
The cost is $16 a person.
On Jan. 25 and Feb. 29 from 1 to 4 P.M., cocoa and cookies will be served during a sleigh ride and tour of a canal and an old school house in Avon.
The tour is $8 for children 6 to 12, $12 for people over 12.
A colonial dinner at the West Hartford home of Sarah Whitman Hooker, a cousin of Walt Whitman, will be held on Feb. 1 from 4 to 8 P.M.
It is $36 a person.
Hot cider, gingerbread and entertainment are scheduled at the Brown Elton Tavern, an 18th-century tavern in Burlington, on Feb. 8 from 1 to 4 P.M. for $5 a person.
Two events will celebrate George Washington.
On Feb. 15 from 1 to 4 P.M., there will be a colonial tea costing $10 a person at the Sarah Whitman Hooker Homestead.
On Feb. 22 from 11 A.M. to 1 P.M., there will be a Washington's birthday lunch at the Stanley-Whitman house in Farmington for $16 a person.
Advance reservations are required except for the one on Feb. 8 They can be obtained by sending checks, with name, address and telephone to the Farmington Valley-West Hartford Visitors Bureau, Box 1550, Avon, Conn. 06001.
For more information: (800) 468-6783 or, in Connecticut, (203) 674-1035.
GORGING FOR GOOD CAUSE
DOUGHNUTS will be consumed for a cause next Wednesday at Fisher &amp; Levy, 875 Third Avenue (52d Street).
The food shop and caterer, which began making homey cake-style doughnuts last fall, is holding a doughnut-eating contest from 7:45 to 8:45 A.M. and will contribute a dollar for every doughnut consumed to City Harvest, a charity that provides food for the homeless.
Chip Fisher, an owner of the company, said he expects that participants will be able to stuff down more than 20 doughnuts a piece in the hour.
City Harvest will also receive a dollar for every doughnut sold during the day.
The doughnuts are 45 cents each, $4.95 a dozen.


ALGERIAN LEADERS FORM NEW COUNCIL
The civilian and military officials who forced the resignation of President Chedli Benjedid on on Saturday formed a new five-member State Council today.
It was not clear how much real power the State Council would have, although it was supposed to fill the functions of the President.


The Wheel of Fortune: 149 Seek Arbitration
Barry Bonds, a two-time loser, and Doug Drabek, a two-time winner and the recipient of the largest salary ever awarded in a hearing, were among 149 players who filed for salary arbitration yesterday, the final day of the filing period.
No one had filed previously.
Eligible players have waited, in recent years, until the final day because they then have extra time before they have to submit their salary bids.
Players and clubs will exchange figures on Friday, an act that is certain to establish records for highest salaries submitted by a player and a club.


Premier Financial Services Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Surgery for Williams
TED WILLIAMS, the last major leaguer to bat .400 over a season, underwent surgery yesterday at Shands Hospital in Gainesville, Fla., where he was first treated after suffering a minor stroke last month.


Ziegler Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Grievance Withdrawn
The Major League Baseball Players Association yesterday withdrew a grievance over a conflict with the Republican National Convention at the Astrodome this summer that is forcing the Houston Astros to make a four-week road trip.
The 28-day, 26-game trip is needed to give work crews enough time to prepare the Astrodome for the convention, scheduled for Aug. 17-20.
The league's agreement with the players says trips of more than 19 days will not be scheduled without the permission of the union.
Neither the league nor the Astros consulted the union before making the agreement with the Republican Party.


McDonald's Executive Named Vice Chairman
A number of McDonald's employees are fond of saying that Jack M. Greenberg spent the last 18 months "getting ketchup in his veins" -- flipping hamburgers, scooping french fries and serving up extra-thick milkshakes.
Now, having learned firsthand what it is like to be a McDonald's operator and regional supervisor, Mr.
Greenberg has been named to the second-biggest job in the company.
The McDonald's Corporation said yesterday that Mr.
Greenberg, who was chief financial officer, had been promoted to the new position of vice chairman at the company, which is based in Oak Brook, Ill.


Xilinx Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Public &amp; Private; The Great White Myth
In a college classroom, a young white man rises and asks about the future.
What, he wants to know, can it possibly hold for him when most of the jobs, most of the good positions, most of the spots in professional schools are being given to women and, most especially, to blacks?
The temptation to be short, sarcastic, incredulous in reply is powerful.
But you have to remember that kids learn their lessons from adults.
That's what the mother of two black children who were sprayed with white paint in the Bronx said last week about the assailants, teen-agers who called her son and daughter "nigger" and vowed they would turn them white.
"Can you imagine what they are being taught at home?" she asked.


Student Drowns; 2d Is Missing
A 24-year-old Manhattan man drowned and a 19-year-old woman was missing yesterday, after their rowboat capsized in the choppy waters of Gardiners Bay, about 400 feet from shore, said the police in East Hampton, L.I.
Responding to a call from a shoreline resident at about 9:30 A.M., police and Coast Guard rescuers found the man, Jan Hecht, of 820 West End Avenue, floating beneath the 12-foot aluminum boat with his leg tangled in an anchor line.
Mr.
Hecht was taken to Southampton Hospital, where, the police said, he was pronounced dead on arrival at 1:45 P.M.


Star Banc Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


DIALOGUE: Should Congress Investigate the 'October Surprise'?; An Official Inquiry Might Crack the Case
Will we ever know what happened during the so-called October surprise in the 1980 Presidential elections?
Or is this story fated to become a permanent mystery?
Congress may soon be in a position to answer that question.
Last August, House and Senate leaders announced their intention to investigate charges that members of the Reagan-Bush campaign in 1980 met secretly with Iranians to manipulate the timing of the release of the 52 U.S. hostages held in Iran.
President Bush and former President Ronald Reagan said they would welcome a bipartisan investigation.


Steel Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Daily News Unions Resolve Power Struggle
Leaders of nine unions representing workers at The Daily News have resolved, at least temporarily, an internal struggle that had threatened to undermine union solidarity in the effort to save the bankrupt newspaper.
George E. McDonald, head of the Allied Printing Trades Council, the union coalition, apparently turned back a challenge to his leadership from the umbrella group's three largest unions at a meeting yesterday.


Albany's Leadership Void
The experts had predicted it.
But somehow this week's downgrading of New York State's safest bonds hit like a punch in the stomach.
The downgrading will not only cost the taxpayers millions of dollars in added interest costs.
It is the loudest signal yet that New York's political leaders are intolerably ineffective in resolving the state's worsening fiscal crisis.
There is a desperate need for leadership on all sides in Albany.
Not the same old partisan politics -- not Republicans versus Democrats, or upstate versus downstate, or the cities versus the suburbs -- but broad and unselfish leadership that puts the public's well-being ahead of narrow political gain.


H.I.V.-Infected Man Accused of Sodomy In Attack on Boy, 11
An 11-year-old boy was abducted yesterday as he walked to school on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, taken to a fourth-floor apartment and sodomized, the police said.
The police arrested a suspect who, they said later, was infected with the virus that causes AIDS.


Vertex Communications Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Southtrust Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rabies and Raccoons' Sorry Image
For years people regarded raccoons as cute and furry black-masked creatures that roved by moonlight across suburbia's lawns and wooded hills.
Their greatest offense was ripping into bags of trash.
Now, as rabies outbreaks sweep the metropolitan region, raccoons have replaced pit bulls as four-legged objects of public fear.


G.O.P. Vows Change in Trenton As It Takes Over the Legislature
The 205th New Jersey Legislature convened today, ushering in a new Republican majority and tough talk from party leaders who pledged to make sweeping changes in state government.
In a direct challenge to Gov.
Jim Florio and his Democratic administration, the new Senate President, Donald T. DiFrancesco, said he intended to use the investigatory powers of Senate committees "to oversee government operations" and would not hesitate to subpoena uncooperative administration officials.


Suntrust Banks Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hubco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Book Notes; Kitty Kelley Draws a Bead on the Royal Family
The House of Windsor is in for what the Queen herself might call a bit of bother.
Kitty Kelley, who has written best-selling unauthorized exposes of the American royals Frank Sinatra, Nancy Reagan and Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, has agreed to write a book about the British royal family, which Warner Books plans to publish in 1995.
Flush with money from the success of "Scarlett," the record-breaking best-selling sequel to "Gone With the Wind," Warner was looking for an equally dazzling book to bolster its nonfiction reputation.
When Simon &amp; Schuster, which published Ms.
Kelley's most recent book, "Nancy Reagan: The Unauthorized Biography," did not come up with as much money as the author and her agents at International Creative Management thought she deserved, Warner did.


Bias Attack Sends Police to the Bronx Seeking Help
The day after a 12-year-old Hispanic boy was punched and then smeared with white makeup in the Bronx, police officers toured the neighborhood in sound trucks asking witnesses to come forward.
At the boy's school, administrators reached out to students, who said they were starting to despair over the growing number of racial attacks.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  IRAQ ADMITS BIG A-BOMB PROGRAM
Iraq admitted buying many German components for a previously unknown uranium enrichment complex that could have produced enough nuclear explosive for four or five atomic bombs a year.
A1  U.S.
TO MEET WITH NORTH KOREANS
The Bush Administration is planning its first high-level official meeting with North Korea to discuss curbing the spread of nuclear arms.
A12  MIDEAST TALKS HIT NEW IMPASSE
Having resolved a dispute over procedure for their talks, Israelis and Palestinians immediately deadlocked over the agenda.
A1  Foes of talks threatened to bring down the Israeli Government.
A6  The P.L.O. is re-establishing formal ties to Lebanon's Government.
A6  MADE IN JAPAN -- WITH A TWIST
A company in a fledgling market, protected for years from competition by Japan's powerful bureaucracy, grew rapidly into a powerhouse.
But there is a wrinkle.
The company in question is American.
A1  JAPANESE LANGUAGE GAINS IN U.S.
American interest in the Japanese language has soared in the last five years as Japanese investment in, and trade with, the United States have increased.
A8  YUGOSLAV SPLINTERING MOURNED
As Germany prepared to recognize the end of Yugoslavia, paving the way for similar action by the rest of the European Community, some people from all corners of the fragmented land lamented the passage.
A3  NEW EXECUTIVE COUNCIL IN ALGERIA
The civilian and military officials who took power in Algeria formed a new five-member State Council to fill the executive void left by the forced resignation of President Chadli Benjedid.
A5  CHINESE PREMIER TO VISIT U.N.
Prime Minister Li Peng is to visit the United Nations, the first time a top Chinese leader has been in the United States since the military crackdown against the Chinese democracy movement in 1989.
A7  INDUSTRY NEAR HALT IN MOSCOW
Moscow officials warned that industry was coming to a standstill throughout the city as Russia's economy unraveled and raw materials were no longer being supplied from the other republics.
A9  The Honecker standoff in Moscow is raising intense debate in Chile.
A10  NEW INFORMATION ON CUBAN CRISIS
The Soviet Union had 43,000 troops and short-range nuclear missiles in Cuba during the 1962 missile crisis, former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara said.
A11  El Salvador and rebels reached final agreement on a peace accord.
A13  Moderate progress in the fight against drugs was asserted.
A13  Swindon Journal: A high-tech center of the 80's shows a decline.
A4  National A14-22  RETAIL SALES DOWN; MARKET UP
A Government report on retail sales marked a setback for the economy but also suggested that further cuts in interest rates may be in the offing and could provide a lift for the stock market.
A1  INDICTMENT IN H.U.D.
CASE
Lance H. Wilson, once a top official at H.U.D., was indicted on fraud and conspiracy charges arising from the long-running investigation of the agency during the Reagan Presidency.
A1  A SHOCKING CANDIDATE
If Patrick Buchanan shocks or even offends with his speeches, it is not by mistake.
In fact, that is the very point of his conservative Presidential campaign.
A1  CRITICISM OF BOSTON POLICE
Criticizing the handling of complaints about the Boston police, a panel recommended that the police commissioner be replaced.
A14  TAKING THE HEALTH ISSUE PUBLIC
At "town meetings" around the country, Democrats seek to capitalize on public discontent over health care and hear constituents' views on ideas for overhauls.A14  ARREST IN SERIAL KILLINGS
A man who spent nearly 10 years in prison for the beating death of his infant daughter was charged with two of the 19 California killings of prostitutes and drug users dating to 1986.
A14  RULING ON CLAIMS AGAINST U.S.
In Justice Clarence Thomas's first opinion, the Supreme Court increased the liability the Government can face for damages caused by Federal employees.
A15  IMPLANT ALTERNATIVES REJECTED
The leading maker of breast implants has rejected past efforts to develop implants of materials that might have the drawbacks of sil icone.
A18  Scientists found cosmic fireworks with a gamma ray telescope.
A22  Biologists released endangered condors in California.
A15  Magic Johnson urged that President Bush speak out on AIDS.
A17  In a realignment at the C.I.A., the No. 2 official resigned.
A17  Education B7  Memphis is charting what may be a national course to better education.
Teachers find instant history lessons in the Soviet Union's breakup.
Metropolitan Desk Digest, B1 NEW-FOUND POWER FOR G.O.P.
A new Republican majority challenged Governor Florio and pledged major changes in state government as the 205th Legislature convened in Trenton.
A1  A CHANGE FOR TRANSIT
Governor Cuomo has decided the state cannot afford to commit itself to paying for another five-year program to improve subways, buses and commuter rail lines, signaling a change for mass transit.
A1  Neediest Cases B2  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-10  Cooking illiteracy.C1  Parsimony becomes chic.
C1  Jumping into a Velcro wall.
C1  Health Page C12  After a disaster, experts say, rescue work can take a toll  Arts/Entertainment C13-20  An unusual de Kooning.
C13  Film: "35 Up." C13 Word and Image: Kitty Kelley draws a bead on royal family.
C13  Obituaries B6  Rev.
John B. Sheerin, a Catholic editor and columnist.
Sports  Basketball: Knicks win.
B9  Columns: George Vecsey on the Yankees.
B9  On Pro Football B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  Albany's leadership void.
Deception on Capitol Hill.
Ugly ideas, and democracy.
Letters A20  Anna Quindlen: The great white myth.
A21  Gary Sick: Congress should investigate the "October surprise." A21  Mitch McConnell: Don't waste time on this wild tale.
A21  Robert W. Crandall: Detroit's main problem -- Ohio, Illinois . . .
A21


Horizon Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Television; Gamblers Who Face Loaded Dice
The unstartling message of tonight's report from "48 Hours" is that the compulsive gambler is a sure-fire loser.
"Gambling Fever," at 10 P.M. on Channel 2, focuses on several dire examples of the species.
Jim Howard is interviewed in a Federal prison, where he wound up in 1990 after kidnapping a neighbor's 16-year-old son in hopes that the ransom would replenish the life savings he had left in Atlantic City.
At 2:30 A.M. in a Deadwood, S.D., casino, Bernard Goldberg, one of tonight's reporters, comes on a teary 29-year-old man named Tim who has just gone through his last $350, which he raised on a bad check.
Erin Moriarty interviews a mother of four at a rehabilitation center; she managed to pour the family's savings into video keno, 5 cents at a time.


Books of The Times; German Novelists Warn Against Curbing Freedom
The Tango Player  By Christoph Hein  Translated by Philip Boehm. 220 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $20.
The Training Ground  By Siegfried Lenz  Translated by Geoffrey Skelton. 425 pages.
Henry Holt. $24.95.


Supreme Court Raises U.S. Negligence Liability
A Supreme Court decision, Justice Clarence Thomas's first since joining the Court, today increased the Federal Government's potential liability for damages caused by the negligence of Government employees.
The unanimous opinion rejected the Government's legal arguments for limited damages in a case brought by the widow of a man who suffered irreversible brain damage as the result of an accident at a Veterans' Administration hospital.


Country Music Is Hot and Television Is Serving It Up


Country Music Is Hot and Television Is Serving It Up
Call it a long overdue reaction to the noise of heavy metal or the monotony of rap.
Call it an inevitable cyclical return to the musical lure of melody and narrative.
For that matter, call it shrewd marketing.
But one thing is certain: country music is simmering again these days and television is scrambling to get into the lucrative act.
Among the more prominent current efforts are these:
*"Emmylou at the Ryman" (tonight at 8 and 11 o'clock on TNN, the Nashville Network).
Emmylou Harris and her new acoustic backup band, the Nash Ramblers, play the old Nashville auditorium that was home to the Grand Ole Opry from 1943 to 1974.
*"This Is Garth Brooks" (Friday at 9 on NBC).
The new superstar, taped at the Reunion Arena in Dallas, zestfully shows why he has sold more than 14 million albums in the last 2 years.


The Pop Life
Hall of Fame
The seventh annual Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame awards lands in town tonight at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, and it's bringing lots of guitars with it.
"We've got a lineup of guitar players that's mind-blowing," said Ahmet Ertegun, a co-chairman of Atlantic Records and the chairman of the Rock-and-Roll Hall of fame.
"B. B. King, he's presenting an award to Bobby (Blue) Bland. Neil Young is expected to be there, and so will Steve Cropper, Jeff Beck, Jimmy Page, Carlos Santana and Keith Richards. The Edge will be there, and we hope that Phil Spector will play rhythm guitar. It's going to be fun."


Dekalb Genetics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


First Federal Savings Bank of Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Favorite Son Elects to Fly With a Favorite Neighbor
To Andy Tovrea, the pilot who shuttles Senator Tom Harkin from town to town in a twin-engine puddle jumper, the Iowa Democrat is not just another customer.
And that is not because Mr.
Harkin is running for President.
Mr.
Tovrea grew up in the small town of Norwalk, Iowa, four miles from the even smaller town of Cumming, where Mr.
Harkin was reared.
Although the 40-year-old Mr.
Tovrea is 12 years younger than Mr.
Harkin, they both remember the early days, when politics was on no one's mind.


In a Belt-Tightening Age, a $5.2 Million Restaurant Is Born
While the rest of the United States has been battening down the hatches, Terry Peay and Mark Miller have been spending money like sailors on shore leave.
In this age of austerity, their new $5.2 million restaurant, Red Sage, stands out.
Not since Warner LeRoy opened the $10 million Potomac in the heady mid-80's has Washington seen such a fantasy.
The difference is that the LeRoy enterprise looked like fin de siecle bordello and served bordello quality food.
The Red Sage has been done with panache, and Mark Miller, considered among the country's most imaginative chefs, knows how to cook.
The restaurant opened on Monday, and it's already heavily booked.
Dinner will be about $30.


Western Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Observatory's First Findings Hold Surprises
An awesome panorama of cosmic violence, previously undetected and largely unimagined, is coming into focus with the first discoveries of the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, the large spacecraft that has been orbiting Earth since April.
In reports today at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society, scientists described the detection of strong gamma ray emissions from such exotic celestial objects as quasars and pulsars and a veritable fireworks of gamma ray bursts apparently occurring at random, perhaps in the outermost regions of the universe.


U.N. Guards Can Help Contain Civil Conflict; Violate Sovereignty?
To the Editor:
Brian Urquhart, in "Who Can Stop Civil Wars?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 29), explores the options for an expanded role of the United Nations peacekeeping mechanism.
Although his analysis is well intentioned, the practicality of his approach and conclusion are not convincing.
Reality does not mesh well with Mr.
Urquhart's erstwhile moral suggestion.


Re-enactment Tape Is Allowed in Officer's Trial
The judge in the manslaughter trial of a white Teaneck police officer accused of killing a black teen-ager in 1990 today accepted into evidence an unusual videotaped re-enactment that indicates that the victim's arms had been raised above his head at the moment the fatal shot was fired.
The hourlong film provides the prosecution with a graphic, full-color tool to support at least three eyewitnesses who are expected to testify that the youth had his hands up when he was shot in the back.


Jennifer Convertibles Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


No. 2 C.I.A. Official Quits Post
Richard J. Kerr, the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, announced his resignation today, and President Bush is expected to appoint Rear Adm.
William O. Studeman as Mr.
Kerr's replacement, Administration officials said.
Admiral Studeman, who will be 52 years old on Thursday, is the director of the National Security Agency, which is responsible for global eavesdropping and the security of America's secret communciations around the world.


Fitzpatrick Triumphs Over Illness and Wings
Under ordinary circumstances, it would have been fitting to dwell on how unlikely it was for the lowly Islanders to defeat the high-powered Detroit Red Wings for the second time in eight days.
But the Islanders' 6-2 victory tonight had a more compelling subplot: the first victory of the season for Mark Fitzpatrick, a goalie for the Islanders who is attempting a comeback after having endured two seasons with a rare blood disorder.


Sports of The Times; Guess Who Awakened the Yankees
As I was saying during the World Series between the Brooklyn Twins and the Manhattan Braves, isn't it terrible how those selfish New York teams are ruining baseball?
You know how the teams from the big television markets are dominating baseball.
If I have to watch another Cubs-Angels World Series, I think I'll scream.


'Comfort Girls' Protest Japanese Leader's Visit


Lazare Kaplan International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


U.N. Guards Can Help Contain Civil Conflict
To the Editor:
Brian Urquhart, one of the fathers of United Nations peacekeeping, has trenchantly addressed the U.N.'s continuing inability to help end the bloodshed and devastation engendered in current civil conflicts ("Who Can Stop Civil Wars?", Op-Ed, Dec. 29).


Bridge
If one listed the numbers of living world champions by city, New York would be an easy winner.
In the women's division alone there are nine, and two of these were successful as teammates in the Flight A Swiss Teams at the Tri-State Regional Championships in Port Chester, N.Y., on Sunday.
One was Kitty Bethe, who was a Venice Trophy winner in Perth, Australia, in 1989, and now gives instruction at the Culbertson Club, 24 Fifth Avenue.
The other was Sue Picus, who won the same world title two years later in Yokohama, Japan, and sat South on the diagramed deal in Port Chester.


Rescue of Insurer Advances
California insurance regulators said today that they had removed one of the last hurdles to their plan to rescue the failed Executive Life Insurance Company by settling a tax dispute with the Internal Revenue Service.
The I.R.S. had filed a claim against Executive Life last year for $643 million in a dispute over the insurer's taxes for 1981 through 1983.
It left open the possibility that it might file further claims for subsequent years.
But John Garamendi, the California Insurance Commissioner, said at a news conference here that the I.R.S. had agreed to settle the case for $73 million and that the settlement covered all years from 1981 through 1990.


INSIDE
A Phone Deal for Ukraine
A.T.&amp; T. is joining with the Ukrainian Government and the Dutch telephone company to build and operate a new long-distance telephone service in the newly independent republic.
Page D1.
Yugoslav Breakup Mourned
As Germany prepared to recognize the end of Yugoslavia, some people from all corners of the fragmented land lamented its passage.
Page A3.


Rudy's Restaurant Group Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Sept 29


Accounts
*
Signal Apparel Co., Chattanooga, Tenn., a sportswear company, to Earle Palmer Brown, Atlanta, from Reid Associates, Charlotte, N.C.
Billings were not disclosed.


P.L.O. Ties to Lebanon Are Formally Renewed
The Palestine Liberation Organization is re-establishing formal links with the Lebanese Government, and has sent a representative to Beirut to reopen the organization's office, which has been closed since Israel invaded the country in 1982.
The P.L.O. representative, Chafik al-Hout, met with President Elias Hrawi on Monday, and said he delivered a message from Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman.
The contents were not made public, but the P.L.O. representative said it stressed the need for Palestinian-Lebanese coordination at the Middle East peace talks.
Both the Palestinians and Lebanon are taking part in face-to-face negotiations with the Israelis in Washington this week.


Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Under the Wing of Japan Inc., A Fledgling Enterprise Soared
As made-in-Japan stories of corporate success go, this one is a classic.
A company in a fledgling market was protected for years from competition by Japan's powerful bureaucracy.
It grew rapidly and piled up profits.
Today, it is a powerhouse, rich and entrenched, so dominant that outsiders have little chance of cracking into its lucrative bailiwick.
It is also a story that illustrates the very system that American executives, like those accompanying President Bush last week, have long complained makes Japan a closed market.
But there is a wrinkle.
The company in question is American -- Aflac Inc. of Columbus, Ga., which until very recently was named the American Family Corporation.


Corrections
A brief report by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day yesterday about Ames Department Stores Inc. referred incorrectly to the company's debt reorganization plan submitted to the United States Bankruptcy Court on Monday.
It was the company's initial plan, submitted after a deadline extension had been granted; it was not a revision.


Magazine Ad Pages Off 8.7% Last Year
The Publishers Information Bureau yesterday reported the third-largest decline in total annual advertising pages for magazines since the association began tracking those figures in 1950.
The bureau, which is based in New York, said that in 1991, total pages fell 8.7 percent, to 156,650, from 171,536 in 1990.
Only in 1961 and 1958, with declines of 8.9 percent and 14.1 percent, respectively, were the declines larger.
In 1990, ad pages fell 3.7 percent from 1989.


The Torn Yugoslav Quilt
Is there a Yugoslavia?
Two of Yugoslavia's six republics, Slovenia and Croatia, will be formally recognized as independent by Germany today, with other European Community nations expected to follow suit.


CPB Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Albany reports earnings for Qtr to Dec. 31


Onbancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Add Cocoa, Sugar and Milk And Stir Up Some Memories
HOT cocoa is my tea with a madeleine.
A cup of rich, steamy chocolate evokes special childhood memories, the vivid recollections of my first attempts at preparing food.
It was in winter, late on a weekend afternoon after sledding in the park, that my father and I would make cocoa together.
I remember first spooning the cocoa powder into a cup from a decorative paper box with a wax paper lining, then adding some sugar and mixing the two.


U.S.-Japan Exchanges Spurred by Bush Trip
While most people were counting the automobiles and auto parts to come from President Bush's talks in Tokyo last week, some Americans and Japanese welcomed promises of increased cultural exchanges and specifically the promotion of Japanese language studies in this country.
American interest in Japanese has soared in the last five years as Japanese investment in, and trade with the United States have increased.
In 1991, though, the growth in Japanese studies leveled off, mainly because of a national shortage of good teachers and of funds, according to a Japanese official in New York.


Tests Show Graf Must Get Some Rest
Tests have shown that the skin rash that caused Steffi Graf to pull out of the Australian Open just before her first-round match is related to a nonspecific viral infection that is medically untreatable and requires at least 10 days of rest.
Graf's agent, Phil dePicciotto, said Graf underwent a series of blood tests after a dermatologist was unable to diagnose the source of a rash that began to plague her after a practice session in Melbourne, Australia.
Doctors did not say whether the virus is linked to the ear infection that precipitated Graf's withdrawal from Hopman Cup competition two weeks ago.


A.T.&amp;T. to Provide Ukraine's Phone Links
A.T.&amp; T. announced today that it would team up with the Ukrainian Government and the Dutch telephone company to build and operate a new long-distance telephone service in the newly independent republic.
The deal marks one of the first big business agreements between an American company and a former Soviet republic since the official dismemberment of the Soviet Union last month.
It is also the first time that the American Telephone and Telegraph Company will own part of a long-distance network in a foreign country.


Review/Opera; Some Friends Get Together for 'Boheme'
"La Boheme" at the Metropolitan Opera House: it is a standard event that when well stocked with stars, as Sunday night's benefit for the Pension Fund was, can command high prices and loyal attendance.
For more frequent followers of the form, pace Luciano Pavarotti, pace Mirella Freni, the evening promised business as usual, just at a slightly more fevered pitch.
Yet what emerged was something much finer.
Given all the ills suffered by opera houses from economic pressures, erratic taste, scheduling difficulties, temperaments and accidents; given the fact that singers are now around each other hardly long enough to catch a cold; given that familiarity breeds routine: given all that, the Metropolitan Opera showed for one night what it was like to present a repertory opera as if it were a company and not a house.


Polish Aircraft Workers Strike
About 50,000 workers in Poland's 14 aircraft factories staged a one-day strike today to demand Government support for the industry, a spokesman for the strikers said.
The Government has refused to finance restructuring of the industry, which is troubled by the collapse of trade with the former Soviet Union and a decline in orders from the Polish Air Force.
The walkout followed a one-hour strike on Monday by workers in up to 80 percent of Poland's factories to protest energy price rises.


Ohio State Puts a Scare Into Indiana
As if the rivalry needed some spice, the first meeting this season between Indiana and Ohio State produced something new in the high-intensity matchup that could eventually determine a Big Ten conference champion: a villain.
The terms of Hoosier hospitality were rewritten for the return of Ohio State's Lawrence Funderburke, Indiana's big man off campus, who returned to Assembly Hall tonight.


Price Co.  reports earnings for 16wks to Dec 22


Kinark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Washington: It Isn't Wall Street
The main thing he learned in Washington, said Robert R. Glauber, who is resigning Friday as Under Secretary of the Treasury for Finance and returning to academic life, is that there is no clean mechanism here to resolve conflicts.
On Wall Street, his academic specialty, "the markets force issues to a resolution," he said.


Deception on Capitol Hill
It's plainly wrong for a member of Congress to collaborate with a public relations firm to produce knowingly deceptive testimony on an important issue.
Yet Representative Tom Lantos of California has been caught doing exactly that.
His behavior warrants a searching inquiry by the House Ethics Committee.
Mr.
Lantos is co-chairman of the Congressional Human Rights Caucus.
An article last week on The Times's Op-Ed page by John MacArthur, the publisher of Harper's magazine, revealed the identity of a 15-year-old Kuwaiti girl who told the caucus that Iraqi soldiers had removed scores of babies from incubators and left them to die.


DIALOGUE: Should Congress Investigate the 'October Surprise'?; An Official Inquiry Might Crack the Case
Will we ever know what happened during the so-called October surprise in the 1980 Presidential elections?
Or is this story fated to become a permanent mystery?
Congress may soon be in a position to answer that question.
Last August, House and Senate leaders announced their intention to investigate charges that members of the Reagan-Bush campaign in 1980 met secretly with Iranians to manipulate the timing of the release of the 52 U.S. hostages held in Iran.
President Bush and former President Ronald Reagan said they would welcome a bipartisan investigation.


Harlem Hospital Doctor Faces 'Dumping' Charges
The Harlem Hospital doctor who hospital officials said turned away a woman in labor, forcing her to give birth in the hospital's waiting room, is to be charged today with a criminal misdemeanor, making him the first doctor to be prosecuted under a nine-year-old state law that bars hospitals from turning patients away in emergencies.
When the baby, Jeffrey Brown, was born last fall on a stretcher outside the hospital emergency room and wrapped in paper examination gowns because no blankets were available, the case sent waves of outrage throughout the medical community.


Cordero Has Surgery
Jockey ANGEL CORDERO had his spleen removed yesterday and is in stable condition in the intensive care unit of Long Island Jewish Hospital, according to FRANK SANABRIA, the jockey's agent.


Xscribe Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Little Oversight for Big Tax Breaks, Albany Panel Is Told
New York State and its local governments grant as much as $500 million a year in tax breaks to businesses with strikingly little oversight to insure that such actions create jobs, the Republican State Comptroller and a Democratic State Senator charged today.
Their comments came at a hearing on the state's approximately 150 industrial development agencies, which under state law are granted broad authority to issue tax-free bonds and forgive state and local taxes to attract development.


Eight Ball in the Side Pocket, Ma'am
"You got trouble!" is what Prof.
Harold Hill would shout if his train dropped him in deepest Queens.
"Trouble with a capital T! And that rhymes with P! And that stands for pool!"
Friends, we're talking about the Howard Beach Billiard Club.
Young Iowa boys, the sham professor from "The Music Man" warned, start with pool, but before long will assuredly manifest "assorted jungle animal instincts."


Mercantile Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fluke (John) Mfg Co. Inc.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Bypass to a Full Life
To the Editor:
I was appalled by the disturbing "New Years" (editorial, Jan. 1): ". . . he was lucky. . . .He hadn't needed open-heart surgery . . . Her triple bypass operation, though successful, could wear out in a few years." I have had a heart attack, angioplasty (two occasions) and triple bypass surgery (almost five years ago).
I am 71, female, vital, exuberant, active, interested -- and hope to continue into the 21st century.
Let me reassure anyone who has had (or expects to have) angioplasty or open-heart surgery: it is worth it!
JUSTINE M. KUPPLER Cliffside Park, N.J., Jan. 4, 1992


Dreyfus Strategic Governments Income Inc. reports earnings for As of Nov 30


First Georgia Holding Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton Seizes on Asia Trip To Depict Bush as Beatable
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who was helped by encouraging early polls in New Hampshire and a spate of good press notices, is seizing on President Bush's flawed Japan foreign trade mission as evidence that the Republicans are beatable this year and that he is the one to do it.
In recent days, the Presidential contender has begun attacking the Bush Administration with new vigor, casting himself as the change-oriented candidate and -- as the chief beneficiary of the early political handicapping -- sparing little attention for his Democratic opponents.


Richardson, Bobsled Chief, Is Suspended by Federation
The turmoil that has engulfed the United States Bobsled Federation for several years continued yesterday when the federation board of directors suspended its chairman, Neil Richardson.
By a vote of 9-3, Richardson was forced to step aside because of his role in the recent dispute between the federation and four athletes -- Edwin Moses, Willie Gault, Greg Harrell and Brian Shimer -- who had filed a grievance asserting they had been denied a fair chance to make the Albertville Olympics as a four-man team.


Fetisov Is Suspended By N.H.L. for 5 Games
Devils defenseman SLAVA FETISOV was suspended for five games yesterday by the National Hockey League for a high-sticking incident involving Pittsburgh's MARIO LEMIEUX on Jan. 2.
LOU LAMORIELLO, the Devils' president, indicated that the team had no plans to appeal.
Fetisov said the incident was purely accidental.
BRYAN O'NEILL, the N.H.L.'s executive vice president, essentially agreed.


Carolina First Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


IP Timberlands Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lucile Powell Singleton, Radio Executive, 98
Lucile Powell Singleton, one of the first female executives at CBS Radio, died last Wednesday at the South Roanoke Nursing Home in Virginia.
She was 98 years old.
She died of influenza, said her nephew, George Lightfoot Singleton of Birmingham, Ala.


After a Disaster, Experts Say, Rescue Work Can Take a Toll
WHEN an engine fell off American Airlines flight 191 near O'Hare International Airport in 1979, the resulting crash killed 273 people.
Apart from the death toll, there was a more subtle emotional toll.
Some of the greatest suffering was among the police officers who sifted through the wreckage to gather pieces of mutilated bodies.


New 'Lost Generation': The Cooking Illiterate
WITH an entrenched recession and a greater emphasis on simple, inexpensive pleasures, Americans say they would like to do more cooking at home.
But once they arrive in the kitchen, will they know what to do?


Florio Urges a New Fund for Economic Recovery
In a speech that focused largely on New Jersey's economic recovery and the plight of the middle class, Gov.
Jim Florio asked the Legislature today to back a series of plans to create more than 100,000 new jobs and to make it easier for middle-income residents to buy homes and to send their children to college.
"People need help, and they need hope," Mr.
Florio said in his annual State of the State message.
"Not next year. Not somewhere down the road. They need it now." 7 Points by Florio
He outlined these seven major initiatives that he said his administration would pursue during the remaining two years of his term:


Hillenbrand Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


BRIEFS
*
American Cyanamid Co., Wayne, N.J., sold its Glendale Technologies Inc. unit to Bilsom A.B. of Sweden for undisclosed terms. *C.
E.
Chappell &amp; Sons Inc., Syracuse, a retailer, will seek Chapter 11 protection and close several stores.


Girl Is Raped In Bias Case, Police Report
In what the police have classified as a bias-related incident, a 15-year-old high school girl was abducted from a bus stop in the Flatbush-Flatlands section of Brooklyn yesterday morning, had her eyes taped shut and was driven to another location and raped, the police said.
The case was deemed bias-related because ethnic remarks were used by the two abductors, the police said.
The victim is white and the abductors are black.


U.S.-North Korea Talks Planned On State of Nuclear Development
The Bush Administration, concerned about North Korea's nuclear program but encouraged by Pyongyang's recent assertions that it would agree to international inspections and safeguards, is planning the first high-level official meeting to discuss the issue with North Koreans, the State Department indicated today.
The approach to North Korea comes at a time when American experts on nuclear proliferation are voicing doubts about Pyongyang's intentions in signing arms control agreements with South Korea, including a pledge of a nuclear-free peninsula.
They are also skeptical of assurances by Kim Il Sung, an increasingly isolated leader in a vanishing Communist world, that he will open all nuclear plants to international inspection, nearly seven years after signing the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.


Implant Maker Is Said to Resist Design Changes
The Dow Corning Corporation, the leading maker of silicone gel breast implants, has rejected efforts to develop alternatives without the problems of silicone, according to designers of the other implants.
Critics of the company, which is a joint venture of the Dow Chemical Company and the Corning Corporation, say it did not want to incur the costs of developing substitutes and did not want to create the impression that there was any reason to question the use of silicone.
The critics say silicone gel implants can lead to serious auto-immune disease and other problems.


St. John's Sinks, Oh So Slowly, in the South
For a basketball game that looked for the longest time as if it was something from the peach-basket era, tonight's St.
John's-Miami game certainly finished with all the pulsating drama of a Final Four game.
It even came with a surprise ending, with upstart Miami hitting 11 free throws and a 3-point shot by a freshman, Ochiel Swaby, in the final 6 minutes 41 seconds to upset the Redmen, 45-42, before 4,843 fans at the Miami Arena.


Unifirst Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Nu Horizons Electronics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Review/Film; That '7 Up' Group Is 35 Years Old Now, And Drooping a Bit
Michael Apted's landmark "7 Up" series, which began as an attempt to document the long-range effects of social and economic disparities among English schoolchildren of "startlingly different backgrounds," has become much, much more.
These transfixing films, the latest of which is "35 Up," reveal a reality that cannot be found in nature.
The series' ambitious time-lapse method, whereby subjects are revisited at regular seven-year intervals, makes possible an astonishingly intensive view of their lives and evolution.
At 35, not surprisingly, many of Mr.
Apted's former 7-year-olds have begun to squirm under the burden of such scrutiny.
"35 Up," which opens today at the Film Forum, finds this series growing increasingly rueful with age.
Some of the participants have realized early goals, but many others see their dreams receding.
Married, settled, noticeably bulkier, some sit surrounded by kitchen gadgets and family snapshots, speaking wistfully about their annual vacations.
Many talk tearfully about losing their parents, as does the otherwise hardboiled Tony (participants have been identified only by their first names throughout the series), who calls his mother's death "the worst moment of my life." His mother, he says, "was and still is the best girl in the world."


Motorola Net Up 15.5%
Motorola Inc.'s earnings rose 15.5 percent in the fourth quarter of 1991.
Profits totaled $126 million, or 96 cents a share, compared with $109 million, or 82 cents a share, a year earlier.
Sales were up nearly 4 percent to $3.04 billion from $2.93 billion.
For the year, earnings were down 9 percent to $454 million, or $3.44 a share, from $499 million, or $3.80 a share, in 1990.
Sales increased 4 percent to $11.34 billion from $10.89 billion.
The company's semiconductor, paging and cellular subscriber businesses did well in the final quarter.
Motorola stock gained 37.5 cents today, closing at $70.625 on the Big Board.


St. Paul Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Treasury Prices Decline Once More
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday for the fourth straight session on heavy trading, despite further evidence that the economy remains weak.
Reports that retail sales fell for the third straight month in December and that auto sales for the first 10 days of January remained at low levels did not impress traders.


Fly Through Air, Hit a Wall. Now Stay There.
BOB OUELETTE was hoping to jump early.
He wanted to get something on the books for the others to shoot for.
He is a round-faced man of 23, studying to be a conductor.
But now was not the time to ponder music.
What mattered was how adroitly he could leap off a trampoline and stick to a Velcro wall.
"Ten feet or so ought to win it," he said.
"Looks like it will take my best. I hope I stick."


C-Cor Electronics Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Dec 27


Seeking Safer Treatments for Schizophrenia
In a race to develop a drug with a potential market of billions of dollars a year, many of the largest pharmaceutical companies are seeking a safer and more effective treatment for schizophrenia.
"It's a very hot topic," said Dr.
Deborah Dauphinais, chief of the psychopharmacology research program at the National Institute of Mental Health in Rockville, Md.


Intertrans Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Metropolitan Diary
A FRIEND writes:
I was given a wolf for Christmas.
Most guys get gloves, shirts, socks, suspenders, belts, booze, loot like that.
As a kid, I once even got bunny slippers.
Now I get a wolf.
Well, not really a wolf that will pad around my eat-in-kitchen-rent-controlled apartment, but, rather, a generous part of the $35 it takes to adopt a wolf.


Glendale Bancorp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Former Top Official In H.U.D. Is Indicted On Charges of Fraud
A Federal grand jury today indicted a former top official at the Department of Housing and Urban Development on charges of fraud, conspiracy and false statements.
It was the first indictment of a senior H.U.D. employee in an investigation of charges of widespread mismanagement in the department under the Reagan Administration.
The official, Lance H. Wilson, was charged with wrongdoing in a 24-count indictment after a two-year inquiry by Arlin M. Adams, the independent prosecutor who has been investigating the H.U.D. affair.
Accusation on Letters
The charges center on Mr.
Wilson's activities after he left the agency in 1984 and became a senior vice president at Paine Webber, the brokerage firm in New York.
Mr.
Wilson left Paine Webber last June and is now self-employed.


Portable Registers To the Rescue of Red-Hot Spenders
Two retail technology companies are planning to introduce hand-held portable cash registers that would allow roving clerks to handle customers waiting in checkout lines or anywhere else in a store.
During sales or holiday periods, the devices could help relieve the crush of customers at retailers lucky enough to have crowds.
The devices are also being marketed as a way to provide exclusive service to big spenders, instead of subjecting them to the indignity of waiting their turns at checkout counters.


C.D. Yields Keep Dropping
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit continued to decline for the week ended yesterday, according to figures released by The Bank Rate Monitor.
The lowering of interest rates this year to help stimulate the economy continues to hurt some consumers, especially those who rely on savings accounts and other relatively low-risk interest-paying investments.
Banks have not been reducing interest charged on loans as fast as they have cut the interest they offer depositors.


Publishing Venture
Two former colleagues at Adweek magazine have formed Sponsored Publications Inc. in New York, which will produce magazines that corporations can offer to consumers by subscription or as premiums with product purchases.
Kenneth Fadner, who was president and chief executive of A/S/M Communications, Adweek's parent, is chairman, and Larry Dobrow, formerly an Adweek senior editor, is president.
The company has also opened an office in Chicago, headed by Gordon H. Rosberg Jr., a longtime specialty-publishing executive.


Louis Harris Forms New Polling Company
If President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia wanted to find out whether this week's scattered protests indicate how the broad public feels about his radical economic changes, he could call in a team from LH Research in New York.
That is the new public opinion and market research firm being formed by one of the noted veterans of the polling business, the 71-year-old Louis Harris, and his partner, Robert F. Wagner Jr., the former New York City school board president.
"We want to put a lot of emphasis on a whole new kind of international polling," Mr.
Harris said.
"We want to find out things like 'What are the limits of consent by the governed?' "


Northland Cranberries Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


KU Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Correction
Because of a typographical error, an article yesterday about the American steel industry misstated the age of Japanese steel-making equipment.
It was built in the 1970's.


U.N. Guards Can Help Contain Civil Conflict; A World Police Force
To the Editor:
Calls for the creation of a United Nations police force are long overdue.
Brian Urquhart's "Who Can Stop Civil Wars?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 29) successfully conveys the sense of urgency for the creation of such a force in stopping bloodshed wrought by civil wars.


Octel Communications Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Premier Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Southeastern Public Service Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Topics of The Times; Waiting for Broadway
It's good news of a sort when Broadway theaters draw long lines at the box office for current hits like "Dancing at Lughnasa" and anticipated hits like "Death and the Maiden." But the lines themselves are an outrage.
There's no excuse for forcing customers to wait two and three hours on a cold sidewalk for a few minutes at the ticket booth where they can pay up to $50 a seat for a performance months hence.
The Brooks Atkinson Theater, where the Ariel Dorfman play "Death and the Maiden" will open in March, put several hundred customers through those hoops this week.
For these hardy fans, the alternative is to order blindly over the telephone, trusting a computer to pick their seats.
That's more like a lottery than buying tickets for a play, and there's a surcharge besides.


Frisch's Restaruants reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 15


Celebrating by Donating to Neediest
The birth of a baby or a grandmother's birthday are times that bring people close to their families and friends.
For many contributors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, they are also occasions to reach out to others about whom all they know is that they are hungry, cold or sick.
"We have just had a healthy new baby, and he seems to love life and be thriving," Richard Solomon of Westfield, N.J., wrote in a letter with $100.
"Like most people, we tend to take our situation for granted, but sometimes, lately more often than not, but particularly at this time of year, we realize how much we have to be thankful for."


Study Reports Dyslexia Is Not Unalterable, as Experts Have Been Assuming
A large study of Connecticut schoolchildren has found that dyslexia, a reading problem in children, is not an unalterable disability, as many psychologists, educators and parents had assumed.
Instead, the study found, most of the children who were considered dyslexic in the first grade were no longer dyslexic a few years later.


Young Bias-Attack Victim Tries to Laugh Off the Pain
Bryan Figueroa and his best friend, Ahmed Babar, laughed and elbowed each other as they huddled over a hand-held video game yesterday afternoon.
As the sun peeked through the mini-blinds in Bryan's bedroom, decorated with baseball caps and posters of athletic and movie star idols, they could have been any two youths sharing a laugh after school.
Except that one of them, Bryan, 12 years old, is a young symbol of a recent series of bias attacks, ranging from humiliation to violence, that have hit the city, perplexing city officials and the police.
Bryan's incident was eerily like that of a brother and sister who live not far away in Williamsbridge, the Bronx, who were attacked on Jan. 6 by four young men who splattered sneaker whitener on their faces and clothing.


Sea Bright Is Still Reeling from Halloween Storm
It's a sight that Sgt.
Steve Spahr says he'll never forget: A steel dumpster floating down Ocean Avenue, the main thoroughfare here, as floodwaters and flotsam from the normally benign Shrewsbury River crept toward the steps of police headquarters.
"That was a long night," he said, recalling Halloween, when local volunteers and National Guardsmen in 2 1/2-ton trucks helped evacuate nearly a dozen families from this Monmouth County shore community after a storm that caused some $72 million in damage along the New Jersey coastline.
"And the worst of it," said Sergeant Spahr, the borough's emergency management coordinator, "is that I think we're in for a few more long nights."  U.S.
Decision Attacked
Traditionally, Atlantic Coastal storms with high-velocity winds and tides that surge two to three feet above normal besiege this region from late January through early March.
The October storm and a similar but milder one that passed through here on Jan. 4 were unexpected, and many longtime residents view them as a preview of what's to come.


Thousands Apply for Jobs at a New Hotel in Chicago


Port Charlotte Journal; When a Fresh Beginning Disturbs a Peaceful End
The idea of Florida is perfectly clear in the string of Gulf Coast towns from Bradenton through Venice, where the air smells of oleander and orchid tree, modest homes raise hopes of an easier life and a typical cafe serves iced cappuccino even in January.
Southeast of Venice, though, the idea disappears in a vast thicket of palmetto and pine that is sparsely populated and crisscrossed by streets without street lights and avenues cracked by sprouting weeds.
In this real estate development gone sour, the winter stars are bright and clear, as they were after midnight on Dec. 19 when six people, including three children, died in fits of violence.


Starks Enters Contest
The Knicks' JOHN STARKS will challenge Seattle's SHAWN KEMP, runner-up in last year's Slam-Dunk championship, and the Nets' DRAZEN PETROVIC will challenge the two-time defending 3-point Shootout champion, CRAIG HODGES of Chicago, on fun-and-games Saturday of the N.B.A.
All-Star weekend, Feb. 8-9 in Orlando, Fla.
The program kicks off with a Legends Classic, featuring the Hall of Famers OSCAR ROBERTSON, DAVE COWENS and RICK BARRY.


Great-Grandpa Is Now a Great Dane
MANY of the later portraits of Winston Churchill made him look more than a little like a bulldog.
When Thierry Poncelet paints a bulldog , the animal looks alarmingly like Winston Churchill -- perhaps because it is posing in a high collar, necktie and waistcoat.
Some call it "anthropomorphic art," but another way to describe Mr.
Poncelet's curious painting is Alice in Ralphlaurenland.
Mr.
Poncelet painstakingly restores gilt-framed 18th- and 19th-century ancestral portraits, the kind of dour oil paintings usually found lining the staircases of England's statelier homes, inside men's private clubs and, in America, in shops that cater to aspiring Windsors.


Vikonics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Northstar Computer Forms Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Opening Arguments Presented in Trial of Officer Accused in Teaneck Shooting


Why Shops' Names Say 'Just:' Because.
IN Manhattan, a city where the range of specialty stores can be mind-boggling, there is something refreshingly direct about places that publicly proclaim their uniqueness.
In the 1991-1992 Manhattan Business directory, there are 70-plus listings for stores beginning with the word "just." Out of context, it is hard to know whether to take "just" as a compliment or a slam, though it is certainly a more melodic nomenclature than "Nothing but" or "Only."


Market Place; Ralston Purina: Profitable but . . .
THE Ralston Purina Company is solidly profitable, with a roster of famous product names like Purina dog food, Chex cereals, Wonder bread, Beech-Nut baby foods and Eveready batteries.
Yet its stock was among the poorest performers in the food and consumer packaged-goods group last year.
Ralston's shares rose by just 10 percent, compared with more than 40 percent for its main competitors and 26.3 percent for the Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks.
Nor will William P. Stiritz, the publicity-shy chairman and chief executive of the St.
Louis-based company, be able to report a rousing start to the new year at the annual meeting today.


Conston Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


A Summit, or a Pseudo-Event?
Does anybody really benefit from carnival-like meetings of heads of government at the United Nations?
The question is freshly raised by a British bid to bring together by month's end the leaders of all 15 members of the Security Council.
Though formal invitations have yet to be sent, the idea has been welcomed by President Bush.
Those likely to attend include Boris Yeltsin of Russia, President Francois Mitterrand of France and Prime Minister Li Peng of China.
Doubtless this promises an impressive photo opportunity, as well as a useful chance for a new Big Five to meet face to face.
An agenda is said to be in the works that would focus on nuclear proliferation and U.N. peacekeeping.
But only serious preparations for achievable results can dispel suspicions that such a meeting would be mainly a spectacle to impress folks back home.


Bridge
It quite often happens that a declarer fails because his high cards are divided perversely between the two hands.
"If I could have traded the queen of hearts for the jack," he realizes in the post-mortem, "I would have succeeded." The same verdict is not unlikely when intermediate cards are involved, but it is very rare with small spots.
On the diagramed deal played Saturday in the Flight A Open Pairs in Port Chester, N.Y., South was frustrated by the location of a five and a four.
East and West were Peter Bisgeier of Northport, L.I., and Al Levy of Stony Brook, L.I., who were en route to victory in the event.
They were able to set problems for South and defeat a game that was made at almost all other tables.
West chose the heart nine as the opening lead, which proved to be right; in other circumstances a low heart would be the effective choice.
South allowed the nine to win, and ducked again when a heart was led to the queen.


Review/Film; 'Daughters Of the Dust': The Demise Of a Tradition
Julie Dash's "Daughters of the Dust" is a film of spellbinding visual beauty about the Gullah people living on the Sea Islands off the South Carolina-Georgia coast at the turn of the century.
More than any other group of Americans descended from West Africans, the Gullahs, through their isolation, were able to maintain African customs and rituals.
Cut off from the mainland, except by boat, they had their own patois: predominantly English but with a strong West African intonation.
Most of the film's dialogue is spoken in that dialect, called Geechee, with occasional subtitles in English.


Club Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Bank of Boston-Shawmut Merger Talks End
The lengthy merger talks between the Bank of Boston and Shawmut National have ended, Shawmut said yesterday, as the two banking companies failed to agree on terms.
Talks between the companies, whose merger would have created one of the nation's 10 largest banks and the largest in New England, progressed last September to the point of agreeing on jobs for the top two executives of each company.


Giant Staff Is Shifted To Suit Handley
The Giants made major changes in their coaching staff yesterday when Al Groh left, Rod Rust replaced him as defensive coordinator and Jim Fassel was promoted to offensive coordinator.
Groh will join the Cleveland Browns as a "defensive assistant."
The changes were not surprising.
They did not stem so much from last season's disappointing 8-8 record.
Instead, they reflected Ray Handley's desire to shape the staff in his image.


Advanced Magnetics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reynolds Metals Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accountants Change a Rule
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants said yesterday that its members had voted to allow accountants to incorporate, which could make it harder to sue accountants for wrongdoing.
For the rule change to have much impact, most states would have to relax rules that prohibit professionals from using corporations to shield themselves from lawsuits.
Almost all states would have to accept the change before the big national firms could take advantage of it.


Justices Make It Easier for State Officials to Alter Court Pacts
The Supreme Court today made it easier for state and local officials to obtain changes in the Federal court decrees that now govern the operations of prisons, hospitals and many other public institutions.
But the Court's 6-to-2 ruling, in a long-running lawsuit over conditions in a county jail in Boston, stopped well short of the states' rights ruling for which Massachusetts and dozens of other states had argued in a case that appeared to hold the potential for sweeping change in an important and politically sensitive area of law.


American Franchise Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  SEALING YUGOSLAVIA'S FATE
The European Community recognized Croatia and Slovenia, putting its official seal on the breakup of Yugoslavia, the multi-ethnic nation born in 1918.
But while Slovenia looks forward to relative prosperity, Croatia is haunted by the specter of Yugoslav troops.
A1  A triumph for Germany, which led the move toward recognition.
A10  The U.S. refuses to recognize either republic's independence.
A10  BAKER AS MIDEAST REFEREE
Breaking from his usual detachment, Secretary of State Baker urged Arabs and Israelis to be more conciliatory in peace talks in Washington.
But the day of negotiations was acrimonious and futile.
A1  Israelis seized outposts in a protest in the occupied territories.
A8  ACCUSED WAR CRIMINAL WAITS
The man sentenced to death as "Ivan the Terrible" of the Treblinka death camp has no role other than to listen and watch as lawyers argue his fate before the Israeli Supreme Court.
Sometimes it is easy for the few courtroom spectators to forget he is even there.
A4  RUSSIA GETS A HARVARD LECTURE
A prominent Harvard economist told Russians that their central bank and Parliament must stop wasting rubles and start taking responsibility for making price liberalization a success.
His remarks broadened Russia's debate on capitalism.
A3  President Yeltsin tried to soothe consumers in St.
Petersburg.
A3  ALGERIANS DEMAND A VOTE
Three Algerian political parties condemned the military Government for canceling the second round of elections and demanded that they be held.
The most scathing attack came from the Islamic Salvation Front, a fundamentalist party that won the most seats in the first round.
A5  SALVADOR BRACES FOR PEACE
As the Salvadoran Government prepares to sign a peace accord with rebels today, citizens are looking to the future with hope and with trepidation.
Many are worried about jobs and prices, and how the end of the war might directly affect them.
A8  C.I.A.
SEES IRAQI THREAT
The C.I.A. director, Robert Gates, says that Saddam Hussein could rebuild Iraq's ability to make nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and its ballistic missile program within a few years.
A9  An American spy plane was lost off the Korean peninsula.A11  An informal accord between India and rebels in Assam State.
A6  National A12-21, B9  BUSH ON THE STUMP
Having journeyed far and wide, the President toured New Hampshire.
And like Ulysses and many other famous travelers before him, he found the home front a mess.
He responded like a candidate.
A1  A new Bob Kerrey is struggling with the old one.
A16  A TV station calls its own shots -- and the candidates'.
A16  THE WAR, A YEAR LATER
On its first anniversary, the Persian Gulf war has receded in American consciousness to an extent that few people expected, replaced by fears about the economy and doubts about the country's ability to handle problems at home.
A1  MAJOR PROPOSAL ON FREQUENCIES
Hoping to speed the development of new mobile communications, the F.C.C. will propose opening up a big swath of radio frequencies now used by railroads, electric utilities and police and fire departments.
Public safety agencies are alarmed.
A1  RULING ON CONSENT DECREES
The Supreme Court issued a decision making it easier for state and local officials to obtain changes in the Federal court decrees that now govern the operations of prisons, hospitals and other public institutions.
A14  ROUTINE CONTAMINATION OF FISH
In the largest study ever performed on the safety of food in retail fish markets, Consumers Union found widespread contamination and mislabeling of fish and clams.
A21  NEW OUTLOOK ON DYSLEXIA
A large study of Connecticut schoolchildren found that dyslexia was not an unalterable disability.
A18  Scientists identified a gene that causes a form of hypertension.
A18  RELEASE OF IMPLANT DATA URGED
The president of a leading association of plastic surgeons said the F.D.A.'s call for a moratorium on the sale of silicone gel breast implants had "created hysteria, anxiety and panic. " He called on the agency to release the information that prompted the moratorium.
B9  Standard &amp; Poor's lowered its rating on bonds of implants' maker.
B9  RETRACTION ON A DISCOVERY
Astronomers were stunned to learn that the reported discovery of a planet around a neutron star, announced last July and considered the first strong evidence for the existence of other planetary systems in the universe, was all a mistake.
A19  The latest act in Arizona's political theater.
A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 REPORT ON CITY COLLEGE CALAMITY
The Dinkins administration's review of the deadly crush at a City College gymnasium last month blames virtually all parties that arranged and oversaw the celebrity basketball game -- student organizers, college officials, a rap promoter, the police and the spectators themselves.
A1  EX-I.R.A.
FIGHTER LOSES CASE
The United States Supreme Court cleared away the last apparent legal obstacle to the deportation of Joseph Doherty, a former Irish Republican Army guerrilla who has been in Federal custody for more than eight years.
His case has been a rallying point for opposition in this country to British rule in Northern Ireland.
A1  Neediest Cases B5  Business Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-12  For some gardeners, sartorial weeds just won't do.
C1  Papier-mache and its care: the sun can be its ungluing.
C5  Parent &amp; Child C12  Arts/Entertainment C15-24  Rock honors its roots.
C17  Word and Image: Networks all look to next season.
C17  Obituaries D21  William E. Bunney Sr., biochemist.
Sports B10-18  Baseball: Steinbrenner denies he milked Yanks.
B11  Column: Anderson on Ali.
B11  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  The rest of the J.F.K. story.
Summit or pseudo-event?
Jersey's new political order.
Topics: Broadway waiting.
Letters A22  William Safire: The current event.
A23  Anthony Lewis: The Russian challenge.
A23  Charles Murray: Stop favoring unwed mothers.
A23  Geza Jeszenszky: The right choice on Yugoslavia.
A23


Snow Makers Compensate For Nature's Balmy Days
Snow may be the stuff of skier's dreams: giant flakes that Nature supplies to assure deep, powdery landscapes and a white Christmas.
To many of these dreamers who live in the Northeast's major metropolitan areas, this winter's warm temperatures, rain and lack of snow have meant a ski-less nightmare.
But to ski area operators -- and skiers -- who know snow can be stuff shot from guns and blown from jet engines, the truth is, there has been plenty of machine-made snow and plenty of skiing, even at marginal temperatures, all season.
"This year, more areas opened in November and had good snow cover over Christmas than last year," said Morrie Trumble, who has been reporting snow conditions in the Northeast since 1972.
"Warmer temperatures and rain have been a problem in the past couple of weeks, but the mountains had cold weather for snow making in December."


For Some Gardeners, Sartorial Weeds Just Won't Do
IT'S January and you're in your garden, picking the most fragrant sweet pea from Thompson &amp; Morgan, digging up the oldest, bluest potato from Seeds Blum, squeezing the sweetest French Charentais melon from Shepherd's Garden Seeds.
You're dreaming; the catalogues are here.


Triumph for Germany
The recognition of Slovenia and Croatia by the European Community is a victory for Germany, which has lobbied hard for the breakup of Yugoslavia.
The German Foreign Minister said he was "very happy," and other countries rushed to grant recognition.
Yugoslav leaders were indignant.
Article, page A10.


Faded Glory: Looking Back at the Gulf War -- A Special Report Year After Gulf War, Joy Is a Ghost; The Healing: Pain and Images For a Lifetime
As other troops paraded last year through the confetti and basked in the thunderous roar of gratitude, Jon Price watched the triumphant scene on a television from his hospital bed.
Mr.
Price, a 23-year-old Army specialist who stepped on a land mine one February afternoon in Iraq, now walks with a cane.


First Community Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Horizon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


ATC Environmental Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Knicks Crumble to Mediocrity and Blazers
Minute by minute, play by play, the Knicks' offense disintegrated during the fourth quarter of last night's humbling defeat.
By the final two minutes, the Portland Trail Blazers had all but made New York's offense disappear.
Patrick Ewing was engulfed in a mass of Portland defenders.
The rest of the Knicks couldn't buy a jump shot, and they hesitated to take shots when they were open.


Essay; The Current Event
The El Nino current is now getting a big media buildup.
This long-ignored flow of warm seawater across the Pacific and down the coast of South America is being fingered as the cause of floods in Texas and one of the warmest winters on record in the East.
Don't believe it.
Every 10 years I rise to write an essay about El Nino (pronounced El NEEN-yo, short for the Spanish El Nino de Navidad, or Christ Child) straightening out the climatologists and their credulous cohort who see the great, mysterious swoosh of warm water as a troublesome "southern oscillation."


International Systems &amp; Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Two Companies Offer Plan To End Bankruptcy of Orion
New Line Cinema and the Metromedia Company said yesterday that they had submitted a plan to bring the Orion Pictures Corporation out of bankruptcy by infusing it with cash, reducing its overhead and converting the bondholders' position to a combination of debt and equity.
The plan is subject to approval by the creditors, and Wilbur Ross, senior managing director of Rothschild Inc., the financial adviser to Orion's creditors' committee, indicated the bondholders would seek further adjustments.


River Forest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Keptel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Just Boys Being Boys, or Vicious Gangs?
Sekret Kukaj's epitaph is emblazoned on a sprawling mural covering an entire wall, with "Rest in Peace" written flamboyantly on one side and a blood-red Albanian flag flanking the other.
By themselves, the words and images speak to ethnic pride and perhaps hint at the nation's struggle against Communism.
But Sekret died at the age of 15.
This wall is not in Eastern Europe, but in the central Bronx.
And its message for some is as much a declaration of turf as a tribute to a fallen friend.
Avoiding Hangouts
Sekret's memorial -- on the corner of Lydig and Barnes Avenues -- also bears the name of the Albanian Boys, a group that until two recent bias attacks on Bronx schoolchildren held no significance for most New Yorkers.
In both attacks, the police said, the assailants said they were members of the Albanian Boys Inc. or the Albanian Bad Boys, loose-knit groups of teen-agers who often gathered by the mural or at a pizzeria in the Williamsbridge neighborhood to the north.


Austria Fund reports earnings for As of Nov 30


Director Criticizes 'Grand Canyon' Critics
Lawrence Kasdan should be one of the happiest film makers in Hollywood. But he's not.
A highly talented and successful screenwriter and director, Mr.
Kasdan, who celebrated his 43d birthday on Tuesday, says he's delighted that his latest movie, "Grand Canyon," is stirring debate and discomfort among audiences and that the film seems to be moving toward financial success.


At Home Abroad; The Russian Challenge
Russian immigrants gather every day outside the Ministry of Immigrant Absorption, on Hillel Street in downtown Jerusalem.
They read the notices in Russian pasted on the wall of the building.
They vent their frustrations to each other.
Most of them are highly educated people who had good jobs in the former Soviet Union: engineers, economists, scientists, doctors.
Now most are unemployed, and anxious.


Republic New York Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Immersing Himself in Nitty-Gritty, Bush Barnstorms New Hampshire
After roaming far and wide and enjoying many foreign adventures, President Bush came back to New Hampshire today.
And like Ulysses and other famous travelers before him, he found the home front a mess.
Mr.
Bush quickly surveyed the damage and did what any self-respecting politician would do: He begged.
He boasted.
He posed with -- and petted -- a cow.
He tried to look on the bright side, or as he put it, to play the role of "Mrs. Rose Scenario" searching for "the rainbow out there."


Politics Sidetracks Contraceptive Research; Don't Blame Roussel
To the Editor:
I am an elderly widower with no connection to Roussel-Uclaf, the French pharmaceutical company ("Fight Cancer, Not RU-486," editorial, Dec. 26).
It seems to me you are being unfair to Roussel-Uclaf.


Plum Creek Timber Co. L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Both Kerreys Searching For Campaign Strategy
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska strides out onto an empty ice rink, drapes his elbow over a hockey net and gazes earnestly at the camera.
"What's happening in the world economy is like a hockey game," he says, "where others guard their goal to keep our products out, while we leave our net open.


Birmingham Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Delchamps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Techknits Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Michigan National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


MGIC Investment Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Whitman Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Bank System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Designatronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Not Jumping on Bandwagon
The United States stood firm today in its refusal to join the European Community members and other countries in recognizing the independence of Croatia and Slovenia.
A State Department spokesman repeated the Bush Administration's position that the parties to the Yugoslav conflict must first reach a peaceful settlement through negotiation and with firm protections for minorities where ethnic groupings are hopelessly entangled.


Health Management Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Linear Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Review/Music; Pianistic Reflections Of Russia
Now that the Soviet Union is broken apart, it will be interesting to see what art will emerge from the pieces.
Who will sort out for the senses and the soul the chaos of emerging capitalism and ethnic competition?
Will the yearning for material comforts set off a new hedonism?
Will folk music take the form of political badges, as advertisements for opposing cultures?
Will some unanimity of purpose rise up and found a new and monolithic school?
One theory says that, for the moment at least, Russians and their immediate neighbors are too busy with day-to-day survival to think about esthetics.
But then there are composers like Aleksandr Mosolov and Nikolai Roslavets to remind us that in an equally chaotic time three-quarters of a century ago people kept writing, painting and composing, and used their work to speak to this part of the world about its own time.


Baton Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Study of Retail Fish Markets Finds Wide Contamination and Mislabeling
In a study of the safety of food in retail fish markets in New York City and Chicago, Consumers Union has found widespread contamination and mislabeling of seafood.
The study was based on 113 samples of fish and clams that were purchased in 40 randomly selected supermarkets and specialty fish shops.
The group found that 34 samples were spoiled, 50 were contaminated with fecal coliforms, and 8 of 20 samples of swordfish had more than the permissible level of mercury.
What's more, one-third of the samples, taken from a number of different stores, were misidentified, usually as a more expensive variety.


Reporter's Notebook; Networks Focus on Next Season's Upheavals
Although the television season has four months to run and each network has a batch of new series to introduce, the prevailing philosophy among all three big networks is: Wait until next year.
Several circumstances have combined to shift the focus toward next season.


Giants Sign James
The San Francisco Giants signed outfielder CHRIS JAMES, a free agent, to a one-year contract yesterday.
James hit .238 in 115 games with the Cleveland Indians last season, including 5 home runs and 41 runs batted in.
In 1990, he hit a career-high .299, ninth in the American League. . . .
Pitchers LES LANCASTER and AL LEITER and catcher DAMON BERRYHILL avoided salary arbitration yesterday by agreeing to one-year contracts.
Lancaster, 9-7 with a 3.52 earned run average for Chicago, will receive $1.1 million from the Cubs in 1992.
Berryhill, traded by the Cubs to Atlanta, agreed to a deal for $325,000.
Leiter will make $175,000 from Toronto in 1992.(AP)


Discount Corp. of New York reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fatal Crush: Cause Still a Mystery
After dozens of interviews and three weeks of investigation, a mystery remains at the heart of the city's report into the deaths at City College: what precisely set off the fatal surge down a narrow gymnasium staircase?
But the report released yesterday prepared by Deputy Mayor Milton Mollen suggests that the crush began when the organizers of the celebrity basketball game, afraid they would lose the game's proceeds to the increasingly unruly crowd, retreated into the gym, while bewildered fans pushed forward to get in before the doors closed for good.


New Sanitation Chief Hopes To Push Recycling Business
Emily Lloyd, who will become New York City's Sanitation Commissioner next month, said yesterday that she hoped to develop new recycling markets that would attract new businesses and jobs to New York City and to encourage communities and businesses to share in keeping the city's streets and sidewalks clean.
Ms.
Lloyd, the chief business strategist for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, will be inheriting an agency racked by budget cuts that have savaged the city's recycling, street cleaning and dumping enforcement programs.
But Ms.
Lloyd, 46 years old, who is also an expert on transportation and environmental issues, expressed optimism yesterday that the sanitation agency would find new ways to manage the city's mounting waste problems in the wake of growing fiscal restraints.


BAKER INTERVENES AT MIDEAST TALKS
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, breaking his detachment from the Arab-Israeli peace talks, urged all sides today to be more conciliatory.
But his limited effort appeared to have had no effect on the rapidly disintegrating negotiations.
After another bitter and futile day of talks, Israeli negotiators told their Syrian, Lebanese, Palestinian and Jordanian counterparts that they planned to leave Thursday afternoon.
As Israel's Ambassador to Washington, Zalman Shoval, put it, "There's just so much time we can spend here." Departure Delayed
The Israelis had been planning to leave tonight, but decided to stay for another round of talks with the Jordanian-Palestinian team, apparently to soften the appearance that they were leaving prematurely.
Nevertheless, The Israeli departure will bring this second round of negotiations in Washington to a close with no progress having been achieved and with no understanding between the parties as to where or when to meet again.


American Ship Building reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; A Family That Only Appears Zany; It's Really Much Worse
The Tax Inspector By Peter Carey  279 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $21.


New Tokens Must Await Another Day
After saying in November and December that they would introduce a new subway and bus token when the fare went up this month, New York City transit officials said yesterday that they had changed their minds.
The current token will remain in use for the foreseeable future.
During the public debate over the last two months on how much the fare would increase, officials of the Transit Authority, which operates the city's subway and buses, often said they would put a new token into use when the new fare went into effect on Jan. 1.
They said they had spent $9 million for 60 million new tokens, which they said were needed in part to help curb the use of counterfeit slugs.


Photographs Are Linked to Body of Girl Who Was Found in Cooler
Her decomposed body was found on July 23 in a blue picnic cooler beside the Henry Hudson Parkway near Dyckman Street in Manhattan.
In the months that followed a few inconclusive facts emerged.
She was 3 to 5 years old.
She was malnourished.
She had been sexually abused.
No one knew beyond a police artist's sketch what she looked like.
Until yesterday.
The Bergen County Prosecutor announced that five Polaroid photographs found in June beside Route 46 in Garfield, N.J., near Saddle Brook, were pictures of the girl in the cooler.


Employee Benefit Plans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Study Detects Brain Abnormality in Patients With Chronic Fatigue
The largest study yet of chronic fatigue syndrome has found evidence of inflammation in the brains of patients, the first documentation of a neurological abnormality connected with the mysterious ailment.
But the findings detected on magnetic resonance imaging scans were not specific enough for doctors to use such scans as a diagnostic test for the syndrome, the authors reported yesterday in The Annals of Internal Medicine.


American Home Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Miscellany
*
The debut issue of Worth, the personal-finance magazine to be introduced next month by the Capital Publishing Co. division of Fidelity Investments, will carry 97 advertising pages from marketers including American Airlines, Buick, Panasonic and Tiffany. *
To help celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Advertising Council, the Sony Jumbotron video screen in Times Square will run a presentation about the council's work.
It is scheduled to appear from 6 to 8 P.M. on Jan. 30.


Faded Glory: Looking Back at the Gulf War -- A Special Report Year After Gulf War, Joy Is a Ghost; The Grief: Broken Hearts Left Behind
In the 10 months since he buried his son not far from here, Norman Madison has waged a personal war against depression, anger and disillusionment with flag and country.
It is a war that the 54-year-old former marine fears he will have to fight until he goes to his own grave.
Mr.
Madison's son, Anthony, 27, was one of 13 Army reservists from this proud, hard-luck region of Western Pennsylvania who was killed in a Scud missile attack in Saudi Arabia in the final days of the war.
"My son's death has changed my whole life," Mr.
Madison said here the other day as he held his son's Purple Heart.
"I'm altogether different than what I was. I don't know how to describe it."
"Emptiness?" his wife, Darla, suggested.
"Yeah," Mr. Madison agreed, "and I can't fill it up."
Twenty-eight reservists were killed that night in the desert but no other patch of America had to bury so many of its sons and daughters, so many of its dreams of grandchildren and fishing trips.
And nowhere else in America were so many broken hearts left behind, scattered across the hilly countryside of small cities and towns like the leafless trees that now sway in the winter wind.
For much of the last year, Diane Radocaj has tried to help ease the suffering as head of a family support group in Greensburg, where the reservists were based.
"From what I've seen there is a variety of emotions," she said.
"Some are bitter and they always will be. Others have accepted it. But the emotion that dominates is just a sense of loss."
In Rochester Mills, a town with one street, where Specialist Christine L. Mayes grew up and was buried at age 22, her father said he and his family were "getting as close to normal as you can get."
"I could be bitter and cynical but I'm not," Franklin Mayes said.
"You can dwell on this until it drives you crazy. You have to let it go. Enough is enough." Mr.
Mayes's daughter was one of two women from the reserve unit, the 14th Quartermaster Detachment, to be killed in the attack.
On the anniversary, Feb. 25, a stone monument will be dedicated to the reservists, both living and dead.
Fund for Children of Dead
The $250,000 monument will sit near the entrance of the reserve center in Greensburg and will be surrounded by 13 newly planted trees.
Most of the construction, labor and material have been donated.
A $20,000 scholarship fund has been established for the 10 children of the dead.
But most people here have closed the door on the war, said the Roman Catholic Bishop of Greensburg, the Rev.
Anthony Bosco.
"People are back to their own problems," he said.
"The people who have the empty chair at the dinner table are the ones who feel it. That's not cruel. That's life."
Bishop Bosco said the recession had hit the area hard.
Tomorrow, he said, is what most people here now worry about.
"I think the proof that Desert Storm is history is in George Bush's popularity polls," the Bishop said.
"His popularity here is not good because of the economy." 'My Boy Died for Oil'
In Mr. Madison's hilltop home, President Bush is an especially bitter subject.
"What really burns me up is that nothing has changed over there," Mr.
Madison said.
"Hussein is still in control. Our President sits around waving his flag like he did something. He didn't do anything. Nothing. My son is dead. What did he die for?"
Last February as he waited for his son's body, Mr.
Madison said he believed the war was necessary.
But today, after months of grief and reflection, he said he no longer had faith in the Government.
"They lie and lie and lie and it never ends," Mr.
Madison said.
"The war was about oil. My boy died for oil."
As he talked, tears welling in his eyes, his wife, who was Anthony Madison's stepmother, touched his shoulder and said, "It'll be a year ago next month that Tony died, but it seems like yesterday."


Devils Go on a Tear With Sabres Close By
Spectators who brought scorecards to tonight's game between Buffalo and New Jersey probably wished they had taken along calculators instead.
The Devils and Sabres played to an 8-8 tie and the 16 goals scored by both teams tied a home-ice record for combined goals set on April 6, 1986, when the Devils defeated the Islanders here at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, 9-7.


Aluminum Co. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ruling on Consent Decrees
The Supreme Court made it easier for states to win changes in the Federal court decrees that govern many prisons and other institutions.
Page A14.


INSIDE
Changes Ahead for Lloyd's
The Lloyd's of London insurance market is on the verge of adopting some of the most significant changes in its 304-year history.
Page D1.
Flaws in the Fish Market
A Consumers Union study found high levels of contamination in retail fish markets, prompting calls for increased regulation.
Page A21.
New Hope on Dyslexia
A study has found that dyslexia, a reading problem that affects an estimated 10 percent of children, is not necessarily permanent.
Page A18.
Hypertension Gene Found
Researchers have identified the gene behind a rare and severe form of high blood pressure that strikes early in life, often during childhood.
Page A18.
Scientist Retracts Finding
Astronomers were stunned to learn that the discovery of a planet around a neutron star, announced last July, was all a mistake.
Page A19.


In Salvador, Peace Has Worries, Too
With the Government and guerrillas set to sign a formal peace accord in Mexico on Thursday, ending a dozen years of civil war, Salvadorans are looking to the future with a mixture of great optimism and fears about random violence and the economy.
Leaders from President Alfredo Cristiani and politicians across the board to the guerrilla and army chieftains have painted a rosy picture of the political peace and economic growth that they say will follow the cease-fire scheduled to begin on Feb. 1.


Yes, the Giants Do Know the Way to San Jose
In the years since the Giants joined the Los Angeles-bound Dodgers in perfidy and abandoned New York in 1958, the move to San Francisco has not gone unpunished: an open-ended sentence for the Giants to play in the ill-conceived and decidedly misnamed Candlestick Park, where, as virtually any shivering outfielder or fan can attest, no flame can flicker long amid the incessantly swirling winds.
Yesterday, for the fourth time since he bought the team from Horace Stoneham in 1975, Bob Lurie announced yet another plan to move out of the cramped 62,000-seat stadium, which opened in 1960.


COMPANY NEWS;
The AMR Corporation, parent of American Airlines, yesterday reported a net loss of $124.9 million for the fourth quarter.
But the figure represented a significant improvement over the loss of $215.1 million for the quarter a year earlier, and analysts said it was smaller than they had expected.
AMR's chairman, Robert L. Crandall, attributed the loss at the nation's largest airline to economic conditions, compounded by the impact of the Persian Gulf war and fare cutting in the airline industry.
"The best thing you can say about last year is that it's over," he said.


Creative Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Boise Cascade reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Multi-Color Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Steinbrenner Defends Loan From TV Contract
George Steinbrenner yesterday staunchly defended the decision by himself and the Yankee partnership three years ago to secure a $100 million loan against the club's $486 million cable television contract and use that money for payouts to the partners.
Baseball Commissioner Fay Vincent also expressed little concern about the $100 million loan, which was first reported publicly yesterday in Newsday and which produced a payout of $55 million to Steinbrenner.


Keycorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Questions For B.C.C.I. Executive
A Manhattan grand jury investigating the Bank of Credit and Commerce International wants to question a former executive about allegations that the bank's Washington office was a conduit for bribes to American Government officials.
The former executive, Sani Ahmad, a 53-year-old Pakistani banker, headed B.C.C.I.'s Washington office from 1985 to 1990, when he fled to Pakistan after investigators sought to question him.
He was arrested Friday in Williamsburg, Va., visiting relatives there while trying to sell his home nearby in Maryland.





Colorado National Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


3 Algerian Parties Demand Elections Be Restored
The three political parties that won parliamentary seats in the first round of Algeria's elections condemned the military-backed Government today for canceling those elections and demanded that the second round of voting be resumed.
The demands came as the military officers and civilians who seized power on Saturday after the resignation of President Chadli Benjedid tried again to legitimize their cancellation of the elections in which Muslim fundamentalists won a major victory.


Campbell Soup Taps P.&amp; G. for Executive
When Frank E. Weise 3d leaves the $27 billion Procter &amp; Gamble Company for the $6.2 billion Campbell Soup Company, he will actually be departing for a company that is nearly twice as big as his present employer.
Now the chief financial officer at P.&amp; G.'s food and beverage products division, a $3.5 billion business, Mr.
Weise will become, effective Feb. 3, the senior vice president and chief financial officer for all of Campbell Soup.


Victims' Families Agree That Many Are to Blame
The city's findings did not drive out the grief.
Some of the relatives of the nine victims crushed to death in a City College stairwell said they agreed with the conclusions of a report released yesterday by Milton Mollen, the Deputy Mayor for Public Safety.
But many said they were still at a loss to understand why an easily preventable tragedy had happened.


DCX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amonte to Miss Game
Ranger forward TONY AMONTE, who sustained a concussion in the second period of Tuesday's 6-2 victory against Buffalo, has been sidelined for tonight's game with Calgary as a precautionary measure.
Amonte, second in the league among rookies in goals (18) and total points (35), slid into the boards head-first after being checked by GRANT LEDYARD.
Amonte is expected to return Tuesday after the weekend's All-Star break.


BB&amp;T Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Jersey's New Political Order
With political power in New Jersey now split between a Democratic Governor and veto-proof Republican majorities in the legislature, both parties face a daunting challenge to make government work.
And that won't happen unless they suppress their natural instinct to score points.
The opening day of the new legislative session was a standoff.
Gov.
Jim Florio, in his State of the State Message, focused on programs to create more jobs in public construction projects.
The Republicans had something quite different in mind -- tax cuts, and spending cuts to match.


Clinton's Support Rises In New Hampshire Poll
A new poll has found that support for Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas among people likely to vote in this state's Democratic Presidential primary next month has risen sharply in the last 10 weeks.
Twenty-three percent of voters surveyed chose Mr.
Clinton, up from 5 percent of the same group of voters polled in early November.


A Republican Speaker Takes Politics to Heart
Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian, who took over the gavel this week as the new Speaker of the Assembly and the undisputed leader of an ironclad Republican majority, is a man for whom taking politics to heart is a family tradition.
Mr.
Haytaian, the son of Armenian immigrants, grew up in the Bronx and remembers his father as an uncompromising Democrat.


Dreco Energy Services reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Purdue Beats Michigan on Road, 65-60
Woody Austin scored 19 points and Purdue took an early lead and held on tonight to beat Michigan, 65-60.
The Boilermakers never trailed after going ahead, 8-6, three minutes into the game.
Purdue beat Michigan for the fifth straight time, including three straight at Crisler Arena, and sent the Wolverines, who are ranked No. 15 by The Associated Press, to their second consecutive loss in the Big Ten.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about a Boston commission's recommendation to Mayor Raymond L. Flynn against keeping the city's police commissioner referred to the Mayor incorrectly in some copies.
He was recently re-elected to a third term; he is not new.


Senator Pell Hurt When Cab Has Accident in Manhattan
Senator Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode Island, was injured when a taxicab in which he was a passenger was involved in a minor collision in Manhattan yesterday, the police said.
Mr.
Pell's press secretary, William F. Bryant, said the 73-year-old Senator had suffered a cut on his head and been admitted to Cabrini Hospital for observation.
Mr.
Bryant said that Mr.
Pell required 60 to 70 stitches and that he was in stable condition and alert.


Grand Valley Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Dinkins Opposes Revenge
At a City Hall ceremony yesterday in honor of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., Mayor David N. Dinkins called on the city's residents to fight back against racial crimes, which have sharpened anger between ethnic groups in recent days, and "to begin a new movement based on non-violence."
He also urged the victims' families not to seek vengeance because "violence begets violence, hate begets hate." Departing from his speech, he singled out the father of a Brooklyn girl raped Tuesday morning in what police have classified a bias crime.
The father has said publicly that he would like to kill the rapists.


Scientists Find Gene That Causes Rare Form of High Blood Pressure
Scientists have discovered the gene behind a rare and severe form of high blood pressure that strikes early in life, often during childhood.
Although doctors have long observed that high blood pressure can run in families, the research is the first to identify a gene that causes hypertension, a potentially lethal condition that afflicts more than 60 million Americans.


Willard Ching, 50, A National Leader Of Interior Designers
Willard Ching, a noted interior designer of commercial buildings and a leader in professional societies in his industry, died Tuesday at New York University Hospital.
He was 50 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of respiratory failure complicated by AIDS, said Charles Bell, a business partner and painter who was his companion for 22 years.


Lidak Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Fifth Third Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Biogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dionex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


We Are the World; We Are the Crayons
TEACHERS and children from the Montgomery County school district in Maryland, just north of Washington, were tired of seeing the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. being drawn with a black crayon.
The problem was Crayola packed its flesh-colored crayons (hues from apricot to mahogany) only in its 64-pack, which was too big for the pupils' small hands.
Heeding the call for a new age of multiculturalism (and marketing), Binney &amp; Smith, the Easton, Pa., company that makes Crayolas, slipped the existing skin-tone crayons into their own box.


First Alabama Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Anti-Fundamentalist Writer Slain in Beirut
A Shiite Muslim writer who had sharply criticized fundamentalists and Iran's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, was assassinated here today, security officials said.
The police said that unknown assailants opened fire on Mustapha Jeha, 55 years old, as he was leaving his home this morning in the Christian quarter of Sbtiye.
No group immediately claimed responsibility for the killing.


Seidman Back At Old Firm
L.
William Seidman, the former chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Resolution Trust Corporation, will rejoin his former firm, BDO Seidman in New York, as a consultant.
Mr.
Seidman, who is 70 years old, played a critical role in the Bush Adminstration's efforts to restore the health of the nation's banking and savings and loan industry.
Since retiring from the F.D.I.C. last year, he has worked as a television commentator.


No Felony Drug Charge
The United States Attorney's office will not pursue felony criminal drug charges against Yankee relief pitcher STEVE HOWE, assistant United States Attorney KRIS McLEAN said in an interview published yesterday in the Independent Record of Helena, Mont.
"After consulting with the appropriate investigative agencies and reviewing the evidence," there is not enough evidence to indict Howe on federal felony drug charges, McLean was quoted as saying.
"It doesn't mean the misdemeanor case is weaker. It just means we didn't have the evidence to charge a felony."


Defendant In Murder May Be Ill
Carolyn Warmus, the Westchester teacher accused of fatally shooting her former lover's wife, has a growth that "may be malignant" and that requires the immediate attention of her gynecologist, her lawyer has told the judge in the case.
The lawyer, William I. Aronwald, did not say where the growth was, only that it "has been growing substantially over the past week and a half" and that a biopsy may be required.


Parametric Technology Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Wanna Rap? Let It Rip: All You Do Is Add the Lip
EVER since rap music began its segue from being public enemy No. 1 to being an uneasy buddy of the mainstream, it has been only a matter of time until a rap keyboard would wend its way into the crib.
(Crib: that's house, for the uninitiated.)


Plan Would Give New Phones Big Swath of the Radio Band
Hoping to speed the development of new mobile communications, from cheap and tiny wireless telephones to electronic notebooks that send and receive data over the air, the Federal Communications Commission on Thursday will propose opening up a big swath of radio frequencies for "emerging technologies."
In its proposal, which is certain to create controversy, the F.C.C. will recommend reallocating frequencies now used by railroads, electric utilities, police and fire departments for microwave communications.


But Can I Read It in the Bathtub?; Zoom In and Link
To the Editor:
The electronic book is closer than you suggest ("Is the Electronic Book Closer Than You Think?", The Week in Review, Dec. 29)!
Many of the capabilities you describe are already in the marketplace.


Old Glass, New and Old
S. A. Bendheim Company
122 Hudson Street, New York
10013; (212) 226-6370.
Steven Jayson, a vice president at S. A. Bendheim, a glass importing concern, has strong ideas about windows.
"Plate glass windows in an old house stand out like a sore thumb," he said.


Boy Is Raped and Neighbors Ponder the Horror
In all the fear and confusion felt by parents and neighbors who learned that an 11-year-old boy was abducted and raped at 8 A.M. on Tuesday on West 77th Street and that a man with H.I.V. had been charged, there were really only two gut reactions.
Some people tried to reassure themselves that so horrible a crime in their quiet gentrified neighborhood was aberrational.
Others talked of moving out of town.
All agreed that the incident was any parent's worst nightmare.
"What is the magic age at which you can envision letting your child go to school by himself?" said Allan Ripp, whose 6-year-old attends Public School 87, next to Intermediate School 44, the victim's school on West 77th Street.
"God, this isn't about our schools, this is about what is happening in this city."


Barkley Over Line Once Too Often
In a recent game against the Clippers in Los Angeles, the Philadelphia 76ers were leading by 5 points in the fourth quarter and Charles Barkley decided that it was time to rub a little salt into this very minor wound.
Isolating against Charles Smith, the Clippers' 6-foot-10-inch forward, Barkley mocked his opponent's defensive intentions, laughing as he waved the ball in Smith's face and dared him to steal the ball.
Promptly, Smith obliged, and off he went to dunk the ball uncontested, as Barkley's boastful smile disintegrated into one embarrassed smirk.


Century Cellular reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Conner Ties Series
SAN DIEGO, Jan. 15 --
Dennis Conner regained his reputation today through a wily game of tactics on the race course.
Conner's yacht, Stars &amp; Stripes, outfoxed its opponent, Jayhawk, to win the second race of the America's Cup defense trials by 4 minutes 10 seconds.


Lloyd's Prepares To Change
After a decade of scandals and record losses, the Lloyd's of London insurance market is on the verge of adopting some of the most fundamental changes in its 304-year history.
Until now, Lloyd's has gathered its capital from wealthy individuals, known as "names," who have pledged their entire fortunes to pay off claims.
Catastrophic losses have wiped out some of these investors and severely hurt many others.
Now, Lloyd's governing council has committed itself to limiting their potential losses.


Freeport-McMoran Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Aurora Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Triad Systems Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Faded Glory: Looking Back at the Gulf War -- Inside: 4 special reports.; A Year After Victory, Joy Is a Ghost
The yellow ribbons, now frayed and faded, are still wrapped around the oak trees near the Hunter Army Air Field here where horn-honking, flag-waving crowds lined the streets in the early morning hours last March to greet the first troops returning from the Persian Gulf war.
But here as elsewhere, the war seems like something from another era these days, and the talk is of other things: the sluggish economy, the dreary stretch of empty buildings on Broughton Street downtown, the record-breaking local murder rate.


McEnroe Focus of U.S. Olympic Team
The selection of an Olympic men's tennis team for next summer's Barcelona Games is proving a logistical nightmare for the United States Tennis Association, especially if it wants to make sure that the team contains this country's most celebrated veteran, John McEnroe.
As this weekend's selection deadline approaches, the United States still has an incomplete team, and McEnroe's chances of inclusion appear to be dimming.


Fleet/Norstar Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Supreme Court Ruling Clears Way For Deportation of an I.R.A. Man
The Supreme Court today cleared away what would appear to be the last legal obstacle to the deportation of Joe Doherty, a former Irish Republican Army guerrilla who has been in Federal custody for more than eight years.
The case has become a rallying point for opposition in this country to British rule in Northern Ireland.
In a unusual, divided ruling that overturned a 1990 decision by the Federal appeals court in New York, the Court ruled that Mr.
Doherty, who fled a British prison during his trial for murder, was not entitled to a new hearing in his prolonged legal struggle to avoid deportation.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote the 5-to-3 decision.


Intel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Russia's Harvard Tutor Defends Reform
The Russian Government's chief foreign tutor in the ways of free-market economics offered the nation a supplementary lesson today in hard-nose politics.
Jeffrey Sachs, the Harvard economist being viewed here amid the ashes of Communism as both dark wizard and enlightened missionary, demonstrated to his patrons that one way to deal with the rising criticism of President Boris N. Yeltsin's price rise program was to attack Russia's central bank and Parliament as the real culprits in wasting rubles.


Yeltsin Takes to Now-Restive Streets
Boris N. Yeltsin toured the docks and empty stores of St.
Petersburg today in his campaign to maintain the patience of a people sorely tested by soaring prices and unrelenting shortages.
Drawing instant and divided crowds wherever he stopped, the Russian President issued the same mix of stern threats, appeals for initiative and promises of sausages to come that he had carried to Bryansk and other cities around Russia.


Matrix Service Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Astronomer Retracts His Discovery of Planet
Astronomers were stunned to learn today that the reported discovery of a planet around a neutron star, announced last July and considered the first strong evidence for the existence of other planetary systems in the universe, was all a mistake.
But scientists said the retraction of the first discovery did not invalidate the second discovery of planets around a neutron star reported last week by other astronomers.


Still Fierce, But Now Fashionable
CHILDREN say the fierce-faced Japanese warrior figures guarding the entrance to Armand Arman's house in a converted pickle factory in lower Manhattan look like the robots in "Star Wars."
They're not far off the mark, according to the French-born American artist, who is known simply as Arman.
"The colors and helmets in 'Star Wars' were taken from Japanese armor," he said.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about Lehman Brothers, the investment banking organization, misidentified Peter J. Solomon in some editions.
He was a senior partner of the firm before its acquisition by American Express and was later vice chairman of the parent company's Shearson Lehman Brothers unit; he resigned in 1989 to form his own investment banking firm, Peter J. Solomon Company Ltd.


Columbia First Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A picture yesterday with a theater review of "Job: A Circus" carried an incorrect caption.
It showed Mary Dino and Stephen Ringold in a scene from the play.


National Savings Bank of Albany reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Southwestern Bell's Moves Pay Off
When the "Baby Bells" were created by the breakup of A.T.&amp; T., Southwestern Bell won few friends on Wall Street by saying that it planned to stick to its knitting.
Analysts favored the glowing talk of the other Baby Bells about opportunities in unregulated businesses.
In the following years, several of the seven Baby Bells stumbled badly in ventures ranging from real estate to computer retailing.
Southwestern, meanwhile, demonstrated a knack for moving occasionally but boldly into more closely related businesses, like cellular telephones, paging and investments in overseas phone companies.
Now, even though Baby Bell shares have risen handsomely, the former wallflower, Southwestern Bell, trades at an earnings multiple several points above the average for the group.


Supreme Court in Trenton Voids 32d Death Sentence Since 1982
The New Jersey Supreme Court today overturned the death sentence of a Camden County man who was convicted of fatally stabbing his drug supplier.
The case is the 32d in which the court has thrown out a death sentence since capital punishment was reinstated in New Jersey in 1982.
The court has upheld one death sentence, but has scheduled a hearing on its fairness for next week.


Property Values Stay Flat But New York Taxes Rise
The real-estate market in New York City is still losing value, but the pace of that decline is slowing considerably, according to the city's Department of Finance, which released its tentative tax roll yesterday for the fiscal year beginning on July 1.
The total amount by which all properties are assessed for tax purposes fell by just 0.47 percent this fiscal year, compared with a drop of 8.6 percent in the prior period, said the Finance Commissioner, Carol O'Cleireacain.


Year After Bombing, General Is at Ease
A year ago Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf ordered the start of the largest bombing campaign in modern warfare.
Today, retired from the military, he is living with his wife and their three daughters near a golf course in Cheval, Fla., a suburb of Tampa, where he is working on his autobiography with the help of a writer, Peter Petre.
General Schwarzkopf's agent, Marvin Josephson, who usually talks to him every day, said yesterday that the general was not participating in any public commemoration of the start of the Persian Gulf war.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
KEEPING cutting tools sharp is a key to using them skillfully and safely.
Chisels, planes and knives are relatively easy to sharpen; other tools, like saws, scissors and drill bits, should be sharpened professionally.
Sharpening involves grinding a thick, dull edge against a harder surface, like a sharpening stone.
Despite the variety of stones and sharpening implements available, the simplest and least expensive for an amateur remains the old-fashioned combination oilstone.


Lion and Lamb Lie Down in the Bronx
IN the beginning, Christina Schlesinger, a Manhattan artist, endured a hail of bottles thrown from the elevated subway tracks at the East Tremont Avenue station when she drew the grid for "Peaceable Kingdom," her mural on a brick wall in the South Bronx.
But when she fleshed out the mural with cotton-candy pink clouds and forest greens, she attracted a more appreciative audience.
"One guy stood in front of it for a long time," she said.
"He said I had something wrong." It seemed to him that the lion and the lamb couldn't possibly coexist.


DMI Furniture Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Henry (Jack) &amp; Associates (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bad Loans Easing Grip On Banks
It is too early to dance on banks' doorsteps, but recent earnings reports by several large banks suggest that the recession is loosening its grip on the Northeast.
While many banks in the region have been able to recover more quickly than the economy by sharply reducing interest rates paid on deposits and squeezing out other costs, they are also reporting fewer troubled loans, or at least a sharp slowdown in the growth of them.
Troubled loans, those that are far behind in payments or are not expected to be repaid in full, doubled and tripled at many banks as the economy turned downward in 1990 and 1991.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Banc One Financial Card Services, Columbus, Ohio, a unit of Banc One Corp., named Timothy E. Murnane president. *
Book-of-the-Month Club Inc., New York, a Time Warner Inc. unit, named Joanne Pello senior vice president of manufacturing and inventory.
Neal Goff was named senior vice president of club management and Brigitte Weeks was named senior vice president and editor in chief.


Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mayor Opens Exhibition of Art From the Kingdom of Benin


Research Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


'Natural' Label Skews Adoption Issue
To the Editor:
In "A Warning From Margarita" (editorial, Jan. 3), you note the return of a child from her foster parents of seven years to her "natural" mother, "a drug-abusing mother living in a homeless shelter" at the time of the birth.
Were the foster parents who presumably gave "Margarita" love and support therefore unnatural?


Bozell Wins Unisys Following a Review
The Unisys Corporation, Blue Bell, Pa., yesterday awarded its domestic and international advertising account to Bozell Inc., New York, after a two-month review.
The computer maker had recently narrowed its choice to Bozell and two other agencies, FCB/LGK, Philadelphia, and Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners , New York.
Billings for the domestic portion of the account have been estimated at $8 million.


Huntington Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


McCarthyite Relic
To the Editor:
A relic of McCarthyism lives on!
Visitors to the United States must declare (on the visa application form) whether or not they are members of a Communist organization!
What is the relevance of such information in 1992?


Provident Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Universal Foods Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Faded Glory: Looking Back at the Gulf War -- A Special Report Year After Gulf War, Joy Is a Ghost; The Families: For One Woman, A Big Test Met
Carmen Laver wanted to be a mother, wife and soldier.
If men could go to war, leaving spouses, babies and household chores behind, she thought, why not women?
So, in August 1990, when the Navy ship Mercy set sail for the Persian Gulf, with it went Petty Officer Laver on her personal challenge.
She said goodbye to her two small children and her husband in San Leandro, Calif., near Oakland.
It was the hardest thing she had ever done, she said.


Boston Acoustics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


With Subway and Bus Fares at $1.25, the M.T.A.'s Got to Give; Be Creative on Pricing
To the Editor:
The Metro Section's Dec. 30 Pulse was on the money: New York City subway and bus riders are "paying a far higher proportion of the fare . . . than transit riders in any other region of the country".
The new $1.25 token raises this unfairness to new heights.


Infrasonics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Freeport-McMoran Copper reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Knogo reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Dow Up 12.30 as Records Keep Tumbling
Records kept coming yesterday in the stock market in a rush of trading that made the session one of Wall Street's busiest ever.
A day after a 60-point surge, the Dow Jones industrial average plowed ahead, gaining 12.30 points more, to 3,258.50, its ninth record in 13 days.
And other indexes kept rewriting their records as well.
The engine driving this heady advance apparently remains the same, and remains potent: a combination of low interest rates and a strong belief that the economy is recovering.


First Virginia Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ballard Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AN INQUIRY SPREADS BLAME FOR DEATHS AT A NEW YORK GYM
The Dinkins administration's official review of the deadly crush at a City College gymnasium last month blames virtually all the parties that arranged and oversaw the celebrity basketball game -- reproaching student organizers, college officials, a rap promoter, the police and the spectators themselves.
The death of nine young men and women at what they expected to be a spirited contest between two teams of rap stars is the second-deadliest episode of crowd-control failure in recent memory in the United States, ranking after the Who concert in Cincinnati in 1979 in which 11 people died.
The tragedy stunned New Yorkers and led Mayor David N. Dinkins to assign his Deputy Mayor for Public Safety, Milton Mollen, to conduct the investigation that led to the report released last night. 'Inescapable Conclusion'
Portraying a cascading failure of responsibility, it concluded: "A review of all the events leading up to the fateful tragedy at the C.C.N.Y. gymnasium on Dec. 28, 1991, leads to the inescapable conclusion that almost all of the individuals involved in the event demonstrated a lack of responsibility."


Treasuries Down in Hectic Trading
Prices of Treasury securities fell still lower in hectic, volatile trading yesterday.
According to market participants, money managers who chose not to realize profits at the end of last year are now selling securities.
Some of those accounts are moving a percentage of their fixed-income portfolio into German assets, they said.
German interest rates are high relative to American rates, and with Germany appearing to be heading toward recession, money managers are expecting a rally in the German bond market.


ICF International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


People
*
Gary Roberts has been promoted to president at Greenstone Roberts Advertising, Melville, L.I., from executive vice president.
He succeeds Ronald Greenstone, who remains chairman and chief executive. *
Dennis Wilkinson has left his position as executive vice president and general manager at Young &amp; Rubicam Chicago, to become senior vice president of consumer marketing at Home Box Office Inc., New York.


First Colonial Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AMR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BBDO Toronto Unit In Deal With McKim
BBDO Worldwide announced yesterday that it planned to create the largest advertising agency in Canada by merging its Baker Lovick/BBDO unit with McKim Advertising, both in Toronto.
The new agency, to be called McKim Baker Lovick/BBDO, would have billings in excess of $320 million.
The merger, which is subject to approval by shareholders of both companies, follows a decision by BBDO to purchase all of the outstanding shares of McKim.
About 45 percent of those shares became available when their owner, Ayer Inc. in New York, decided not to exercise its option to buy the remaining shares.
Instead, an Ayer spokeswoman said, Ayer chose to sell its stake in McKim because of potential client conflicts.


But Can I Read It in the Bathtub?
To the Editor:
"Is the Electronic Book Closer Than You Think?" (The Week in Review, Dec. 29) raises a number of questions for me.


Todd-AO Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


American List Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Fidelity Medical Inx. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Standard &amp; Poor's Reduces Debt Rating of Implant Maker
The Dow Corning Corporation suffered new trouble yesterday from a Government moratorium on breast implants as the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation lowered its rating for the company's debt and said more reductions were possible.
Standard &amp; Poor's said its major concern was the possibility of a large number of costly lawsuits against the company and Dow Corning Wright, its wholly owned medical devices subsidiary, by thousands of women claiming they had been harmed by silicone leaking from the implants or other hazards asssociated with them.
The credit agency said the shutdown of production operations for the breast implants and the $25 million charge against fourth-quarter earnings announced Tuesday by Dow Corning would have minimal impact on its financial condition.


College Bound Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Home Video
How about Danny Glover as a lion?
And Tracey Ullman as a cat?
When Rabbit Ears Productions or Lightyear Entertainment, two producers of children's videos, tape their animated stories, they hire movie actors to narrate.
While that approach may not dislodge Disney, it has helped earn a following in video stores.
For example, Lightyear's "Beauty and the Beast," part of its "Stories to Remember" series and narrated by Mia Farrow, is especially popular now because Disney's animated film "Beauty and the Beast" is in movie theaters.
Rabbit Ears videos scheduled for this year include "The Monkey People," with Raul Julia; "Rip Van Winkle," with Anjelica Huston; "Koi and the Kola Nuts," with Whoopi Goldberg; a lively, French-accented "Puss in Boots" with Ms.
Ullman, and "Brer Rabbit and Boss Lion," with Mr.
Glover.
The actors don't appear on camera.
Their job is to tell stories chosen from children's literature and similar sources, accompanied by illustrations and musical scores by well-known artists and musicians.
For instance, "The Tiger and the Brahman" from Rabbit Ears, told by Ben Kingsley, has a score composed and performed by Ravi Shankar.
Videos from the two companies, which are not connected, are about a half-hour long and sell for less than $10 in book and record stores as well as video stores.
Rabbit Ears productions are semi-animated, with about 200 drawings moving in sequence, sometimes rapidly enough to produce character movement.
Stories to Remember videos are more fully animated.
"Beauty and the Beast," for instance, has about 1,000 drawings.
"It's not how many drawings you have, but what you do with them," said Joshua Greene, the producer of Stories to Remember.
"A picture book is a very intimate experience for a child. You have to project that onto the screen."
Rabbit Ears began producing its stories in 1985.
"I wanted people who could tell them like my mother," said Mark Sottnick, the executive producer.
Professional storytellers were often too theatrical for his taste, so he turned to actors, most of whom, Mr.
Sottnick said, read similar stories to their own children or were struck by them as works of literature.
"I love the stories," said Mr.
Glover, who has narrated three videos for Rabbit Ears.
"Kids see that it's not only me in 'Lethal Weapon,' but this is the guy who tells them stories."
Rabbit Ears actors, who have included Jack Nicholson and Jodie Foster, are paid for what is usually about a half-day's work.
Mr.
Sottnick wouldn't say how much, but he said the amount was comparable to what the narrator might earn for a half-day on a film set.
Mr.
Greene, who has been creating "Stories to Remember" since 1987, said he paid a good wage.
Often he goes far afield for illustrators.
Two stories now in production, both to be narrated by Sigourney Weaver, are being illustrated by a studio in Moscow.
"We have to send them paper, pencils, erasers and paints," he said.
NEW VIDEO RELEASES Jungle Fever
1991. MCA/Universal
. $94.95. Laser disk, $39.98. 2 hours
15 minutes. Closed captioned. R.
At the core of Spike Lee's film is the doomed affair between Flipper (Wesley Snipes), a young black architect, and Angie (Annabella Sciorra), his white secretary.
From there the story moves out to record the reactions of family and friends.
There are Flipper's angry wife (Lonette McKee), his befuddled parents (Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee), his cavalier brother, a crack addict (Samuel L. Jackson) and his reflective best friend (Mr. Lee).
On the other side, behind aluminum storm doors in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, are Angie's outraged father (Frank Vincent), her robustly bigoted brothers (David Dundara and Michael Imperioli) and her detached neighborhood boyfriend (John Turturro).
Mr.
Lee's anger complements his competence as a film maker, resulting in a "splendid, serious social comedy" (Vincent Canby).
Point Break
1991. Fox
. $94.98. 2:02. CC. R.
Scrounging around for clues after a bank stickup in Southern California, agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation turn up a suspicious substance in a footprint at the scene of the crime: surfboard wax.
Well, it's a start, so Kathryn Bigelow's film sends a young lawman (Keanu Reeves) to infiltrate a surfing group suspected of the heist.
There he encounters the group's leader, a sort of beach boy Svengali named Bohdi (Patrick Swayze), who leads the law on frantic chases that display Ms.
Bigelow's "real talents as a director of fast-paced, high-adrenaline action" (Janet Maslin).
Victor Borge in London
1991. Kultur. $29.95. 50 minutes. No rating.
Cornball wears well on the sophisticated Dane, who in this 1972 concert repeatedly bounces off the piano stool to pass along his own angles on life and the musical scene.
Among other things, we learn how Chopin used his "Minute Waltz," played three times, as an egg timer and why people screamed "Bravo!" at early Borge recitals. (Bravo was a better pianist.) Here also, in a famous routine, Mr.
Borge and a partner climb all over each other on a piano bench while performing a duet.
Accompaniment, whenever anybody can get a note in, is provided by the London Philharmonic.
Carnegie Hall at 100
1991. BMG. $29.98. LD, $34.98. 57 minutes. No rating.
From Tchaikovsky, who opened the hall on the podium in 1891, to Garrison Keillor, about everyone (or so it seems) who performed there is given coverage in this rapid-fire documentary, broadcast last year on PBS.
A stream of recollections from artists as diverse as Agnes de Mille and Frank Sinatra are mixed with clips of performances taken from film archives -- the most remarkable by Vladimir Horowitz and Jascha Heifetz -- to make up the "ultimate souvenir program" (John J. O'Connor).
DECEMBERS PAST
As films from "Hook" to "J. F. K." illustrate, Hollywood goes into the new year on the strength of its big holiday releases.
Here are some movies from other Decembers, some of which were bigger than others, available on tape.
BROADCAST NEWS.
William Hurt, Holly Hunter and Albert Brooks contend with careers and personal agendas. 1987.
Fox. $19.98. 2:13.
CC.
R.
DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS.
The suave Michael Caine is the Riviera's top con man until Steve Martin shows up to compete for the bankroll of the heiress Glenne Headly. 1988.
Orion. $19.99. 1:42.
CC.
PG.
GANDHI.
Ben Kingsley is the spiritual leader in Richard Attenborough's film, which won eight Oscars. 1982.
Columbia Tri-Star. $29.99. 3:11.
CC.
PG.
OUT OF AFRICA.
Karen Blixen (Meryl Streep), better known as the writer Isak Dinesen, finds her true life in Kenya.
Robert Redford and Klaus Maria Brandauer also star in the Sydney Pollack film, which won an Oscar. 1985.
MCA/Universal. $29.99. 2:44.
CC.
R.
PLATOON.
Oliver Stone's account of Vietnam combat is particularly realistic.
Charlie Sheen, Willem Dafoe and Tom Berenger star. 1986.
LIVE. $19.98. 1:59.
CC.
R.
RAIN MAN.
Dustin Hoffman won an Oscar as the autistic brother of Tom Cruise, a crass car salesman who learns about love and sacrifice.
Barry Levinson's film won as best picture. 1988.
MGM/UA. $19.99. 2:13.
CC.
R.
REDS.
Warren Beatty directs and stars as the journalist John Reed during the Russian Revolution.
Maureen Stapleton won an Oscar as the anarchist Emma Goldman, Jack Nicholson is Eugene O'Neill and Diane Keaton is the writer Louise Bryant. 1981.
Paramount. $29.99. 3:19.
CC.
PG.
THROW MOMMA FROM THE TRAIN.
Contending with a domineering mother, Danny DeVito gets an idea on how to correct the situation.
With Anne Ramsey and Billy Crystal. 1987.
Orion. $19.99. 1:28.
CC.
PG-13.


Warren Finds It's Better to Block Than to Receive
Don Warren always hoped for a solid pro football career, but he never figured it would turn out this way.
"I envisioned myself as being what I was at San Diego State," said Warren, who was the Washington Redskins' fourth-round draft choice in 1979 after leading his college team in receiving.
"I figured when I came here that I would do a lot of blocking, but I also would catch a lot more balls than I have up to this point."


William Bunney, 89, Biochemist Who Was Officer of E. R. Squibb
Dr.
William Edward Bunney Sr., a biochemist who was formerly a director and vice president of E. R. Squibb and Sons in charge of worldwide manufacturing, died Jan. 8 at the University of California-Irvine Medical Center while on a family visit to Southern California.
He was 89 years old and lived in Surry, Me.
His family said he died of heart failure.


Wachovia Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cherokee Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Accounts
*
Pepsi-Cola Co., Somers, N.Y., has revamped its assignments for Hispanic advertising after a review.
Siboney Advertising, the incumbent agency, will continue to create national ads and handle network media buying, while Ornelas &amp; Associates, Dallas, has been named to develop and execute local promotions and field marketing programs.
Pepsi did not disclose billings, but the trade publication Adweek estimated that Ornelas would handle the bulk of the $8 million to $9 million account.


Analysts International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Geodynamics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


McEnroe Earns Shot At Becker
The wisdom that comes with age has taught John McEnroe lessons about hindsight and about making the most of the future.
After maneuvering his way past Andrei Cherkasov, 7-5, 3-6, 6-4, 6-3, in the second round of the Australian Open, McEnroe paused to reflect on his past.
"It's hard to smell the roses when you're No. 1," McEnroe said.
"You're always looking over your shoulder because the second you let down there are these young guys ready to pounce on you."


Nets March In and Bury the Wounded in Boston
Larry Bird was out with a sore back.
Robert Parish was sidelined with a sprained left ankle.
And five minutes before tonight's game with New Jersey, Boston announced that Kevin McHale would be placed on the injured list and miss the next five games.
Showing no mercy, the Nets raced back from a 14-point third-quarter deficit, overtook the depleted Celtics and beat them, 130-120, to the dismay of the 516th consecutive sellout in Boston Garden.


Intel Profits Are Strong for Period and Year
The Intel Corporation today reported record revenues and earnings for 1991 and fourth-quarter results at the high end of analysts' expectations.
Its strong showing came despite the recession and the emergence of a competing producer of its core microprocessor products.
Analysts attributed Intel's gains partly to increased sales of the company's products with high profit margins.
These include the 486 microprocessor, which forms the heart of the most powerful personal computers, and the 386SL, a version of the 386 chip that consumes less electrical current.


Vivigen Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


General Microwave Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY QUESTIONS OF RESPONSIBILITY
A mayoral report that offers the first authoritative assessment of the deadly crush at a City College gymnasium last month paints a picture of a cascading failure of responsibility and blames virtually all parties that arranged and oversaw the celebrity basketball game -- reproaching student organizers, college officials, a rap promoter, the police and the spectators themselves.
A1 and B8.
REAL-ESTATE DECLINE SLOWING
New York City's real-estate market is still losing value, but the pace of that decline is slowing considerably, according to the Department of Finance, which released its tentative tax roll for the new fiscal year.
Nonetheless, property taxes will go up, by 2.7 percent, because those bills are based on a five-year average that still reflects the boom years of the 1980's.
B3.
Police seek suspect in Brooklyn rape classified as bias.
B2.
Young bias-attack victim in the Bronx copes with the pain.
B2.
Records seized in investigation of newspaper unions.
B3.
Photos could provide first clues to slain girl's identity.
B3.
REGION OPENING JOUSTS IN TEANECK TRIAL
Opposing lawyers drew starkly different portraits of the fatal shooting of 16-year-old Phillip Pannell during opening arguments in the manslaughter trial of Gary Spath, the Teaneck, N.J., police officer who fired the shot.
B4.
BATTERED AND BITTER
Still feeling battered by two recent Atlantic storms, residents and borough officials in Sea Bright, N.J., say they are increasingly bitter about the Federal Government's decision to deny them disaster relief, though damage from the October storm has been estimated at nearly $2 million.
B4.
INTRODUCING THE SPEAKER
Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian, the new Speaker of the New Jersey Assembly and the undisputed leader of an ironclad Republican majority, is a man for whom taking politics to heart is a family tradition.
B6.
DEATH SENTENCE OVERTURNED
The New Jersey Supreme Court overturned the death sentence of a Camden County man who was convicted of fatally stabbing his drug supplier.
The case is the 32d in which the court has thrown out a death sentence since capital punishment was reinstated in 1982.
B4.
SAYING GOODBYE TO A REFUGE
It wasn't B. Altman or the Horn &amp; Hardart Automat, both major landmarks recently vanished from the New York retail firmament.
But for thousands of commuters who passed the Commuter Book Centre in Grand Central Terminal day after day, its sudden disappearance has left perhaps as great a void.
Metro-North Journal, B6.
Warmus's lawyer says she may have cancer.
B6.
Neediest Cases B5


Uno Restaurant Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Lexicon reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Bigger Force Hunts Rapists As Officials Plead for Calm
As an expanded force, including extra police patrols and human rights counselors, appealed for calm in the Marine Park section of Brooklyn yesterday, an intensive search continued for two men who detectives say abducted and raped a 15-year-old girl on Tuesday morning as she waited for a bus to school.
At a news conference at Police Headquarters yesterday, the Police Commissioner, Lee P. Brown, released a sketch of one of the men in the attack and said the city had enlisted extra help because the attack involved both rape and bias.


Geriatric &amp; Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Top Officer Is Named At Republic Health Corp.
Charles N. Martin Jr., who resigned last fall as president of Healthtrust, a chain of 85 hospitals, was named yesterday to be chairman and chief executive of the Republic Health Corporation, an 11-hospital chain based in Dallas.
Mr.
Martin is buying a million shares, or 6.6 percent, of Republic Health for $7.75 million, the hospital chain said.
It added that he had been granted options to buy 750,000 more shares at $10.75 each.


Strategies for Selling More When Shoppers Want Less
"THE 'less' decade" is here, according to Carol Farmer, a retail consultant.
The "era of excess" of the 1980's is history, she insists, and marketers must catch on to that quickly.
She was speaking as part of a panel of advertising, marketing and media executives who urged the nation's retailers to revamp drastically how they communicate with customers or suffer the loss of their businesses.


Sports of The Times; On His 50th, Ali Is Still 'The Greatest'
Three months before his Thrilla in Manila with Joe Frazier in 1975, Muhammad Ali stopped in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, for a 15-round appointment with a statue named Joe Bugner.
In the days before that title bout, the heavyweight champion and the British challenger attended a ceremonial selection of the gloves.


Quotation of the Day
"This 15th of January, 1992 will be inscribed in golden letters in 14 centuries of Croatian existence." -- PRESIDENT FRANJO TUDJMAN of newly independent Croatia.  [ A1:1. ]


Japanese Stocks Retreat
Japanese stocks fell today, as late selling erased the strong gains posted in the morning.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues lost 162.94 points, or 0.75 percent, to close at 21,612.94.
The Tokyo stock market was closed on Wednesday for a holiday.


With Subway and Bus Fares at $1.25, the M.T.A.'s Got to Give
To the Editor:
Since it will now cost a family of four $5 to take a subway or bus ride for an outing, then another $5 to return, it may well be that many families will switch to taxis rather than support a sagging public transportation system.
Since poor families are hardest hit by increases in subway and bus fares, many families of four or more may have to think twice about investing $10 just to take public transportation to a museum, sporting event, show or whatever.


Cordero Out for 6 Weeks; Status Is Called 'Improved'
Angel Cordero Jr. remained under intensive care yesterday at Long Island Jewish Hospital, but his agent said he was much improved after surgery to remove his spleen.
And his agent said that the 49-year-old riding star would need six weeks to recover but would then resume his racing career.
"There is no question about it," said the jockey's agent, Frank Sanabria.
"He'll be back."


Get the Rest of the J.F.K. Story
Oliver Stone, the film maker, was wrong to use trick photography and spurious evidence to charge that the murder of John F. Kennedy was a coup by the nation's highest officials.
But he is right to call for release of assassination documents that have been sealed for decades and are scheduled to remain so for decades more.
Without endorsing Mr.
Stone's conspiracy theories, the Kennedy family and a growing number of public officials are giving welcome encouragement to a fuller historical account of a national tragedy.
They need to press the case for wider disclosure -- without illusions that new data will appease the insatiable conspiracy theorists.


Barry's Jewelers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


India Reports Insurgents in Assam Have Agreed to End 4-Year Fight
Leaders of an insurgency in Assam State in northeast India have agreed to end their four-year rebellion, give up their weapons and abide by the Constitution, after a secret meeting here with Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao, a senior official says.
Four leaders of the insurgent group, the United Liberation Front of Assam, attended the two-hour meeting, which was held on Sunday.
The four had been freed from prison and flown by special aircraft to New Delhi for the talks.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.00
6.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.80
3.80
6.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.89
3.86
6.17
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.79
6.76
8.07
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.57
7.53
8.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.76
8.71
9.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.69
6.69
7.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
An article in the Business People column on Tuesday about the new chief executive of Marion Merrell Dow Inc. misstated the patent status of the company's blood-pressure drug Cardizem.
It will lose patent protection on Nov. 5.


Yields Are Down Sharply for Money Funds
The money funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report continued to show lower yields yesterday for both tax-exempt and taxable funds.
"Now we are seeing the full effect of the Federal Reserve's recent easing of interest rates showing up in money fund yields," said Walter Frank, economist for the organization.
"Earlier this year, the effects were masked somewhat by year-end influences. We will see some further decline in money fund yields. But until we get some further action from the Federal Reserve, the bulk of the decline in short-term yields is behind us."


Topics of The Times; Congress, Skiing Downhill
A small, private gathering last weekend in Snowmass, Colo., illustrates how members of Congress market themselves to special interests.
The event was the "Speaker's Club Ski Weekend," which the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee has staged for several years.
The invitation, sent in October to lobbyists and wealthy political donors by Representative Vic Fazio of California, offered more than just good skiing.
It also offered a chance to get to know influential legislators.


Chevron to Cut Back At Big Texas Refinery
Hurt by weak demand and low prices for natural gas and gasoline and rising costs for environmental regulations, the Chevron Corporation today announced a program to cut costs, including a plan to reduce or possibly end output at the Chevron refinery in Port Arthur, Tex. -- the company's biggest.
The decision follows moves last year by other large refiners like Shell and Amoco to sell or close refineries and suggests that the nation's gasoline refining capacity will fall by approximately 100,000 barrels a day, or about 4 percent, in coming years.


Pancho's Mexican Buffet reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rock-and-Roll Honors Those at Its Roots
Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones lovingly, if a bit irreverently, spoke of the contribution that Leo Fender made to popular music to the audience assembled for the seventh annual Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremonies at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel last night.
"He gave us the weapons," Mr.
Richards said to the crowd of 950 about the man who invented the Fender electric guitar.
Mr.
Richards's parting shot to the crowd was what he called the "guitar players' prayer": "Caress it. Don't squeeze it." Mr.
Fender, who died in March, was among the hodgepodge of pop-music legends inducted into the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame last night.
The diversity offered raucous, soulful and mellow testimony that rock defies easy definition.
A planned I. M. Pei-designed building in Cleveland to house the music's history, meanwhile, continues to defy construction.


Iraqis Could Pose a Threat Soon, C.I.A. Chief Says
President Saddam Hussein could rebuild Iraq's ability to make nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and its ballistic missile program within a few years, Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, said today.
The timing of Mr.
Gates's testimony before the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, on the eve of the first anniversary of the start of the Persian Gulf war, may have been coincidental.
But the message was clear: Despite allied success in damaging Iraq's special weapons programs, the country, he said, "is still a great challenge" to nations and organizations that have attempted to disarm it.


Sports-Tech International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Surgeons Accuse F.D.A. of Creating Panic on Implants
The president of a leading association of plastic surgeons said today that the Food and Drug Administration's call for a moratorium on the sale of silicone gel breast implants had "created hysteria, anxiety and panic" and called on the agency to release the information that had prompted the moratorium.
Dr.
Norman Cole, president of the American Society for Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, said it was "unconscionable -- an outrage" that Dr.
David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, had not provided doctors with the medical and scientific data behind his decision.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Carl Allen  Bradley's 70 University Place Greenwich Village Through Saturday
One of the ways jazz gives pleasure is by swinging, by implying motion in the music, by enveloping listeners in a kind of communal activity.
It also gives pleasure by exposing the linear nature of the narrative process, by showing exactly how thought and play can be the same thing.


Freeport-McMoran Resource Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rollins Environmental Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


So the Baby's Food Can Find Its Target
ADAM STRAUS, an industrial designer, had only the physical and play needs of babies in mind when he designed his silver spoons, shown at left.
The wide, animalesque, tactile handles are meant to be gripped overhand, the way a baby grips: tightly, ungingerly.
Underneath, the handles are cut in relief so small hands won't slip.
Mr.
Straus, who has a 1-year-old niece, also studied nurseries for design themes.
Animals, not suprisingly, popped up most frequently.
His three stylized animal handles -- depicting a rabbit, a bear and a fish -- are meant to look as if they are in motion; the fish spoon, for example, seems to float along, bubbling.


For Arizonans, the Political Circus Is Back in Town
In this state where politics has become theater, the latest act stars the new Governor, J. Fife Symington 3d, who faces a Federal lawsuit for his role in a failed savings and loan.
After a four-year run of political embarrassments, said a prominent poll taker, Earl de Berge, "I think people have reached the point where they are not surprised by anything, and the anti-incumbency mood is as deep as I've seen it in 25 years."


SHL Systemhouse reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Events: Antiques Shows And Folk Art Lessons
Nine Days
Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue and 66th Street; (212) 472-0590.
The Winter Antiques Show, which features 66 dealers, starts Saturday and runs through Jan. 26.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Monday through Saturday; 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sunday.
Admission: $10.
Benefit Antiques
The Sacred Heart School, 1 East 91st Street; (212) 722-4745.
The Convent of the Sacred Heart is sponsoring a preview party for an antiques show to benefit its building fund.
The reception, with tickets at $50, will be held from 6 to 10 P.M. tomorrow.
Show hours will be 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. on Saturday and 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. on Sunday.
Admission: $10.
Minds and Hands
Folk Art Institute of the Museum of American Folk Art, 61 West 62d Street; (212) 977-7170.
The spring session starts Wednesday with classes in American textiles and folk art painting.
Tuition is $120.
One-day workshops will be offered in various quilting styles and, stenciling and rug hooking.
Each workshop is $65, plus a materials fee.
Registration is required for all programs.
Equal Access
Cooper Union Great Hall, 7 East Seventh Street; (212) 838-9670.
Nine speakers will discuss the Americans With Disabilities Act and the implications of its accessibility requirements for architecture in New York. from 5:30 to 8 P.M. on Wednesday.
Admission, $20; $10, members.
Pier Antiques
Piers 90 and 92, 12th Avenue between 52d and 55th Streets; (212) 246-5450
.
There will be an antiques show featuring 400 dealers on Saturday and Sunday.
The hours are 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $9.
An early buying session will be from 8 A.M. to 11 A.M. on Saturday; tickets, $35.
Woodlands Work
Boat House in Prospect Park, Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-287-3400.
The Urban Park Rangers will hold lectures about the park starting at 1 P.M. this Sunday.
Participants can help with woodlands restoration work.
Future dates are Feb. 2 and 16; March 8 and 22; April 5 and 26.
Free.


Suddenly, Travelers at Grand Central Miss a Funky Old Friend
It wasn't B. Altman or the Horn &amp; Hardart Automat, both major landmarks recently vanished from the New York retail firmament.
But for thousands of commuters who passed the Commuter Book Centre in Grand Central Terminal day after day, its sudden disappearance has left perhaps as great a void.


FCS Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Breakup of Yugoslavia Leaves Slovenia Secure, Croatia Shaky
Recognizing Croatia and Slovenia, the 12 nations of the European Community put their official seal today on an accomplished fact: the breakup of Yugoslavia, the multi-ethnic nation born in 1918.
But while Slovenia looks forward to a relatively secure future as a comparatively prosperous Alpine republic, the joy in Croatia was tempered by uncertainty.


Review/Music; Mozart and Something New
The Mozart bicentennial binge seems scarcely to have abated with the passing of the anniversary of the composer's death.
The Brooklyn Philharmonic and its conductor laureate, Lukas Foss, offered motley Mozart for the first half of their program last weekend at the Brooklyn Academy of Music: the "Don Giovanni" Overture, the Andante in C for Clarinet and Strings (K. 315) and the Trio in E flat for Viola, Clarinet and Piano (K. 498).
The overture was something more, actually: a Foss confection called "Music for Three Orchestras." Bands in front of the stage and in two side balconies played the little dances from the opera's party scene, and the large orchestra onstage played the overture.
The dances proved a harmless fillip at the start, but they returned to intrude on the overture's conclusion.


To Say Kitschy, Kitschy Without Having to Coo
WENDY BACKER, the sole owner of Thinga-ma-bib, a San Francisco company, decided it was high time that babies and kitsch -- vintage post cards, plastic dinosaurs, tiny dolls in Hawaiian skirts, tinier ants -- got together at mealtime.
So she put the kitsch in her bibs.
"I was so disgusted with the pink-and-blue-duck stuff that I decided to make my own," she said.
The vinyl bibs have seven themes, including "The Suburban Dream" (fake money attached to a picture of a house) and "La Bamba" (babies and electric guitars), below.


U.S. Oil Output Drops; Consumption Also Falls
Domestic oil production "has begun a precipitous decline," the American Petroleum Institute said yesterday.
In a report summing up last year, it also found that consumption fell, so imports also declined, and that oil's slice of the national energy pie dropped to a 40-year low of 41 percent.
The institute, which is the industry's main trade group, said that producers kept up their output in the early part of 1991 because of the Persian Gulf war, but that fourth-quarter crude production was the lowest for that quarter in 30 years, and outside Alaska it was the lowest since 1950.
The number of operational drilling rigs, fewer than 800 in the last five months, is the lowest in nearly 50 years.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Candidates Are on Call for Small TV Station
Jack Heath, the 31-year-old news director of a small television station here, did not have to hang up on anyone at the White House this week or threaten to cancel an interview with the President.
He had used that tactic -- with great success -- before his interview in December, but this time the problems were resolved more smoothly.
The only real difficulty came on the eve of President Bush's arrival in New Hampshire, when the White House called to say that Mr.
Bush would find time during today's visit to tape an interview with the station, WMUR-TV.
"They said we'd be the only media to get an interview," Mr.
Heath said Tuesday, but he was still not satisfied.
He wanted the President on live at the start of the 6 o'clock news.


Review/Theater; The 'Near Future' of 1970 Arrives in a Revival
In "The Philanthropist," Christopher Hampton turned "The Misanthrope" inside out by creating a title character who likes everyone and apologizes for everything, even when it is someone else's fault.
Because of the accuracy of the playwright's perceptions, the play is far more than a case of reverse Moliere.
It is a highly literate comedy of manners, with sobering undertones.
The subjects are academic insularity and artistic arrogance, the assumption that words are more relevant than actions or emotions.
Although the play was first presented in 1970, it seems not to have aged at all, as demonstrated in Gordon Edelstein's vibrant new production at the Long Wharf Theater.
This bourgeois comedy was originally set in the "near future." That future is now, and also tomorrow, whenever and wherever people forcibly detach themselves from the problems of the world around them and seclude themselves in a hothouse.
In this university environment, the characters suffer from severe myopia.
They are unmoved by suicide and even mass murder, as long as it happens to other people.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
SOON after her mother broke up with the man she had been dating, 9-year-old Jane asked to sleep in her mother's bed.
"She wanted to comfort me," said Barbara S., a recently divorced psychologist in Westchester County who spoke on the condition that her full name not be used.
"She told me, 'He wasn't good for us, Mom. Besides, you have me.' "
Children of single parents have a tremendous emotional investment in the parent's dating.
Yet their feelings can be ambivalent or even contradictory.
The person their parent is involved with can be both a potential savior and a threat, a provider of love and a rival for it.


Century Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


IMRS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Freshman Makes Himself at Home
Lawrence Moten wasn't really expecting much from himself this season.
The 6-foot-5-inch Syracuse freshman figured 1991-92 would be a season of learning and a minimum of on-the-job training.
"I thought I'd come in, get five minutes and come out," Moten said tonight after yet another stellar performance.
"Things have really happened so fast."


Manufacturers National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


'Daughters of the Dust'


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Jan. 8 about an appointment at A. L. Laboratories Inc. misstated the company's corporate structure.
It is independent.


SPORTS PEOPLE: PRO BASKETBALL
The Seattle SuperSonics, stung by consecutive home losses to Orlando and Charlotte, lost their coach, K. C. JONES, yesterday.
He was fired hours after a 1-point overtime loss to the Hornets.
The move caught the Seattle team by surprise.
And it was one that the Sonics' president, BOB WHITSITT, didn't want to make.
"But at this time, we need to go in a different direction," Whitsitt said in a release.


Jury in Shooting by Officer Hears Conflicting Accounts
Opposing lawyers drew starkly different portraits of the fatal shooting of 16-year-old Phillip Pannell in opening arguments today in the manslaughter trial of Gary Spath, the Teaneck police officer who fired the shot.
The chief prosecutor, Glenn D. Goldberg, a special deputy attorney general, said the teen-ager was killed while trying to surrender to Officer Spath and Officer Wayne Blanco as they chased him, their guns drawn, in the yard of a two-family home in Teaneck on April 10, 1990.


He-Ro Group Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Modine Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


G.M. Sets Venture in China To Assemble Pickup Trucks
The General Motors Overseas Corporation announced today that it had formed a $100 million joint venture with a Chinese vehicle manufacturer to assemble pickup trucks for sale in China.
The joint venture represents General Motors' effort to enter a vehicle market that is expected to be one of the fastest growing in the world.
China's 1.1 billion people now get around mostly on bicycles, but very rapid industrial growth rates are likely to mean enormous growth in the numbers of cars, buses and trucks on the roads in the future.


Palmer (66) Almost Posts His Age (62) but Trails by 2
The annual annihilation of par that is the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic began today with any 18-hole score starting with the numeral "7" being bad news.
The lowest numbers posted on a warm, clear day in the Southern California desert were eight-under-par 64's by David Peoples, who did it at Indian Wells Ccountry Club, and Rick Fehr, who accomplished the feat at the more difficult La Quinta C.C.


Radius Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Faded Glory: Looking Back at the Gulf War -- A Special Report Year After Gulf War, Joy Is a Ghost; The Warriors: Impending Cuts Causing Worries
Come the first anniversary of the start of the Persian Gulf war, it will be business as usual at this Army post that sent 26,000 soldiers to Saudi Arabia.
The lack of ceremonies seems somehow fitting: For the American soldier, the war is a rapidly fading memory, shoved aside by the stunning collapse of the Soviet Union and fears that looming budget cuts could push thousands out of the military.


Elcor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rowan Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Bryan Adams  The Ritz
When Bryan Adams's single "(Everything I Do) I Do It for You," from the film "Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves," became a hit last summer, it was as though a voice from rock-and-roll's near past had suddenly crashed into the present.
Known for such hits of the mid-80's as "Cuts Like a Knife," "Run to You" and "Summer of '69," Mr.
Adams wasn't exactly making a comeback; his last album was released in 1987.
But in those four years between hits, he was rather easy to forget.
There was something disposable about his songs, something generic.
At the Ritz on Friday night, Mr.
Adams made "(Everything I Do) I Do It for You," which is the second-best-selling single of all time, the obvious centerpiece of his set.
The lights came down low; the singer mumbled something about a "happy accident"; the keyboardist, Tommy Mandel, struck a few fat notes on his synthesizer, and women in the sold-out crowd began shrieking as one.
The show was carefully paced around the ballads.
Mr.
Adams opened with a string of uptempo rock tunes -- "Can't Stop This Thing We Started" and "Hey Honey -- I'm Packin' You In!" from his latest album, "Waking Up the Neighbors," a version of the rhythm-and-blues classic "I Hear You Knocking" -- that sounded enough like the Rolling Stones in the "Sticky Fingers" era to be a bit spooky.
The only difference was that the relatively clean-cut Mr.
Adams and his lead guitarist, Keith Scott, are too polished to miss notes the way the Stones do.
Pounding out tracks like these, wearing a no-frills gray T-shirt streaked with sweat and new-looking blue jeans with the cuffs rolled up, Mr.
Adams strove to fit the most basic archetype of a rock-and-roller: unpretentious, hard-working, sincere.
Even the title of his new album seems to suggest that he's just a good old boy who wants to have fun.
But what kept his rocker act from being convincing were the ballads.
Their unapologetic mushiness and glossy pop production are the antithesis of rock-and-roll.
"Everything I Do" and "Thought I'd Died and Gone to Heaven" could easily have been hits for Michael Bolton or Whitney Houston, and the raunchy chords and stomping rhythms can't disguise the fact that hits like "Somebody" and "Run to You" are hollow at the core.
Mr.
Adams is all form and no content.
His songs are catchy and shallow, like pop.
They're neat.


Autodie Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Robert B. McNee, Instrumental In Geography Theory, Dies at 69
Robert B. McNee, a prominent geography professor who once headed the American Geographical Society, died Jan. 8 at the U.C.L.A.
Medical Center.
He was 69 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of complications of lung cancer, his family said.


ISRAELI SETTLERS ANSWER ASSAULTS
A member of Parliament from the Likud Party welcomed visitors today to his new office and home set up in a trailer at dawn at this site north of Jerusalem by Jewish settlers.
The trailer of the legislator, Michael Eitan, parked in a muddy clearing in a grove of pine trees, was one of five similar outposts scattered today by settlers throughout the occupied territories after the ambush of an Israeli bus and car in the West Bank on Tuesday in which seven people were wounded by gunfire.


Jerusalem Journal; As the Doubts Grow, 'Ivan' Loses His Fascination
He is the man in the wooden booth, the focus of everyone's attention.
Yet it is easy for the few spectators in the courtroom to forget sometimes that he is even there.
John Demjanjuk, found guilty and sentenced to death as the monstrous "Ivan the Terrible" of the Treblinka death camp, has no role other than to listen and watch from the dock, surrounded by policemen as lawyers fill the stage, arguing his fate before the Israeli Supreme Court.


Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The F.C.C. will propose opening up a big swath of radio frequencies for "emerging technologies," hoping to speed the development of new mobile communications, from cheap and tiny wireless telephones to electronic notebooks that send and receive data.
It will recommend reallocating frequencies now used by railroads, utilities, and police and fire departments.  [ Page A1. ]


Choice Drug Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Valley National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A chart on Dec. 18 about industrial production in China described one category of enterprise incompletely.
The category labeled "privately run" also included collectives and village enterprises.


Records Are Seized In Union Inquiry at New York Papers
State, city and Federal agents seized records yesterday at The Daily News and The New York Post in what an official said was an investigation into organized crime's penetration of newspaper unions.
The official, Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, said the investigation did not concern the newspapers themselves.


Newhall Land &amp; Farming Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


O'Toole's Group reports earnings for Year to Sept 1


Molex Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Real-World Issues Reach the Bronx
Like the dark before the dawn, the business-of-baseball season is here.
And as it has been in past so-called off seasons, baseball has found a way to push into the territory once reserved almost exclusively for winter sports.
But the big news during baseball's second season is no longer dominated by such feel-good stories about M.V.P. and Cy Young winners and the coronation of the latest inductees into the Hall of Fame.


Capital Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Europe, Backing Germans, Accepts Yugoslav Breakup
In a triumph for German foreign policy, all 12 members of the European Community, as well as Austria and Switzerland, recognized the independence of the former Yugoslav republics of Slovenia and Croatia today.
In a series of separate statements, various European governments asserted that the Belgrade Government no longer had a right to rule the two republics.


Gadgets Fall Back With the Times
From the purple-carpeted lounges that looked out over the International Housewares Show at McCormick Place here you could see an ocean of wicker and neon.
There were mirrored renditions of Malcolm X, Elvis and puppies.
There were inflatable clocks, flashlight-shaped "personal alarms," cloth sacks made specifically for kittens to play in, miniature teak furniture, contraptions that bake waffles in the shape of Bugs Bunny, electric wands that dehumidify closets, and companies with names like Mr.
Ice Bucket, Warp Brothers and Love Mug Inc.
When it comes to churning out gadgets and novelties, there is nothing more prolific than the housewares industry.
For the last 53 years, marketers of ergonomic cheese cutters, flashing dog collars and the like have gravitated to this show to display their goods.
It is all the more curious, then, that at this year's exhibition age-old products and Depression-era designs were touted as the industry's cutting edge.


EA Engineering, Science, Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Liberty National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Executive Director For Spoleto Festival
Marcus Overton, the manager of the performing arts program at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, has been named executive director of the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. in Charleston, S.C.


First Union Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Attica Judge Alters Decision on Verdicts
The judge presiding over a trial to determine the liability of four New York State officials in the 1971 Attica prison uprising said today that a verdict could be announced while he was away on vacation, reversing a decision he made on Tuesday.
Judge John T. Elfvin -- who has overseen this landmark case since 1975 and had said that any verdict reached by the jury would be sealed until he returned from Barbados on Feb. 10 -- announced just before leaving for the Caribbean today that the jury could deliver its verdicts to a magistrate who will preside in his absence.
The judge's about-face followed objections from lawyers for the 1,281 former inmates who filed a civil-liability suit against New York State officials and lawyers representing the four defendants.


Pop and Jazz in Review
'The Fabulous Bud E. Luv Show'  Jewel Box Theater 321 West 44th Street Through Jan. 26
Who is the world's greatest entertainer?
According to an announcement at the Jewel Box Theater, it is none other than Bud E. Luv (Robert Vickers), the quintessential Las Vegas lounge lizard and a star with an ego as big as all outdoors.
In "The Fabulous Bud E. Luv Show," the singer, clad in a red smoking jacket decorated with images of dice and martini glasses, runs through many of the songs you never wanted to hear again, from "Mack the Knife" to "Danke Schon," in a style that suggests a distillation of Sonny Bono, Tony Orlando and Dean Martin.
Wearing the fixed grin of a sleazy used-car salesman, Mr.
Luv, who was christened Bud Euripides Luvalopolis Jr., chats about a typical day's activities (golf with Joey Bishop, lunch with Charro, big winnings at the gaming tables) and oozes endlessly about the "chicks" in his life.
Amid those songs you never wanted to hear again, he performs such originals as "The Ballad of Sheila Cornucopia," the story of his failed marriage to his "fifth and seventh wife," set to the tune of "El Paso," and "Talent," a name-dropping list song of stupefying fatuity.
The star, who claims to have been on the scene in just about every place where pop history has been made in the last three decades, pays tribute to the "Woodchuck" generation in a medley that includes fragments of Santana's "Black Magic Woman" (re-christened "Black Magic Marker") and the Who's "Pinball Wizard" ("Crap Game Wizard").
The show reaches a hilarious nadir with a Las Vegas-style disco medley, which begins with "The Hustle" and includes fragments of "Boogie Oogie Oogie," "Kung Fu Fighting" and "YMCA."
The kind of entertainer epitomized by Bud E. Luv is, of course, an easy target for spoof.
What makes Mr.
Vickers's performance special is the deadpan accuracy of his impersonation.
His tributes to Sammy Davis Jr. and Tom Jones reveal that technically he is almost as good a singer as those he mimics.
As withering as his parody may be, it is also obviously driven by a deep affection for the Bud E. Luvs of this world and their oleaginous ways.


Mobile Gas Service Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Protectionism Not Root of Wheat Loss
To the Editor:
On his recent trip President Bush told the Australians that a 30 percent loss in United States wheat production last year was related to trade barriers created by European farm subsidies.
In fact, the sharp decline in our wheat production was due to drought and excessive temperatures in much of the country's grain belt.


Ex-Ally Executive Will Join Lintas
Nancy Vaughan, formerly executive vice president and group creative director at Ally &amp; Gargano in New York, will join Lintas New Yorkon Feb. 3 as one of four executive vice presidents and group creative directors.
Ms.
Vaughan, who supervised work for clients like Tampax and Jergens at Ally, will succeed Lynn Giordano on accounts including Maybelline and Mastercard.
Ms.
Giordano, who created "Master the Moment" for Mastercard, will be moving to London to join her husband, Terry Rosenquist, the worldwide account director on Lintas's Unilever accounts.


Zeus Components Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rodney Griffin, 46, Choreographer, Dies
Rodney Griffin, a dancer, choreographer and co-founder of the Theater Dance Collection company, died on Dec. 26 at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 46 years old.
He died of AIDS, said David Haynes, his companion.


BRIEFS
*
Ecogen Inc., Langhorne, Pa., an agricultural biotechnology concern, agreed with Pfizer Inc., a pharmaceuticals company, for Pfizer to provide Ecogen with fermentation production requirements for bioinsecticides in North America.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Food Lion Inc., Salisbury, N.C., a supermarket operator, will open 30 to 40 stores in Houston beginning late this year. *
International Paper Co., Purchase, N.Y., will buy the operating assets of Western Paper Co., an industrial paper distributor and unit of Keller Enterprises Inc., Portland, Ore.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Lone Star Industries, Stamford, Conn., a cement and concrete maker, received an extension to April 24 for submitting its bankruptcy reorganization plan. *
Ryder System Inc., Miami, a leasing concern, will take an after-tax charge of $52 million, or 70 cents a share, for the fourth quarter of 1991 in connection with its discontinued aircraft leasing operations.  *
Tecnol Medical Products Inc., Fort Worth, will buy an orthopedic product line and an ice pack line from Sepro Healthcare Inc., Moorestown, N.J., for $2.8 million. *
Town and Country Corp., Chelsea, Mass., a jewelry maker, said its Feature Enterprises unit in New York was considering organizational changes that might result in consolidating manufacturing in Massachusetts.


Fewer Names Are Changed
The number of corporate name changes in 1991 fell for the third consecutive year, according to the 21st annual name-change survey by Anspach Grossman Portugal Inc., a New York corporate-identity consulting firm.
Anspach Grossman reported that 1,069 name changes were recorded last year, down 19.1 percent from 1,321 in 1990 and down 33.2 percent from 1,600 in 1989.
The 1991 figure also marked a decline of 42.7 percent from the record number of name changes, 1,864, in 1988.


Politics Sidetracks Contraceptive Research
To the Editor:
I recently presided over Congressional hearings that examined both the state of contraceptive research in this country and the potential usefulness of the French abortifacient RU-486.
At one hearing, Dr.
David Grimes, a researcher and professor of gynecology at the University of Southern California, told my subcommittee that "today, women in Dhaka, Bangladesh, have contraceptive choices that are not available to a woman in Washington, D.C." Of course, Dr.
Grimes could have named any city in the United States.


When the President Talks
President Bush long ago made himself famous for his tin ear in speech.
Once, he told reporters that "I hope I stand for anti-bigotry, anti-Semitism, anti-racism," prompting Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York to express relief that the President hadn't gone on to offend Italians, too, by saying he was antipasto.


At the Bar
Judges manques enjoy serving on bar association ethics committees, where they get to pronounce on the mores of the legal profession.
For the most part, though, what they ponder are not crowd pleasers but less-than-scintillating technical matters like questions about client confidences or conflicts of interest.
The ethics committee of the New York County Lawyers' Association, however, recently received a cri de coeur from a Manhattan law firm that raised what the panel's chairman called "needlesome" questions about fashion, popular culture and sexual politics: Is it acceptable for female lawyers to wear pants suits in court?


Britain Is Accused on Iraqi 'Supergun'
New questions have been raised about what the British Government knew of Iraq's abortive efforts in the late 1980's to build a long-range cannon, after testimony before Parliament by a man who helped design the so-called supergun.
In an appearance before a House of Commons committee Wednesday, Christopher Cowley, who managed plans to build the launcher, said some British intelligence and defense officials had been aware of the project at least two years before customs officials seized British-made components for the weapon in 1990 because they violated export laws governing the sale of military equipment to Iraq.


Francis O'Neill, 83, U.S. Mediator Who Helped Settle Labor Disputes
Francis A. O'Neill Jr., who played a leading role in settling major airline and railroad strikes as a longtime member and chairman of the National Mediation Board, died Tuesday at Martin Memorial Hospital in Stuart, Fla., where he was visiting.
He was 83 years old and lived in Manasquan, N.J.
He died of natural causes, the funeral home said.


Carolco Reaches an Accord On Its Plan for Revamping
Carolco Pictures Inc. said today that it had reached a tentative agreement with its biggest foreign shareholders and its banks on a plan that would give the struggling Hollywood production company some financial breathing room.
The plan would provide Carolco with $45 million in new money, delay the repayment of existing bank loans and other obligations, and possibly allow additional bank loans.
Analysts said the package should permit Carolco to complete and release its next several movies, including "Basic Instinct," a thriller starring Michael Douglas.
But they said that unless these movies performed well, Carolco would once again face a financial crisis.


Salvadorans Sign Treaty to End the War
The Government of El Salvador and its guerrilla foes signed a comprehensive peace treaty here today, formally ending a 12-year civil war that turned their tiny Central American nation into the most violent theater of East-West conflict in the hemisphere.
Under the watch of world leaders whose presence reflected the shifting forces that helped bring years of negotiations to a close, the two sides pledged an end not only to the fighting that has left about 75,000 people dead, but also to the hatred that has fed its sometimes unspeakable brutality.


Holiday on Monday
The birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Democrats Press TV Campaigns to Reach New Hampshire Voters
The Democratic candidates are stepping up their campaigns to woo the voters of New Hampshire, battling it out on the airwaves with advertisements that hammer at the Republicans' management of the economy.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas continued his theme of help for the "forgotten middle class" with a second commercial that began appearing on television in New Hampshire today.


Volunteers or Not, Tennessee Lawyers Help Poor
So many natives signed up for the War of 1812 and the Alamo that Tennessee became known as "The Volunteer State." But at the Knox County courthouse these days, the proud tradition of Tennessee voluntarism is being sorely tried.
With the court docket clogged, the public defender's office swamped and the state's treasury depleted, every lawyer in the county has been ordered to represent the poor at no charge.
The notion of mandatory public service for lawyers has been bitterly debated by bar groups throughout the country and, some courts have ruled, is of dubious constitutionality.
But in Tennessee, a state so strapped for cash that it has grounded fleets of school buses, the judges are assigning first and asking questions later.


As Computers Track Drugs, Fears of Abuse Arise
In Oklahoma, every druggist who fills a prescription for Demerol, codeine or any of a dozen other potentially addictive drugs must punch it into a state computer network that keeps track of patients' and doctors' names.
The intention is to crack down on illegal trafficking in such drugs.
But the year-old law has set off a national debate over doctor-patient privacy and has prompted worries that the prescription data collected under the program could be used by employers, insurers and others to withhold health benefits or to make hiring decisions.


Witness Says Victim Had Hands in Air
Moments before he was fatally shot, 16-year-old Phillip Pannell was standing in a yard with his hands raised, a Teaneck resident testified today in the manslaughter trial of the Teaneck police officer accused of killing him.
The witness, Dorothy Robinson, a nurse's aide, said she heard the first of two shots fired at Mr.
Pannell as she left her home near the scene to visit a neighbor.


Art in Review
Lynne Cohen  P.P.O.W. Gallery 532 Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Feb. 8
The empty classrooms and government testing facilities that Lynne Cohen photographs are for the most past so bland or ugly, or simply utilitarian, that they tend to sink below notice.
But by presenting them in straightforward black-and-white prints, Ms.
Cohen functions as a kind of contemporary archeologist, uncovering the day-to-day life of a hidden civilization.
Judging from the architecture and decor of these rooms, the civilization is a strange one indeed.
Ms.
Cohen pays special attention to the ways in which these rooms and the objects in them are used to simulate real situations, whether in the hulking shapes of a flight simulator or the lined-up rows of test dummies in an automobile safety lab.
More than a few of these pictures are creepy and ironic at the same time.
Covering the walls of one classroom are wall charts, now obsolete, showing how to distinguish the uniforms of East German and Soviet soldiers.
In a photograph of a firing range, the viewer is confronted by two equally unappetizing figures, one a gunman, the other a door-to-door salesman.
Despite such flashes of deadpan humor, the work here seems stale, with too many pictures resembling warmed-over versions of Ms.
Cohen's own previous hits.


TV Weekend; 2 Dramas About Drugs, One Fact, One Fiction
On prime time, it's still the white hats against the black hats, only these days the cowboylike heroes are likely to be agents working for the Drug Enforcement Administration.
The villains, most of them dark skinned, are greedy and murderous foreigners.
This is the playing field of the United States' war on drugs, and it figures prominently in two television "entertainments" this weekend.
One is a factual documentary: "Undercover Eddie," the first installment in a six-part "D.E.A." series starting tonight at 9 (repeated at 1 A.M.) on the Arts &amp; Entertainment network.
The other is a four-hour movie mixing fact and fiction: "Drug Wars: The Cocaine Cartel," being broadcast on NBC Sunday and Monday night at 9.


ELECTION PROSPECT GROWING IN ISRAEL
Prospects for early Israeli elections increased today with the imminent departure of two right-wing parties from the governing coalition, but Government officials insisted that the political turmoil would have no effect on Israel's participation in Middle East peace talks.
"The peace process has to continue even after the crisis," Foreign Minister David Levy told reporters.
Aides to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir took pains to argue that the political uncertainty would have no effect on Mr.
Shamir's commitment to continue peace negotiations with the Arabs.


Review/Art; Alfredo Jaar's Work: 'Us' and 'Them'
Alfredo Jaar's art seems to be aimed at a big audience beyond the art world, an audience well versed in sophisticated materials, dramatic images and flawless execution and with little time for contemplation.
His efficient combinations of sleek Minimalist forms and big color photographs of beleaguered inhabitants of the third world are as glamorous as they are politically committed, and the experience they create is often fleeting and lightweight, too easily digested.
Mr.
Jaar, who was born in Chile in 1956 and has lived in New York since 1982, wants to make his viewers more conscious of the ties that bind the first world to the third, to show, as he has said, that the "widening gap between Us and Them" is "only a mental one." He also wants to distinguish among different third-world populations and predicaments.
The title of his exhibition at the New Museum of Contemporary Art in SoHo, "1 Plus 1 Plus 1," refers to Africa, Asia and Latin America.
The 10 new pieces on view take the vistor to Brazil, to Lagos and to the barbed-wire gates of a Vietnamese refugee camp in Hong Kong.


Police Account Offers Details of Critical Moments
While exonerating the officers at the scene of the fatal City College crush, the Police Department's preliminary report was far harsher on the organizers of the event than a review by the Dinkins administration.
The police report included witnesses' assertions that the fatal stampede was triggered by two ticket-takers who fled their posts and that one of them later brandished a gun.
In a nine-page letter to Milton Mollen, the city's Deputy Mayor for Public Safety who prepared the administration's report, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown provided a summary of the department's own investigation.
The letter, dated Jan. 10 and made public yesterday, included a detailed chronology, almost minute by minute, of the events leading up to and immediately after the deaths.


Luxe on the Menu: Softening Hard Times
LIFTON FADIMAN, the writer and editor, once remarked that when you have little money it is best to spend that little "on the unnecessary, the emotional dividends being higher." Certainly not the kind of advice your accountant would offer, but it carries a grain of logic.
More to the point, if you are scrimping in other parts of your life -- foregoing a vacation, a new car, home improvement -- a dining splurge can be a potent spiritual anodyne.


Stretch Run for the Neediest Aided by Large Contributions
The note scribbled on the sheet of yellow paper read like many others attached to contributions to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund: "I find I have extra to give away so I am sending you this additional check."
The difference was that this anonymous donor had previously given $50,000 and the "extra" was $100,000.
Together, they equal the largest gift received during the 80th annual appeal.
The Starr Foundation, a New York-based philanthropy, also gave $150,000.
Newman's Own, the food company owned by the actor Paul Newman, gave $100,000.


S.E.C. Sets $5 Million In Penalties
Completing the first leg of its sprawling investigation arising from the scandal at Salomon Brothers Inc., the Securities and Exchange Commission imposed fines today on 98 banks and Wall Street houses.
The move came after the institutions acknowledged that they had submitted scores of inflated bids in the debt markets of five Government-created organizations that raise money to lend to home buyers, students, farms and banks.
In bringing this part of the investigation to a prompt conclusion, the S.E.C. fined the banks and brokerages only about $5 million, or an average of $52,000.
The roster included many of the world's largest and most powerful financial companies, including all the nation's top banks and most of the key firms on Wall Street, as well as leading European and Japanese firms.
Salomon, which has undergone a tumultuous reorganization, remains under investigation by both the S.E.C. and the Justice Department and was not part of today's settlement.


Sounds Around Town
The Aquanettas
The Aquanettas and Jonathan Gregg and the Lonesome Debonaires, CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, Manhattan, (212) 982-4052.
The Aquanettas are a kind of female Replacements: a sassy, sometimes sloppy four-piece group that writes fearless post-punk songs about smashing beer bottles on beach jetties and how it feels to walk into a party and see your least favorite ex-boyfriend standing in the corner.
Their lack of finesse is in direct proportion to their rock-and-roll passion -- they can bash out a three-chord anthem as though their souls depended on it.
Jonathan Gregg and the Lonesome Debonaires' debut album, "Blue on Blonde" (Jag Disc), is a catalogue of clever, countrified guitar-pop songs about being intellectual and lovelorn.
Tomorrow night at around 10:30.
Admission is $8.


There's Kleinman, Still Blocking the Plate
For all of his flamboyance and theatrics as the owner of the Yankees, George Steinbrenner has been unable to mimic Monty Hall and make the one deal that would begin discussions about his reinstatement to baseball.
He cannot persuade a longtime friend, Leonard Kleinman, to drop a $30 million lawsuit against Commissioner Fay Vincent and major league baseball.
Steinbrenner is thirsty to return to baseball, but Kleinman's lawsuit has been a mighty obstacle and the Yankees' chief operating officer is reluctant to drop it.


Art in Review
Glenn Goldberg  M. Knoedler &amp; Company 19 East 70th Street Through Jan. 30
If Paul Klee had designed video games, they would probably look something like Glenn Goldberg's work.
More than half of these oil-and-enamel-on-wood paintings are less than a foot high.
All have solid black or white grounds against which are isolated a few abstract forms made of dots and dashes of lively color and a good deal of decorative stippling.
The forms suggest many things -- watchful eyes, Christmas tree bulbs, funky little space stations chugging away through the void -- without relinquishing their own enigmatic identities.
Both because of its small size and the associations its images conjure up, the work might drop into preciousness if it got too pretty (a claylike elegance in this context would probably spell disaster), and the painter seems to know it.
He keeps his black surfaces bone dry, his white surfaces slightly scuffed, and the colored forms have a myopic, labor-intensive appearance, as if they had been painted flat on a kitchen table during late-night sittings.
The resulting intimacy shading into obsession provides the tension, and Mr.
Goldberg's vision of abstract painting as a game involving recombinations of bright cosmic bric-a-brac is an attractive proposition.


Defiant Breezes In Yacht Trials
The yacht Jayhawk appeared to be no match today for its younger sibling, Defiant, as the two met for the first time in the America's Cup defense trial races.
Both yachts, owned by William Koch's America 3 syndicate, crossed the start line on starboard tack, bow to bow.
But after nearly three hours of racing in 6- to 12-knot winds, Defiant crossed the finish ahead by 3 minutes 47 seconds.


Third Round of Mideast Talks Closes With Scant Progress
Israeli negotiators left Washington today, bringing to a close the third round of Arab-Israeli peace talks, where there was scant progress on substance and no agreement between the parties as to where or when to meet again.
In the last four days of talks in Washington, Israelis, Jordanians and Palestinians finally overcame all of their procedural disputes over the shape of the table for their negotiations, but they failed to agree on an agenda for future discussions.
There was no movement at all in the Israeli-Syrian and Israeli-Lebanese talks, which continued to wander aimlessly.


Bobsled Trials Held Up For Appeals Court Ruling
The final trials to determine the United States Olympic team in bobsled, which were scheduled to begin today in Alternberg, Germany, were postponed yesterday, pending an appellate court's ruling that would establish who is eligible to compete.
The delay was imposed by the United States Bobsled Federation after a long day of legal maneuvers, starting with a ruling by a judge in the Supreme Court of New York State that effectively ended the chances of Willie Gault and Greg Harrell to make the team.


School Reform Should Begin With Society and the Family
To the Editor:
I very much enjoyed reading "Which Students Are Worst at Science?" (Science Times, Dec. 24) and felt many interesting and noteworthy issues were brought up.
One issue in particular was that of American society's role in education.


Astronomers Say Proof of Black Hole Theory Is Almost Within Their Grasp
Astronomers believe they are a measurement away from definitive proof of the existence of black holes, those central regions of some galaxies where matter would be so dense and the pull of gravity so strong that nothing, not even light, could escape from them.
Einstein's theory predicted black holes, and current astrophysical theory assumes that they exist, but the hunt for proof of their existence has been going on for two decades without clear success.


Hunting 2 Outlaws, They Find Skeletons
A team of forensic experts and historians has exhumed a pair of skeletons in Bolivia that may be those of two famous American outlaws, Butch Cassidy and "the Sundance Kid."
One of the expedition's members, Dan Buck of Washington, said a trail of documentary clues discovered in various parts of South America led the group last month to a cemetery in San Vicente, Bolivia, a remote mining village where the outlaws supposedly died in a 1907 gun battle.


Apple's Net Is Up 10.3% In Quarter
Spurred by sales of its new products, Apple Computer Inc. said today that net income for its first fiscal quarter increased 10.3 percent from the comparable period a year earlier.
The Cupertino, Calif., personal computer company said net income for the three months ended Dec. 27 reached $166.0 million, or $1.36 a share, compared with $150.5 million, or $1.28 a share.
Revenues grew 10.7 percent, to $1.86 billion from $1.68 billion.


Critic's Choice/Film; Hellish Visions In High Style
The wickedest wit in town can be found in "Naked Lunch," David Cronenberg's ingenious adaptation of William S. Burroughs's utterly film-resistant novel.
The only requirements for appreciating Mr.
Cronenberg's accomplishment are a strong stomach and an interest in the Burroughs mystique.


INSIDE
Fined for Trading Violations
The Securities and Exchange Commission fined 98 banks and Wall Street houses for submitting phony bids in the debt markets.
Page D1.
Inflation in Check
Consumer prices rose just three-tenths of a percent last month and only 3.1 percent last year.
Page D6.
Police Challenge Report
A captain contested the criticisms in a review of the City College crush, and a police report concludes that officers acted properly.
Page B1.
Trade Deal With China Set
China will provide greater protection against piracy for American books, recordings and other items.
Page D1.
Greece Acquits Ex-Premier
Former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou of Greece was acquitted of charges in a bank scandal.
Page A5.


A Festival of New Voices From a Changing Israel
New York City has seen a good many festivals of Israeli performing arts in the last few decades.
But "Israel: The Next Generation," which opens on Sunday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music with a "Salute to Freedom" concert, is truly a festival with a difference.
Some of the theater, music and dance being presented in the next two weeks does refer to the past and to the kinds of folk traditions New Yorkers associate with previous Israeli festivals.
But the work has been filtered through very different contemporary sensibilities: those of second-generation Israelis, Arabs and immigrants from the former Soviet Union and from Ethiopa.
Performances will be given in five languages: English, Hebrew, Russian, Arabic and Amaharic, the language of Ethiopian Jews.


Manila Journal; Wow, It's 'Eee-mel-da!' Now Shopping for Votes
To some people, her name may be synonymous with greed and plunder and excess, but Imelda Marcos -- the new candidate for President of the Philippines, who calls herself "mother of the nation" -- is being greeted on stretches of the Philippine campaign trail as a resurrected hero.
It seems as if no one remembers, or cares, about all those shoes.


Angel Penna, 68, Race-Horse Trainer In U.S. and France
Angel Penna Sr., trainer of thoroughbred horses that won more than 250 stakes races in his 50-year career, died of cancer Wednesday at his home in Garden City, L.I.
He was 68 years old.
Mr.
Penna, born in Buenos Aires, was the eldest son of one of Argentina's leading trainers.
He saddled his first winner there in 1945.


Reins, but No Horses, for Civil Justice System
To the Editor:
In "Cheaper, Faster Civil Justice" (Op-Ed, Jan. 7), Whitney North Seymour Jr. demonstrates lack of knowledge with respect to the current state court system of civil justice in New York, yet he calls that system "mindless."


Many Simultaneous Exhibitions
Here is a sampling of antiques shows and decorative arts exhibitions in New York City.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted.
Antiques Shows


Reins, but No Horses, for Civil Justice System; Insurance Milkmen
To the Editor:
The suggestions for cheaper, faster civil justice set forth by Whitney North Seymour Jr. (Op-Ed, Jan. 7) overlook the obvious.
So long as insurance companies, who make up the overwhelming majority of litigants in New York State, are not required to pay pre-judgment interest, it will be to their advantage to litigate.
The lengthier the litigation becomes, the longer the period of time the insurance company has to float and invest money.
Their single greatest incentive is to delay the inevitable.


A Departure At Salomon
Thomas H. Hanley, one of Wall Street's leading bank stock analysts, said yesterday that he had left Salomon Brothers to join one of its top competitors, the First Boston Corporation.
The move came as the new Salomon Brothers management, led by Deryck Maughan, is cutting its research and trading in corporate stocks, a part of the company where profits were weak.
Mr.
Hanley, who is 47 years old, spent 24 years at Salomon.


Malcolm Arth, 61, Anthropologist and Educator
Malcolm J. Arth, a retired anthropolgist and innovative museum educator, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old.
His relatives said he died after a long illness..


Review/Dance; Doug Varone, At Home And at Sea
Doug Varone opened his program on Tuesday night in the Altogether Different festival at the Joyce Theater with a superb solo called "Nocturne." It was the sort of introduction to an artist's work that every audience should have.
Moving along a diffuse path of light to music by Chopin, Mr.
Varone seemed to be working out a dance in his head and on his body.
He would walk a few steps, then break into a lush little spiral or stretch his arms out and up in a knottily dramatic gesture.
His finger would move to his lips as he paused, deep in thought.
Then he would surge into a moment's jazzy lunge or pivot.
Dressed in a worn-looking sweat shirt, a hole visible under one arm, and sweat pants, his hair rumpled, he was at home, yet utterly lost.
Thought and gutsy, imaginative movement came together and were one with Mr.
Varone's clearly expressed theme.


Move Over, Messier: Broten Is Leading the Way
Paul Broten's usefulness had never been questioned by the Rangers this season: Crafty, careful, and dedicated to transforming himself into a small thorn in every opponent's side, he had always been an asset, albeit not a flamboyant goal-scorer.
That's why Broten was the first to laugh at the prospect of being allowed to zoom in unimpeded on Mike Vernon and take a penalty shot with 13 seconds left to play in the second period last night at Madison Square Garden.


Freezing Wasn't the Word to Describe It


Corrections
An Education page picture caption on Wednesday about efforts to improve Memphis's schools misidentified the women shown.
At left center was Barbara Jacobs of Goals for Memphis and at right center was Nancy E. Bogatin of Memphis 2000.


Corrections
A headline in Business Day yesterday on an article about United States oil production and consumption misstated the change in production for last year.
Output rose one-tenth of a percent; it did not fall.


Chief of Transit Officers Resigns After 21 Months
William J. Bratton, who as chief of the New York City Transit Police for the last 21 months had earned high marks as a manager and motivator, resigned yesterday to take the No. 2 position in the Boston Police Department.
New York police and transit officials said Chief Bratton had engineered a remarkable turnaround in the New York Transit Police during his brief tenure.
They credited him with increasing the department's morale, reducing the level of serious crimes in the subway and providing officers with new equipment and new strategies for policing the city's vast transit system.


Art in Review
Jack Pierson  Tom Cugliani Gallery 40 Wooster Street SoHo Through Feb. 29
Jack Pierson's first solo exhibition has a feeling of fresh, yet slightly jaded vulnerability, like a new talent in a B movie.
Casually installed, it offers washed-out color photographs pinned to the wall (a highway disappearing into the distance, a deserted beach, a dressing table in a cheap hotel room) and illegible scraps of black and white photographs (these a bit adolescent), also pinned to the wall.
Also on hand are three works that use found plastic letters from store signs to spell out extra-poignant words haphazardly.
In one piece, the letters of "Hopeless" and "Helpless" intersect; another says "Sexlessness" and a third simply pleads "Stay."
Effective as some of these pieces are, their primary function is to set the stage for Mr.
Pierson's many drawings, the best part of the exhibition.
These drawings center for the most part on fragmentary words and phrases written in blunt, angry print, in a suave cursive or in tiny letters that suggest set type.
Sometimes smudged and smeared, they speak repeatedly of longing, loneliness and failed love.
One resentfully announces "You went to Hollywood. I WENT TO HELL." In another the letters of "you" and "me," written repeatedly on top of each other, stack up in violent clusters.
They bring to mind both David Hockney and Jean Michel Basquiat, but their condensed and suggestive narratives seem to be very much Mr.
Pierson's own.


Last Chance
Here is a listing of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon.
Closing This Weekend
"CITY OF ANGELS," by Larry Gelbart, music by Cy Coleman and lyrics by David Zippel, at the Virginia Theater, 245 West 52d Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M., and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $40 to $60.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"PENN AND TELLER ROT IN HELL," John Houseman Theater, 450 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 3, 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 564-8038.
"WORD 2 MY MOTHER," Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
A video installation by Tony Cokes.
Through Sunday.
Today through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
Admission: $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free under age 16).
Information: (212) 708-9480.
"FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT: PRESERVING AN ARCHITECTURAL HERITAGE," American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
More than 70 interior-design items created by the architect in his 60-year career, including furniture, leaded-glass windows, porcelain dinnerware and drawings.
Through Sunday.
Today to Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4.50 ($2 for students and the elderly; free under age 12).
Information: (212) 956-3535.
Closing Next Weekend
"LA TRAVIATA," Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance of the season.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $75.
Information: (212) 360-6000.
"MAD FOREST," a play by Caryl Churchill, at the Perry Street Theater, 31 Perry Street, Manhattan.
Through Jan. 25.
All performances are sold out.
Information on returned tickets: (212) 302-6989.
ALTOGETHER DIFFERENT, dance series, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Manhattan.
Through Jan. 26.
Performances this weekend: Elizabeth Streb Ringside, tonight at 8; Peter Pucci Plus Dancers, tomorrow at 2 P.M. and Sunday at 7:30 P.M.; Molissa Fenley, tomorrow at 8 P.M., and Doug Varone, Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
SCULPTURE CENTER, 167 East 69th Street, Manhattan.
A group show featuring works by Steven DeFrank, Louise Dudis, Matvey Levenstein, Drew Shiflett and Daniel Wiener.
Through Jan. 25.
Tuesdays through Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 879-3500.
"ARTISTS OF CONSCIENCE: 16 YEARS OF SOCIAL AND POLITICAL COMMENTARY," Alternative Museum, 594 Broadway, near Houston Street, SoHo.
Works by about 70 artists.
Tuesdays through Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Through Jan. 25.
Admission: $3.
Information: (212) 966-4444.


Dow Rally Ends With 8.95 Decline
Stock prices pulled back yesterday from their record levels in active, but choppy, trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average lost 8.95 points to close at 3,249.55.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange grew to 336.2 million, from 312.8 million on Wednesday, making it the eighth-most-active day ever.
Trading was at its highest since Oct. 16, 1989, when volume totaled 416.3 million shares.


2 Convicted of Mail Fraud In Pet Burials
In a case that provoked impassioned outcries from pet lovers, the owners of a Long Island pet cemetery were convicted of mail fraud yesterday for dumping thousands of dead dogs and cats in mass graves and bilking thousands of people who had paid for dignified burials for their pets.
The cemetery owners, Samuel J. Strauss, 71 years old, and his son, Alan J., 36, were each found guilty of 45 counts of mail fraud, and are expected under Federal sentencing guidelines to be sentenced to at least six and a half years in prison, said Andrew J. Maloney, the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York.


Tests Halted on AIDS Drug Compared With AZT
A new drug being tested to treat people with AIDS is less effective than the standard one for many patients, the drug's manufacturer announced yesterday.
The company, Hoffmann-La Roche of Nutley, N.J., said it was halting its one-year study comparing its drug, dideoxycytidine, or DDC, to AZT, or azidothymidine, in patients who had not previously used AZT or had used it for fewer than three months.
There were fewer deaths among those who received AZT in the study, the company said.


Sounds Around Town
Dizzy's Horn
Dizzy Gillespie, Dizzy's United Nation, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Manhattan, (212) 475-8592.
The band is filled out by five Americans including the drummer Charli Persip and the trombonists Doug Purviance and Steve Turre.
United Nation, formed in 1988, has toured widely overseas during the past four years.
Mr.
Gillespie and the band play tonight, tomorrow and Sunday at 9 and 11:30.
There is a $35 music charge and a $5 minimum at tables or $20 admission to the bar.
Davern Quartet
Kenny Davern Quartet, the Church of the Heavenly Rest, Fifth Avenue at 90th Street, Manhattan, (212) 752-1428.
The clarinetist Kenny Davern has carved out an unusual niche for himself in jazz.
From the often stereotyped world of Dixieland, he has developed an approach that acknowledges that background and even reflects one of its great individualists, PeeWee Russell, but has a powerful and original cast of its own.
On Sunday at 5 P.M., Mr.
Davern will lead a quartet that includes the versatile guitarist Howard Alden, with Frank Tate on bass and Tony De Nicola on drums, in a concert that is part of the Heavenly Jazz series.
Tickets are $10 ($7 for students and seniors).


The Art Market
Paintings by Australians
Behind-the-scenes maneuvering for major works of art has always been a way of life for auction houses and dealers.
But in this bleak season, when so few good collections are up for grabs, the competition is especially heated.
This week, three plum collections -- one of a celebrated collector, featuring works by Australian artists, another of Old Master paintings and decorative objects, and a third comprised of contemporary art -- have caused quite a scramble.
By far the juiciest is the group of paintings and sculptures belonging to Alan Bond, the bankrupt Australian industrialist who became a famous figure in the art world five years ago when he borrowed $27 million from Sotheby's to buy van Gogh's "Irises" for $53.9 million, at that point the largest amount ever paid for a painting. (The painting has since been bought by the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif.)


A New Battle Is Ahead for Powell: The Budget
As Gen.
Colin L. Powell revises American military policy to fit a world without the Soviet Union, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is running into strong Congressional pressure to cut deeper and faster into the Pentagon budget than he would like.
Democratic leaders in Congress have already made clear that reducing money for a few weapons systems while leaving the basic Pentagon budget intact in the 1993 fiscal year will not be acceptable.
But so far that appears to be the kind of effort General Powell has in mind for the budget that Congress will start considering next month and that will become effective on Oct. 1.


Pop/Jazz; Lou Barlow Opts for Quiet After Dinosaur's Hullabaloo
Lou Barlow didn't mean to start a band called Sebadoh, the group that is to perform tonight at CBGB.
As he tells it, "it just turned out that we had to be a band after a while."
In 1985, Mr.
Barlow was already in a band, Dinosaur Jr., that was a major draw on the American college circuit and was worshiped in England for its combination of introverted lyrics and hard-rock laced with screaming guitar solos.
But when he wasn't playing bass with Dinosaur Jr., Mr.
Barlow was trading homemade tapes with Eric Gaffney.
The two collaborated on quiet songs that were far removed from Dinosaur's sonic barrage, blending the confessional candor of songwriters like Joni Mitchell with the self-protective irony of collegiate rock.
Mr.
Barlow played most of his songs on a guitar with two strings removed, which is still his main instrument.


Musical Humor
The Gregg Smith Singers will give a concert of music with humorous texts tomorrow at 8 P.M. at St.
Peter's Church, on Lexington Avenue at 54th Street in Manhattan.
On the program are the world premiere of Jack Beeson's "Magicke Pieces," the New York premieres of Gian Carlo Menotti's "Moans, Groans, Cries and Sighs" and Dennis Riley's "Beastly Conceits," and works by Mozart, Schoenberg, Bernstein, Rick Sowash and Mr.
Smith.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 874-2990.


For Children
'Harmony Castle' The Puppet Company Metro Lounge, Metropolis Cafe 31 Union Square West, at 16th Street Manhattan (212) 741-1646 Recommended ages: 2 to 8 Through April 26


Seeking Voter Reward, Bush Still Predicts Fall of Hussein
Facing criticism of a Persian Gulf policy that President Bush hopes will help catapult him to re-election, the White House today offered new predictions of President Saddam Hussein's downfall and proclaimed the war a "tremendous victory."
"We can all take pride in the results of that effort," Mr.
Bush said in a written statement marking the passage of one year since he ordered the bombing against Iraqi forces in Kuwait.


Elkington and Lancaster Share a One-Shot Lead
Steve Elkington has never been accused of being the most ambitious player on the PGA Tour, but after winning the year's first event, he has decided to get greedy this week at the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic.
Elkington, who won the Tournament of Champions in a playoff with Brad Faxon last Sunday, shot a six-under-par 66 at Indian Wells Country Club today and shared the 36-hole lead with a journeyman, Neal Lancaster, at 11-under-par 133.


A Magazine On Selling
Selling magazine, a publication for salespeople, will start in the spring, it was announced yesterday by Whittle Communications L.P. and Jim Martay and Marjorie Weiss, co-founders of In Heath magazine.
Selling, which will publish 10 times a year, will be sold to corporations to distribute among their sales staffs.
It will be aimed at the 15 million people who sell for a living.


Texas G.O.P. Wins on Redistricting
The United States Supreme Court refused today to block a redistricting plan for the Texas Legislature, giving Republicans their best chance in more than a century to win control of the State Senate.
The decision means that the state's primary elections will go forward March 10 under a redistricting plan drawn by a panel of three Federal judges appointed by a Republican President rather than under a map approved by the Legislature, which is controlled by Democrats, said Texas Attorney General Dan Morales.


Richard G. Denzer, Ex-Prosecutor And New York Judge, Dies at 80
Richard G. Denzer, a longtime prosecutor who helped rewrite New York State's penal laws, died on Wednesday while on a family visit in Kensington, Md.
He was 80 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Boca Raton, Fla.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Top New York Court Overturns Pay Deferral for State Workers
New York State's highest court ruled yesterday that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the State Legislature acted unconstitutionally when they required employees of the state's court system to defer part of their wages two years ago.
The unanimous decision by the Court of Appeals in Albany applied only to court workers, but groups representing state employees immediately asserted that the same reasoning would ultimately apply to their lawsuit against a much larger wage deferral, known as a lag payroll, that the Governor and lawmakers imposed on nearly all state workers last year.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Quintessential Insiders Put on Airs of Outsiders
Caveat New Hampshire.
There are two Republicans wandering around your state claiming that they disdain everything Washington stands for, that they are fed up with everyone who runs the city and that they would like to boot out all those colluding, golf-playing, inside-the-Beltway bums.


Winter's Armoryful Of Antiques
FOR some, winter's blasts inspire thoughts of warm beaches.
For others, they inspire thoughts of antiques, particularly of the annual mammoth Winter Antiques Show (actually, it's more a spectacle) at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan.
This year's show has drums and a doorway, folk art and photographs, mechanical banks and Apostle spoons, just about anything a lover of old things, especially old and odd things, could want.
A report by Rita Reif is on page C26.


The Squabbling Resumes Over Roosevelt Raceway
Once the nation's premier harness racing track, Roosevelt Raceway stands vacant now, the paint on its bleachers cracking, its turf in disarray, a decaying symbol of a developer's ambition and what state investigators called government mismanagement.
But now that a state inquiry into the publicly financed sale of the raceway has ended, the same government officials and developers are at war over the future of the 172-acre site, the largest stretch of undeveloped land in Nassau County.


From The Publisher
It has been four generations since Adolph S. Ochs laid down the precepts that have successfully guided The New York Times for 96 years.
Those principles have been carried forward with distinction by my grandfather, Arthur Hays Sulzberger; my uncle, Orvil E. Dryfoos, and my father, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger.
Each of these men, in their message upon being named Publisher, quoted the pledge Mr.
Ochs made when he took the helm of The Times:
To give the news impartially, without  fear or favor, regardless of any party,  sect or interest involved.


The Larger Crime
In recent days, New Yorkers have been disgusted by several particularly repulsive crimes.
A black brother and sister were attacked by four young white men and squirted with a white liquid.
A 15-year-old white girl was raped by a black man.
An 11-year-old boy was abducted and raped by a man who says he has the AIDS virus.
Each crime cries out for rapid police response and public condemnation.
But one thing these crimes are not is connected.
They are not all racial crimes, sex crimes, ethnic crimes.
To weave them, as some New Yorkers do, into a sort of tapestry of terror is not only wrong but perverse.
That commits a larger crime of fomenting exaggerated fears.


China, in Shift, Accepts U.S. Shipping Concerns
China agreed today to allow two American companies to compete directly with Chinese rivals in shipping the nation's cargo, resolving a longstanding dispute over market access.
The Chinese concession, which comes at a time of mounting trade frictions between Washington and Beijing, is expected to facilitate trade with China and perhaps reduce transportation costs.
It also is the first time that foreign companies will operate wholly owned subsidiaries in China's transportation business and directly compete with Chinese rivals.


University of Bridgeport Plans Takeover by Sacred Heart
The University of Bridgeport said today that it has decided on a plan to have all its programs, including its law school, taken over by Sacred Heart University in Fairfield.
But the announcement set up a confrontation between the financially troubled University of Bridgeport and its law school that could undermine not only the agreement with Sacred Heart, but also the law school's own accreditation.


Corrections
A picture with an art review of abstract exhibitions in Weekend last Friday was printed upside down and in mirror image.
A corrected version appears today in Weekend on page C25.


Car Linked to Rape Is Found in Brooklyn
The stolen rental car that the police said two men used to abduct and rape a 15-year-old girl on Tuesday was found yesterday in Bushwick, a largely residential, high-crime area in north Brooklyn.
Two officers who were handing out sketches of the suspects found the four-door white Toyota Camry just before noon, parked on Bushwick Avenue between Furman and Granite Streets, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Peter Berry.
The car and its license plate number, ZNY143, matched the description that the victim had given to the police.


War of Hams Where the Stage Is All
HAM actors may be a horror, but fine actors playing ham actors are almost always a joy.
Brian Bedford, cast as the 19th-century British tragedian William Charles Macready in Richard Nelson's new play, "Two Shakespearean Actors," is no exception.
Very grand, often pickled and prone to forgetting the end of any sentence well before he has made it to the verb, Mr.
Bedford's puffed-up Macready would be right at home in the hapless theatrical companies of "Nicholas Nickleby," "The Dresser" and "Noises Off." Even his version of the actor's nightmare is egomaniacal: when Macready dreams this dream, he does not forget his lines but instead plays all the parts at once.
Mr.
Bedford, a British actor who has been a mainstay of Broadway and Stratford, Ontario, over a 30-odd-year stage career, pours a lifetime of both classical and boulevard-comedy experience into this role.
In Mr.
Nelson's play, Macready is a tired, fading figure who arrives to perform "Macbeth" in the New York City of 1849 only to find his supremacy challenged by a younger local upstart, the first great American Shakespearean, Edwin Forrest (Victor Garber), who is performing his own "Macbeth" elsewhere in town.
It's an ugly situation.
A symbolic target for enraged nationalistic forces beyond his comprehension, Macready suffers the indignity of less-than-full houses, a pelting with stones and, finally, a full-scale Anglophobic riot that leaves more than a score dead outside the Astor Place Opera House.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 588 money market mutual funds increased by $9.19 billion, to $499.32 billion, in the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 218 institutional funds increased by $5.33 billion, to $174.33 billion; the assets of the 281 general-purpose funds were up by $1.77 billion, to $178.07 billion, and the 89 broker-dealer funds increased by $2.08 billion, to $146.92 billion, the institute said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Almanac; New Hampshire Profile
All figures are for 1990.
New Hampshire's population in 1990 was 1,109,252, or 0.4 percent of the U.S. total.
It ranks 40th among the states in population.
Growth since 1980 N.H.: 20.5% U.S.: 9.8% Median age N.H.: 32.8 U.S.: 32.8 Married couple households N.H.: 55.9% U.S. 59.7% Unemployment rate N.H.: 5.6% U.S.: 5.4% Per capita income N.H.: $20,789 U.S.: $18,685 Race White N.H.: 98.0% U.S.: 80.3% Black N.H.: 0.6 U.S.: 12.1 American Indian N.H.: 0.2 U.S.: 0.8 Asian N.H.: 0.8 U.S.: 2.9 Other N.H.: 0.3 U.S.: 3.9 Hispanic N.H.: 1.0 U.S.: 9.0 People of Hispanic origin can be of any race. (Source: Census Bureau; The Almanac of American Politics, 1992)


Two Benefit Previews
The Winter Antiques Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory, 643 Park Avenue, at 66th Street, opens today with two benefit previews.
Admission is $500 for the benefactors' tea at 4 P.M., for which the hosts will be Carolina Herrera and Bill Blass, the fashion designers, and John Richardson, the art historian.
Admission is $250 for the patrons' party from 6 to 9 P.M. in the Tiffany Room and the Great Hall, with silver lame and pink silk decorations by John Drews and Luis Rey of McMillen Inc.
Tickets may be purchased at the door.


Economic Scene; A Time of Peril For World Trade
PRESIDENT BUSH took a beating on his trade mission to Japan, and Japan got off lightly.
Instead of conveying the picture of a determined leader fighting to safeguard an open world economy, Mr.
Bush appeared to be pleading for Japanese mercy -- especially for the suffering American auto industry.
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa responded by saying Japan would show "compassion."
Japan agreed to double imports of American auto parts from $7 billion last year to $15 billion in 1994, and to import 20,000 American cars, although it appeared that most of these cars would come from Japanese manufacturers in the United States.


Macy's Again Avoids the 'B' Word
By delaying payments this month to its 20,000 suppliers in deference to its bankers, R. H. Macy &amp; Company once again crossed a tightrope that many financial and retailing experts see suspended above bankruptcy court.
The venerable New York retail company certainly satisfied its lenders by not tapping its credit lines to send on-time payments to those who make its dresses, suits and housewares.
But the move also shed a new, unfavorable light on just how much of a financial bind Macy appears to be in as the year unfolds.
If nothing else, the two-week payment delay brought into sharper focus Macy's need to borrow for some routine operations.


50 Candles for Ali: Let Them Glow Awhile
Muhammad Ali is 50 years old today, which surprises me.
I never thought he would become middle-aged, certainly not fat and slow and patronized, adored in the way elderly former pin-up girls are adored for evoking a time when we had the hot blood to want to be them or have them.
In that dazzling time when his beauty, his skill, his outrageousness, made Ali worshiped and feared, I thought that if he survived the controversies he illuminated, he would become a major actor of our times, an elder, a peacemaker.
I remember the moment I first began to have such grand thoughts.
The photograph helps.
It was Feb. 26, 1964, the morning after he won the heavyweight championship.
His name was still Cassius Clay, although Malcolm X's presence in Miami Beach made credible the rumors that he had joined the Lost-Found Nation of Islam and would soon change his name.
He had already brought African-American style back into the world sports arena.
But at this morning-after press conference, he was subdued, modest, almost, incredibly, boring.
In the picture, many sportswriters are already looking toward the right, where the beaten Sonny Liston was being incredibly amiable.


P.R. Firm Had No Reason to Question Kuwaiti's Testimony
To the Editor:
In "Remember Nayirah, Witness for Kuwait?" (Op-Ed, Jan. 6), John R. MacArthur disingenuously attacks Congressional testimony given by an eyewitness to Iraqi brutality in Kuwait and suggests that Hill and Knowlton concealed her identity to mislead the American public.


Prices Down, Optimism Up for Antiques Show
"Welcome to my fantasy garden," said Thomas K. Woodard, a folk-art dealer, standing by a weathered 10-foot-high doorway dominating his booth at the Winter Antiques Show in the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan.
The archway, as intricately carved and pierced with scrolls and leaves as a giant paper doily, is a century-old frame for the front door of a New England house, he said.
On either side of this doorway, Mr.
Woodard placed two English 19th-century garden urns of fired clay and filled them with freeze-dried strawberries, artichokes and gardenias.
"I'm a hopeless romantic -- or a hopeful romantic when it comes to gardens," he said.


No Headline
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear on pages B14-15.


Islanders Bar Patrick's Cellar Door
It was their last game before the All-Star break, a battle to stay out of the basement between the last-place Philadelphia Flyers and the Islanders, who hold fifth place in the Patrick Division.
When it ended in a 4-3 victory for the home team at Nassau Coliseum, the Islanders had increased their lead over Philadelphia to 3 points and had provided another showcase for two of their recent heroes.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday misidentified the town in which President Bush was campaigning and the farmer with Mr.
Bush.
The town was Stratham, N.H., and the farmer was Doug Scamman.


Two Sides in Conflict Celebrate Separately In Downtown Plaza
The church bells of El Salvador rang out around the country today to herald the end to civil war, but the two sides celebrated separately in downtown plazas of the capital.
Liberty Plaza was decorated in banners of blue and white, the national colors, to await the triumphal nighttime return of President Alfredo Cristiani from the signing of peace accords in Mexico City.


4 Executives Are Given New Posts at Bechtel
Bechtel Group Inc., the big San Francisco construction company, yesterday named three executives, including a member of the founding family, to head three of its main operating companies.
It also said it would transfer a senior executive to Europe in an effort to drum up new business there.
Gary Bechtel, 41, was appointed president of the Bechtel Civil Company, which works on transportation, water resources projects, buildings and other civil engineering projects.
He replaces Bob Polvi, who is retiring.


Diner's Journal
Grappino
In the garment district of midtown Manhattan, just south of 42d Street, good lunch spots are harder to find than Nehru jackets.
So when an attractive Italian restaurant on West 39th Street was recommended recently, I scooted down for lunch.
The four-year-old Grappino has a clean, generic northern-Italian-restaurant look, with pale yellow walls that appear pinkish under colored ceiling lights, long banquettes and tightly packed tables.
At a recent lunch, the dining room was crowded and so noisy that waiters had to bend over to communicate with diners.
A starter of grilled shrimp, fennel and tomato sprinkled with balsamic vinegar was fresh and tasty ($8).
So was a grilled vegetable plate holding tiny sweet carrots, zucchini, eggplant, cauliflower, mushrooms and goat cheese ($6.50).
Entrees include pastas, grilled chicken, seafood and steak.
The penne with radicchio, broccoli, mild sausage, roasted peppers and olive oil ($15) was well balanced and skillfully cooked.
Grilled swordfish was pleasing, too, with a garnish of orange sections, pine nuts, fennel and basil ($18).
Other entrees include grilled breast of chicken with arugula, tomato and pesto mayonnaise ($8); cavitelli with eggplant, hot peppers and tomato ($8), and sirloin steak with tomato, black olives and Tuscan-style bread ($15).
Recommended for dessert are the moist, minimally sweet mascarpone cheesecake ($5) and an apple crostade, a strudel-like apple tart ($6).
Grappino, at 38 West 39th Street, is open Monday through Friday, serving lunch from noon to 3 P.M. and dinner from 5 to 9 P.M.
American Express is accepted.
Telephone: (212) 398-0350.
The Changing Scene
CLOSED: Auntie Yuan, the elegant Chinese restaurant at 1191A First Avenue, near 64th Street, Manhattan.
David Keh, the owner, said a drop in business forced the closing of the restaurant, which he had turned over to a managing partner seven months ago.
"These are not the times to have a restaurant like Auntie Yuan," he said.
At the same time, Mr.
Keh said he has secured the lease to the former Fortune Garden Pavilion at 209 East 49th Street, Manhattan, where he plans to open a Chinese noodle restaurant in mid-March.
OPEN: May We, a Mediterranean-style restaurant at 1022 Lexington Avenue, at 73d Street, (212) 249-0200. . . .
C III, a casual American restaurant in the Washington Square Hotel, 103 Waverly Place, Manhattan, (212) 254-1200.
The chef is Daniel Kobin, formerly of Dano in Greenwich Village. . . .
Country Club, a supper club featuring American cuisine and big-band music, at 210 East 86th Street, Manhattan, (212) 879-8400.
NEW CHEF: Richard Krause, the former chef of Rose Cafe on Fifth Avenue at 16th Street in Manhattan, is the new chef at Rex, the restaurant and nightclub at 579 Avenue of the Americas, at 16th Street, Manhattan.
Telephone: (212) 741-0080.


Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Passes Times Publisher's Post to Son
Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, chairman and chief executive officer of The New York Times Company and for 29 years publisher of The New York Times, relinquished the publisher's title yesterday to his son, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr.
As publisher, Mr.
Sulzberger Jr. will oversee all aspects of the newspaper, including its editorial-page policy.
He will report to the elder Mr.
Sulzberger, 65 years old, who intends to continue active participation in the overall company day to day as chairman and chief executive.


Gibbs Is Gearing Up for Game and Race
While most of the Washington Redskins are immersed in preparations for Super Bowl XXV, their coach, Joe Gibbs, has the Daytona D on his mind as well.
Gibbs took time off in Washington yesterday to meet with reporters on the Charlotte Motor Speedway Media Tour in a satellite hookup to the track in Charlotte, N.C.


Arts-Space Benefit
First Festival, a daylong benefit to be held tomorrow, will raise money for Arts at University Settlement, a new performance space on the Lower East Side.
More than 20 dance, music and theater soloists and groups will perform in three shows, among them Risa Jaroslow, the Rhythm Technicians, Douglas Dunn, Vicky Shick, the Chacabuco Ensemble, Mbira and the Shekere Sound Experience and the Chinese Folk Dance Company, with free video programs by Asian artists starting at noon.
Performances are at 1, 4 and 8:30 P.M. at the University Settlement House, 184 Eldridge Street in Manhattan.
Tickets to each show are $15.
Information: (212) 674-9120, extension 183.


BRIEFS
*
Apple Computer Inc., Cupertino, Calif., said Sony Corp. had licensed its Appletalk network software to allow Sony work stations to communicate with different computer systems. *
Biospherics Inc., Beltsville, Md., a pollution control company, received a patent that protects its process for making D-Tagatose, the nonfattening sugar being developed by the company.
The company said it was in discussions with several potential partners to develop the product.


Shift in Rockefellers At Family Enterprise
Rockefeller Financial Services Inc., the main corporate entity in the Rockefeller family's business empire, announced yesterday that David Rockefeller Jr. had been elected to replace his father as chairman of the company.
The move is another significant step in the Rockefeller family's efforts to pull together its various enterprises and ventures under one corporate roof.
With the extended family now having about 100 members, some leading members have been concerned that until recently there was no formal plan for managing and preserving the multibillion-dollar fortune.


Cambridge Loses
The N.C.A.A.
Eligibility Committee denied a second appeal by suspended Texas basketball player DEXTER CAMBRIDGE on Thursday, possibly ending the senior forward's college career.
Cambridge played in Texas' first four games while under a temporary restraining order and hasn't played since.
He was suspended in November for accepting a $7,000 check from a Lon Morris Junior College booster in 1990.
It was alleged that Cambridge, who transferred to the University of Texas last season, received the money as a reward for being named a junior college All-American.
(AP)


Corrections
A music review on Wednesday about "La Boheme" at the Metropolitan Opera misidentified the tenor who appeared with Mirella Freni on the work's opening night in 1990 at the Met.
He was Placido Domingo, not Luciano Pavarotti.


A New Candy That's Light on Guilt
As "light" foods keep nudging aside their weightier cousins, nothing, it seems, is sacred.
If marketers can squeeze calories and fat out of potato chips, soft drinks and even Spam, why not candy?


EXECUTIVES
*
Bank of California N.A., San Francisco, named Cecilia A. Isaac senior vice president and manager of the newly created Southern (California) division of the company's Real Estate Industries Group. *
Banknorth Group Inc., Burlington, Vt., named William H. Chadwick president and chief executive, succeeding John H. Barry, who retires next month. *
Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, named Drew J. Otocka senior vice president and regional banking marketing executive. *
Dorna Sports Promotion Inc., Madrid, a sports marketing concern, named Richard H. Evans president and chief executive of its Dorna USA unit, with responsibilities for operations in the United States, Canada, Mexico and Puerto Rico. *
Fortis Inc., New York, the United States holding company that represents the combined operations of N.V.
AMEV and Groupe A.G., named Anthony J. Rotondi senior vice president in charge of information services. *
Hanover Direct Inc., Weehawken, N.J., a specialty catalogue marketer, appointed Thomas C. Day executive vice president-operations. *
Ann Taylor Inc., New York, a women's fashion retail chain, named Rosemary De Franco vice president of real estate. *
Time Life Inc., Alexandria, Va., a Time Warner unit, named Bob DeSena publisher of its Time Warner Libraries unit.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.00
6.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.78
3.80
6.11
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.87
3.89
6.26
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.88
6.79
7.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.66
7.57
8.18
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.76
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.66
6.69
7.44
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


At the Mike: Harwell
The Detroit Tigers may have figured that 73 was too old and 32 years was long enough, but CBS Radio apparently uses a different formula.
The network announced yesterday that ERNIE HARWELL, the deposed Tigers broadcaster, had been hired as the lead announcer for one of its two weekly Saturday games of the week.
Harwell, who will turn 74 next Saturday, will work with a rotation of sidekicks while calling 26 night games during the season.


The Unveiling of 11 Treasures
Coinciding with the Winter Antiques Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan is "Celebrating Art and Antiques in New York: 11 Treasures Revealed." The dealers in this event are exhibiting paintings or furnishings that are not known to have been shown in New York City.
The dealers will contribute a portion of the sale price of the works to the Frick Collection.
Through Jan. 25.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday to Saturday.
Admission is free.


Reins, but No Horses, for Civil Justice System; Client Self-Protection
To the Editor:
Here is a true story that confirms the wisdom of the first of Whitney North Seymour Jr.'s recommendations for improving justice in New York ("Cheaper, Faster Civil Justice," Op-Ed, Jan. 7).
Mr.
Seymour urges the courts to adopt rules that encourage early settlement.


3 Lawmakers Press to Keep Weapons Reactor Shut
Democratic and Republican members of the South Carolina Congressional delegation urged Energy Secretary James D. Watkins today to keep an old reactor at the Savannah River nuclear weapons plant shut down until new safety measures are taken and the Energy Department prepares a study justifying a need to start it.
The call to slow the Energy Department's aggressive program for restarting the 37-year-old reactor, near Aiken, S.C., came today in a letter to Mr.
Watkins that was signed by three of South Carolina's eight members of Congress: Senator Ernest F. Hollings and Representative John M. Spratt Jr., Democrats who are members, respectively, of the Senate and House Armed Services Committee, and Representative Arthur Ravenel Jr., a Republican.


Winter's Armoryful Of Antiques
FOR some, winter's blasts inspire thoughts of warm beaches.
For others, they inspire thoughts of antiques, particularly of the annual mammoth Winter Antiques Show (actually, it's more a spectacle) at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan.
This year's show has drums and a doorway, folk art and photographs, mechanical banks and Apostle spoons, just about anything a lover of old things, especially old and odd things, could want.
A report by Rita Reif is on page C26.


Reins, but No Horses, for Civil Justice System; Fast Track for Cases
To the Editor:
Whitney North Seymour Jr.'s commentary addresses the real problem behind New York State's court crisis (Op-Ed, Jan. 7), but the overhaul of the litigation system that he suggests could go further.


The Spoken Word
LECTURE, Association of the Bar of the City of New York, 42 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
"Music in Italy in the Age of Columbus," by Howard Mayer Brown, professor of music at the University of Chicago; sponsored by the Waverly Consort.
Tomorrow at 4:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 666-1260.
STORYTELLING, Museum of American Folk Art, Eva and Morris Feld Gallery, 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street, Manhattan.
Diane Wolkstein will tell "Popul Vuh," an epic Mayan myth, to musical accompaniment by Geoffrey Gordon; sponsored by the Mexican Cultural Institute of New York.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 595-9533.
READING AND MUSIC, Lehman Center for the Performing Arts, Lehman College, Bedford Park Boulevard West and Goulden Avenue, Bedford Park, the Bronx.
Readings commemorating the work of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., selected and directed by Shauneille Perry Ryder, director of theater at the college, and a performance of gospel music by the Richard Smallwood Singers, Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 960-4598.
READING AND PERFORMANCE, Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, Manhattan.
An event commemorating the birthdate of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., with the Rev.
Dr.
Herbert D. Daughtry, Kecia Lewis-Evans, a gospel singer, Rejoicensemble and Trazana Beverly, an actress.
Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 316-7486.
GALLERY TALKS, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, Crown Heights.
"Quattrocentro: Early Italian Panel Paintings," by Maribeth Flynn, today at 2 P.M. and tomorrow at 1 P.M.; "The Williamsburg Murals: A Rediscovery," by Betty Kahn, tomorrow at 2 P.M.
All talks are free with museum admission of $4 ($2 for students, $1.50 for the elderly).
Information: (718) 638-5000.
GALLERY TALKS, Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
"Mexican Modernism," by Amelia Arenas, today at noon; "Looking at Modern Art: Mondrian," by Mina Roustayi, today at 1 and 3 P.M.; "Mark Rothko," by Matthew Armstrong, tomorrow at 1 P.M.; "Picasso," by Mr.
Armstrong, tomorrow at 3 P.M.; "Gemini G.E.L.," by Julie Reiss, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "Gay Block: Rescuers of the Holocaust," by Ms.
Reiss, Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free under age 16).
Information: (212) 708-9480.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
"Alexis Smith," by Carl Palusci, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 and 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.


BUSH WOULD TRIM TAX FOR FAMILIES OVER $50,000 LEVEL
The income-tax cut President Bush plans to propose this month would make families with incomes of more than about $50,000 the biggest winners, drawing a new line in his election year battle with the Democrats over who can develop the more attractive tax breaks for the middle class.
The Democrats, in Congress and on the Presidential campaign trail, have not found a tax policy they can all support, but most of their proposals aim lower on the income ladder than the President's.


On Stage, and Off
A Move for 'Grand Hotel'
For weeks now, theater people have been waiting for the final showdown between Rocco Landesman, the president of Jujamcyn Theaters, and the co-producers of "Grand Hotel: The Musical." The stakes are high.
Jujamcyn owns the Martin Beck, where the long-running Tommy Tune show is playing.
It wanted to book Jerry Zaks's much-anticipated revival of "Guys and Dolls" into the Beck for an April opening, but "Grand Hotel" just kept on running.
It still will, moving to the Gershwin Theater on Feb. 3 after playing its final performance at the Beck on Jan. 27.
Which means "Guys and Dolls," at long last, will have a home.
One reason "Grand Hotel" has lasted so long is that until recently "Grand Hotel" and Jujamcyn had never negotiated what is known as a stop clause, a standard practice on Broadway.
It means that if a show makes less money than a mutually agreed-on figure for two weeks in a row, the theater owner has the right to evict the show.
But in this economy, most theater owners are flexible.
Martin Richards, a co-producer of "Grand Hotel," says: "We never had a stop clause because Rocco Landesman offered us everything but the ownership of the theater to get our booking. He never wanted to discuss a stop clause until 'Guys and Dolls' wanted our house." Mr.
Richards says the ensuing negotiations were heated, and he maintains that during the talks Jujamcyn stopped printing tickets for the show at the box office, violating an agreement that tickets remain on sale for 13 weeks in advance.
"Rocco said that 'Grand Hotel' might run another year but 'Guys and Dolls' could run three years," Mr.
Richards recalls.
"How does he know that? Does he have a crystal ball?"
Mr.
Richards also says Mr.
Landesman promised to contribute $100,000 toward the $300,000 cost of moving the show, "but now he seems to have amnesia." James Nederlander, the owner of the Gershwin, will pay $200,000 toward the move and Mr.
Richards will pay the rest.
Mr.
Nederlander says he plans to mount a London production of "Grand Hotel" and tour it through Europe.
Mr.
Landesman refused to address any of Mr.
Richards's charges.
"I've been at Jujamcyn for four and a half years, and my integrity will have to stand on its own," he says.
"I wish them the best of luck at the Gershwin." Economizing on Tony Tickets
When Tony Randall envisioned a National Actors Theater, it seems that nothing so crass and commercial as a Tony Award was part of the picture.
His company is presenting its second show of the season, Georges Feydeau's "Little Hotel on the Side," at the Belasco Theater, a Broadway house, but, as with "The Crucible," the 700 Tony voters are not invited.
That means that none of the company's productions can be nominated for best revival, although the actors and designers are still eligible, says Harvey Sabinson, the executive director of the League of American Theaters and Producers, which sets the Tony rules with the American Theater Wing.
But what good are nominations in any category if no one has seen the performances to vote on them?
Any nonprofit company, especially a brand-new one, needs to raise money strenuously in these times.
Even if it is not interested in the commercial benefits that a Tony Award brings to other Broadway shows, wouldn't a Tony go a long way toward impressing potential donors?
Manny Kladitis, the general manager of the National Actors Theater, says that because subscribers hold 51 percent of the tickets for each show's seven-week run, the company cannot afford to give each Tony voter the customary pair of free tickets.
But Todd Haimes, the managing director of the Roundabout Theater, the other nonprofit company reviving classics in a Tony-eligible house, says his theater does invite voters.
He has found room for them in his seven-week runs, which are 80 percent subscribed in a theater roughly half the size of the Belasco.
One producer who spoke on condition of anonymity says other Broadway managements resent Mr.
Randall's brand of economizing.
The perception is that he has used Broadway's cachet for all his publicity without extending to the Tony voters the basic courtesies that other shows do.
A spokesman for the National Actors Theater says Mr.
Randall's comment was that the company cannot afford to make Tony seats available.
Just Two Sisters?
No Performance
The 1,100 people who showed up to see the star-studded cast of "The Three Sisters" at the McCarter Theater in Princeton, N.J., on Sunday had quite a surprise at 2 P.M., when the curtain was to go up.
The show's director, Emily Mann, went onstage to announce that the performance was being canceled.
Mary Stuart Masterson, the actress playing the third sister, Irina, had the flu.
She does not have an understudy, and neither do her co-stars, Linda Hunt, Frances McDormand, Laura San Giacomo and Edward Herrmann.
Since most of the other performances were already sold out, this audience was offered the chance to reschedule for 10:30 A.M.
Thursday or the evening of Super Bowl Sunday.
You can imagine the reaction.
"Most regional theaters don't have understudies," says David Mayhew, the director of marketing for the McCarter.
"The expense involved for runs of only a few weeks is too high. Once a show opens here, we only have 15 performances left. Up until opening night, we only have time to rehearse the main cast, so even if we had had the understudies, they wouldn't have been rehearsed."
Mr.
Mayhew says Ms.
Masterson returned for the next scheduled show on Wednesday night.
Dedications to Papp
With the opening last night of Richard Nelson's "Two Shakespearean Actors" at the Cort Theater, at least three dedications to the late producer Joseph Papp are now to be found in Playbills around town.
" 'Two Shakespearean Actors' is dedicated to the memory of Joseph Papp, who, for 35 years, served Shakespeare, the theater and New York in full and generous measure," it reads.


A New Loss At Security Pacific Seen
The Security Pacific Corporation said today that it expected to lose about $400 million in the fourth quarter, its second consecutive hefty loss.
Officials at the BankAmerica Corporation said the new loss would not deter it from going ahead with its acquisition of Security Pacific.
"That was all in line with our expectations," Frank N. Newman, BankAmerica's vice chairman and chief financial officer, said at a news briefing here today.
BankAmerica reported its own earnings for the fourth quarter of $285 million, roughly equal to the $287 million reported a year earlier.


U.S. and China Reach Accord on Copying
The United States and China struck a deal this evening intended to provide greater protection for American pharmaceuticals, computer software, books and music recordings against illegal copying in China.
China essentially agreed to adopt most international standards for foreign inventions, and will enact laws that extend the duration and scope of patent, copyright and trade-secret protections.


Books of The Times; Finding Order in the Cosmos and Calling It G-o-d
The Mind of God  The Scientific Basis for a Rational World  By Paul Davies  254 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.


Movies Don't Cause Crime
Time was, when a crime was committed the victim wanted the criminal punished.
Now victims may be given an opportunity to see how profitable their pain can be.
Take the Pornography Victims' Compensation Act, under consideration by the Senate Judiciary Committee.
It would allow a rape victim to sue -- not the rapist -- but the producers and distributors of "obscene" videos that the rapist had viewed.
The committee has heard expert testimony on the bill, and may vote on it next month.
It is sponsored by Republican Senators Mitch McConnell of Kentucky and Charles Grassley of Iowa.


30-Year Bond Off More Than Point
Long-term interest rates rose for the sixth straight session yesterday, as credit market participants sold Treasury bonds and long-term notes despite additional evidence that inflationary pressures are very tame.
Prices were off sharply, with the benchmark 30-year bond down more than a point.
That pushed its yield up to 7.66 percent, compared with 7.57 percent late on Wednesday.


Art in Review
Mel Chin Queens Museum of Art Flushing Meadows-Corona Park Through Feb. 2
The 17 works in Mel Chin's show (organized by the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis) include paintings, installations and works on paper, but it is the sculpture that proves of interest.
Generally speaking, the simpler it is the better.
In "Forgetting Tiananmen, Kent State, Tlatelolco," reeds of dried flowers have been embedded in slabs of cast stone and then chipped free as if exhumed.
The work honors specific individuals, but it is also a metaphor for suppressed history brought to light.
"The Sigh of the Cross" is more complicated.
It consists of an enormous upright sickle with a jagged blade, a rope stretched down its length and a box with a faded scarlet cross punctured by the tip of the sickle.
A wall text reveals in great detail that it symbolizes the expulsion of the Red Cross from drought-stricken Ethiopia by the Mengistu Haile Mariam Government in 1988.
This explanation has the effect of changing the piece almost instantly from an esthetic object to a didactic puzzle in which every material component assumes a precise and predetermined role.
Whether this calculated perceptual shift expands or narrows the often overt programmed works in the show is debatable.
In the case of "The Sigh of the Cross," vitality drains away from the sculpture in direct proportion to the intricacy of the scenario imposed upon it.
The issue raised here -- how sculpture and political content can coexist -- is one with which artists in the 1990's will continue to struggle.
Mr.
Chin's is an honorable attempt at an answer, but it leaves the question open.


Will the Real Bills' Defense Stand Up in the Super Bowl?
The Buffalo Bills' defense has spent the last eight weeks apologizing for the statistics posted in the first eight weeks of the regular season.
And no matter how often the Bills point to crucial injuries as the reason, they find themselves heading for the Super Bowl still trying to explain the numbers.
Even after a convincing defensive performance in a 10-7 victory over Denver in the American Football Conference title game, in which Bills linebacker Carlton Bailey scored the team's only touchdown on an 11-yard interception return, Buffalo's defense is still haunted by its statistics.
The legacy of the early failings resulted in Buffalo's defense finishing the season ranked next to last in the National Football League in total defense, yielding an average 341.1 yards per game.


Art in Review
Peter Greenaway  Nicole Klagsbrun Gallery 51 Greene Street SoHo Through Jan. 25
Peter Greenaway, the British film director, has found what to do with his old scripts: he turns them into art.
For the works here, Mr.
Greenaway took pages from a first draft of a script that, he writes in a wall label, might be the basis for a sequel to his current film, "Prospero's Books." Each page describes one of the creatures that Prospero found or created on his magic island, from juggler to simpleton to pedant to pimp.
Many of the typed pages have been scribbled over with notes, presumably added before they were relegated to the status of drawing paper.
Mr.
Greenaway has subsequently applied postal stickers, scraps of photographs, items cut out of newspapers, daubs of paint and stenciled letters and numbers, among other things, to the pages.
The resulting collages are as smart, arcane and occasionally cryptic as his films.
On the page devoted to a minotaur he has drawn a maze, at the center of which is a torn snapshot of a Roman inscription.
The entry for a "cartographical clerk" features a grid of pink, yellow and white brush strokes that suggests a map, while a small mirror is pasted onto the page that describes an exhibitionist.
As in his films, Mr.
Greenaway sets up playful games of meaning in these collages, producing works in which words, images and found elements mesh in strongly evocative combinations.


Restaurants
Il Nido has the self-assurance of an institution that has been around forever, even though it is just 12 years old.
The reason could be the traditional Tuscan decor, the seasoned waiters or even the menu, which offers a long roster of Italian standards.
Dining at Il Nido is like listening to a beloved grandfather tell the same stories over and over again: the stories themselves may cease to be exhilarating, but they are told with such elan that they are still arresting.
One goes to Il Nido for comfort, pampering and refinement, all of which come at a price.
The soothing setting includes plaster walls crisscrossed by timber beams, brown leather banquettes and well-appointed tables.
The noise is muted even when the two main dining rooms are full.
Adi Giovannetti, the kinetic owner and wine aficionado, adds a personal touch while buzzing around the restaurant as if he were on roller skates.


Blue Cross Asks 26% Rise for Some Customers
Warning that it might run out of money by the middle of this year, New York State's largest health insurer has asked the State Insurance Department for permission to raise by an average of 26 percent the rates it charges to more than one million customers.
The increase requested yesterday by Empire Blue Cross-Blue Shield would affect the 1.2 million customers who are insured under what are called small group major medical plans and those with individual insurance policies, including Medicare supplemental policies.
The increase would not affect the company's 7.1 million customers whose insurance plans cover 50 people or more.


Shot! Savor. Davidson's Day Never Ends.
It's Hockey Night in John Davidson's Armonk house.
The National Hockey League All-Star Game is only days away.
But the MSG Network's Rangers analyst is a bit down.
Only four games are scheduled.
Only four games to watch.
There's nothing like a good hockey game after a good hockey game for the former Rangers goalie.
"I came home last night after the Rangers-Sabres game, and watched the San Jose-Los Angeles game," he says.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The S.E.C. fined 98 banks and Wall Street houses after they acknowledged that they had submitted inflated bids in the debt markets of five government-created organizations that raise money to lend to home buyers, students, farms and banks.  [ Page D1. ]


Mets Want Magadan to Take Pay Cut
The Mets, who have signed one free agent after another to generous and even historic contracts during the off season, got off to a more controversial start yesterday in the delicate business of salary arbitration.
They requested that Dave Magadan take a pay cut from his 1991 salary, something clubs have done infrequently in arbitration.
The Mets had filed early for arbitration with Magadan and their offer of $1,187,500 yesterday represents a 5 percent cut for the infielder, who got $1.25 million last season.
Magadan, whose average fell from .328 in 1990 to .258 in 1991 before his season was cut short by surgery to repair cartilage damage in both shoulders, submitted a salary request of $1.6 million.


Racing to Learn to Speak English
It is a universal complaint of children that their parents don't speak their language.
That may never be more true than it is for the children of immigrants.
And that is why learning English is a race for Rita Limanto, who arrived in New York two years ago from Indonesia.
Her two children are far ahead, and while she is proud of their success, she is anxious that she may fall too far behind.
In an essay for her English class, she wrote: "Two more years, my children are going to forget their original language. They are going to be fluent in English."


Greek Ex-Premier Not Guilty in Bank Scandal
A special Greek court acquitted former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou today of criminal charges in a banking scandal that contributed to his administration's defeat in 1989.
Mr.
Papandreou, who led a Socialist Government for eight years and is now the main opposition leader, was found not guilty of all four counts.


Premieres, Debuts, Etc. For the Met Next Season
For the second consecutive season the Metropolitan Opera is to present the world premiere of an opera by an American composer.
"The Voyage," by Philip Glass, is to have its first performance on Oct. 12.
The Met also plans new productions of three standard-repertory works in the 1992-93 season, which opens on Sept. 21 with a revival of Offenbach's "Contes d'Hoffmann," starring Carol Vaness, Samuel Ramey and Placido Domingo and conducted by James Levine.
Also notable on next season's schedule are the Met conducting debut of Seiji Ozawa, and three performances of the company's staging of the Wagner "Ring" cycle.
The season will last 32 weeks.


Cuomo and Chief Judge Settle Court Budget Fight
Ending what a Federal judge once called "an unseemly conflict," Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Chief Judge Sol Wachtler announced an agreement today to settle their four-month legal battle over the state's judiciary budget.
Judge Wachtler said he had agreed to drop his lawsuit against Mr.
Cuomo in State Supreme Court in exchange for a commitment from the Governor and the State Legislature to provide enough money in the next fiscal year to restore the state courts to their former strength.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Harkin Emphasizes Steadiness but Looks for Lift
In a calm aside from his regular verbal assaults on his Democratic rivals and President Bush, Senator Tom Harkin offers his own assessment of his quest for the Presidency: "Unlike the other campaigns, I haven't had any big highs, I haven't had any lows. Just steady as she goes."
This is Mr.
Harkins's effort to get his audience to ignore early polls and some pundits' predictions by making a virtue of his own perserverance as Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska have enjoyed more of the highs so far.


On My Mind; Skewing the Primaries
What the press giveth we taketh away.
Sometimes we do it so rapidly that the recipient hasn't had time to unwrap the gift before, zip, he is staring at empty hands.
Giveth: On the air and in print, the coverage of the Democratic candidates for the Presidency has been full, well planned and detailed.
Taketh: Before a vote is cast, everybody "knows" the victor.


Maybe It's Time to See If This Marriage Works
Well, it's beginning to look like the marriage of Louis Moro and Mary Fekete may last, after all.
These days some people change spouses like jewelry.
So there was considerable concern, you know, after their whirlwind romance, what with his being older and society's values changing.
The pair met in a park.
She was sitting with girlfriends.
He was hanging around with buddies that autumn afternoon.
Not coincidentally, the boys happened past the girls, who, not surprisingly, didn't seem to notice.
But they got to talking, which was no accident, either.


Review/Television; Reining In Presidential Candidates
"Campaigning for the Presidency," tonight at 9 on Channels 13 and 49, really gets going when John Chancellor, the evening's ringmaster, stops treating his eight assembled campaign managers as if they were political scientists and descends to the details of their efforts in behalf of Presidential candidates from Richard M. Nixon to Michael S. Dukakis.
Not all have been as successful as Stuart Spencer and Edward Rollins, who served Ronald Reagan.
Richard Kleindienst was Barry M. Goldwater's first campaign manager in 1964; Gary Hart worked for George S. McGovern, and Susan Estrich advised not only Mr.
Dukakis but also the team of Walter F. Mondale and Geraldine A. Ferraro.
Still, all have been in the trenches.


Nanny Pleads Not Guilty in Death of Baby
The Swiss nanny accused of setting several fires that killed a Westchester couple's baby was indicted today on murder charges and pleaded not guilty.
The nanny, 20-year-old Olivia Riner, was indicted by the grand jury on four counts of second-degree murder and one count of arson.


Winter's Armoryful Of Antiques
FOR some, winter's blasts inspire thoughts of warm beaches.
For others, they inspire thoughts of antiques, particularly of the annual mammoth Winter Antiques Show (actually, it's more a spectacle) at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan.
This year's show has drums and a doorway, folk art and photographs, mechanical banks and Apostle spoons, just about anything a lover of old things, especially old and odd things, could want.
A report by Rita Reif is on page C26.


To Counter Bias Attacks, Dinkins Is Spreading Message of Tolerance
Striving to see beyond a recent spate of racially motivated attacks, Mayor David N. Dinkins spent yesterday spotlighting the pain of hate and demanding tolerance, orchestrating meetings with the Governor, state legislators and religious and community leaders to rouse New Yorkers.
The effort culminated 10 days of restless motion in which the Mayor has swept to the side of victims from Brooklyn to the Bronx with his top aides in tow.
It seemed aimed at gathering the full powers of municipal government to raise the public debate above the cruel string of individual incidents and onto the way to understanding. 'A Loud Wake-Up Call'
"I have come to the conclusion that one of the most important things I can do for our children is to issue a loud wake-up call to the adults of our city, pointing out the unprecedented need for our involvement, our leadership and our guidance," the Mayor said amid a flurry of official statements urging remedies from tougher penalities for hate crimes to "teach-ins" on tolerance in schools and churches.


JAPANESE PREMIER BEGINS SEOUL VISIT
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan arrived here today on his first overseas trip since taking office, flying into a storm of indignation over the Japanese Army's role in forcing Korean women to have sex with Japanese soldiers during World War II.
The main items on Mr.
Miyazawa's agenda in talks with President Roh Tae Woo were Japan's trade surplus with Seoul and their joint approach to ending the confrontation between North and South Korea.


Review/Film; Too Much to Prove, and No Reason to Prove It
Juice: it means power, nerve, street-smart bravado, and according to Ernest R. Dickerson's new film it can definitely be had in oversupply.
"Juice" is the story of how four young friends from Harlem are caught up in a murderous spree after one of them decides to test the limits of his machismo.
The idea may be familiar, but the execution is much better than that, thanks to natural, affecting performances from the principals and a very sharp visual style.
Mr.
Dickerson, whose cinematography has been the reason Spike Lee's films look so good, has a terrific eye and some juice of his own.
"Juice" begins with the innocent spectacle of Q (Omar Epps), Raheem (Khalil Kain), Steel (Jermaine Hopkins) and Bishop (Tupac Shakur) rolling out of their respective beds and heading off for school, which is a place they almost never see.
Instead, they roam amiably through their neighborhood, engaging in such relatively innocent activities as shoplifting records and trading insults with rivals.
Throughout this easygoing portion of the film, Mr.
Dickerson (and his cinematographer, Larry Banks) gives the Harlem streets a rare crispness and clarity, and manages to position the camera in uncannily apt ways.
The film's look is handsome but also claustrophobic, creating a caged feeling even in some of its outdoor scenes.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  SALVADORANS SIGN ACCORD
After years of bitter recriminations, the Salvadoran Government and its guerrillas saluted each other as compatriots and signed a peace treaty ending 12 years of civil war.
The two sides pledged not only to end the fighting, but to end their hatred.
A1  ISRAEL ADJOURNS PEACE TALKS
Israeli negotiators brought the third round of Arab-Israeli peace talks to a close and left Washington after making scant progress on substance and reaching no agreement with Arab parties on where or when to meet again.
A1  Israel says its political turmoil will not affect peace bargaining.
A8  SHAKY RUSSIAN DEALS
In the absence of statutes, contracts are being signed for all sorts of deals in Russia, with lawyers making up their own rules.
Although the contracts are bringing new business ventures to life, they may prove difficult to enforce.
A1  President Yeltsin tells lawmakers he won't halt painful reforms.
A10  SLOVENIA WEIGHS ITS CHANCES
With most of Europe supporting its independence from Yugoslavia, Slovenia now faces the task of reinventing itself.
Known as efficient and industrious, Slovenia is nonetheless barely a contender with capitalist Western Europeans.
A3  Leaders of Serbia denounce recognition of Croatia and Slovenia.
A3  GREECE ACQUITS EX-PREMIER
A special Greek court acquitted former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou of complicity in a major bank scandal that helped bring down his Socialist administration in 1989.
A5  BUSH DEFENDS GULF POLICY
Facing criticism of his Persian Gulf policy, President Bush offered new predictions of Saddam Hussein's downfall and proclaimed the war a "tremendous victory." Mr.
Bush has found himself on the defensive about Mr.
Hussein's grip on power and other foreign policy issues.
A8  WHAT BRITAIN KNEW OF SUPERGUN
After parliamentary testimony from a man who helped design the so-called supergun, new questions have been raised about what the British Government knew of Iraq's efforts to build the long-range cannon.
A8  KOREANS BERATE JAPAN'S LEADER
Japan's Prime Minister arrived in Seoul and encountered a storm of indignation over the Japanese Army's role in forcing Korean women to have sex with Japanese soldiers during World War II.
A6  Manila Journal: Imelda Marcos hits the campaign trail.
A4  National A12-19  THE BATTLE OVER TAXES
A tax cut that President Bush plans to propose would make families with annual incomes of more than $50,000 the biggest winners, drawing a new line in his election-year battle with the Democrats over who can develop the more attractive tax breaks for the middle class.
A1  NEW HAMPSHIRE, TAKE WARNING
Political Memo: A pair of Republican Presidential candidates are roaming the state whose primary will be held in a month, saying that they disdain eveything Washington stands for, that they are fed up with those inside-the-beltway bums.
The rub is that both of them are quintessential Washington insiders.
A14  The Harkin campaign is off to a sluggish start.
A14  The candidates' battle over the airwaves is in full swing.
A14  NEW PUBLISHER AT THE TIMES
Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, chairman and chief executive officer of The New York Times Company and for the last 29 years publisher of The New York Times, relinquished the publisher's title to his son, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr.
A1  BIG CUTBACKS LOOM AT YALE
A Yale faculty committee has recommended the elimination or consolidation of several academic departments and a 10.7 percent reduction in faculty posts.
A1  THE G.O.P.
GAINS IN TEXAS
The United States Supreme Court declined to block a redistricting plan for the Texas Legislature, giving Republicans their best chance in more than a century to win control of the State Senate.
A15  ALARM OVER AN ANTIDRUG EFFORT
In Oklahoma, every pharmacist who fills a prescription for any of more than a dozen potentially addictive drugs must punch it into a state computer network that tracks patients' and doctors' names.
The intention is to crack down on illegal drug trafficking.
But the requirement has set off a national debate over doctor-patient privacy and whether the data could be used by employers to make hiring decisions and withhold health benefits.
A12  POWELL'S PEACETIME BATTLE
The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is running into strong Congressional pressure to cut deeper and faster into the Pentagon budget than he would like.
A16  Newly exhumed skeletons may be those of two famous outlaws.
A12  New evidence was reported for the existence of black holes.
A17  Three lawmakers faulted the Savannah River start-up.
A12  The American AIDS epidemic reached a grim milestone.
A16  Alaska's Aleuts, Eskimos and Indians won in court.
A15  Law Page B16  A city where every lawyer has been drafted to serve the poor.
At the Bar  Metropolitan Desk Digest, B1 TOWARD GREATER UNDERSTANDING
Mayor Dinkins, in a series of meetings with the Governor, state legislators and religious and community leaders, strove to direct the public debate over individual bias incidents toward more tolerance and understanding.
A1  Neediest Cases B3  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-30  Where luxe is on the menu.
C1  A festival of Israeli arts.
C6  Theater: "Two Shakespearean Actors." C1  Film: At the Movies C6  Word and Image: Of the new physics and God.
C29  Sports B7-12  Baseball: Mets want Magadan to take pay cut.
B7  Column: Vecsey on George Steinbrenner.
B7  Football: Bills' defense getting defensive.
B7  Stanford hires Walsh.
B11  Super Bowl Notebook B11  Hockey: Rangers win.
B7  Islanders top Flyers.
B8  Obituaries D16  Malcolm J. Arth, an anthropolgist.
Richard G. Denzer, a lawyer.
Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials A28  From the Publisher.
The larger crime.
When the President talks.
Magic and Bush, one on one.
Letters A28  A. M. Rosenthal: Skewing the primaries.
A29  Leslie H. Gelb: Bush's ultimatum to Shamir.
A29  Teller: Movies don't cause crime.
A29  John D. Sicher: Open up the I.R.A.'s.
A29


It's Back to Stanford As Walsh Leaves NBC
Bill Walsh stepped out of the press box and back into college football today, saying that his decision to return to Stanford University as its football coach was spurred by a love for teaching and coaching.
Walsh, who coached the San Francisco 49ers to three Super Bowl titles before joining NBC as its top pro football analyst in 1989, agreed to a five-year contract that will reportedly pay him $350,000 a year.


Foreign Affairs; Bush's Ultimatum to Shamir
George Bush has a mega-jolt in store for Yitzhak Shamir.
The President seems ready to let the Prime Minister know that Israel will have to make a choice: between more Israeli settlements in the occupied territories and U.S.-backed multibillion-dollar loan guarantees, between pleasing thousands of right-wing settlers and helping resettle hundreds of thousands of Soviet immigrants, between bad and good relations with the White House.
Mr.
Bush is taking a gamble.
Unless he frames his position with great skill, Mr.
Shamir will turn it to hard-line advantage in soon-to-come Israeli elections.


Knicks Trying To Free Ewing
The recent fourth-quarter frustrations have not become intolerable for Patrick Ewing, yet.
The Knicks are still 10 games over .500, they lead the Atlantic Division by two games, and by all accounts are one of the National Basketball Association's most-improved teams.
All that pleases Ewing, making him a much happier player than he was last season.
But for New York to become a contender, the Knicks need to make their opponents pay for double- and triple-teaming Ewing, and Ewing must make the most of the scoring opportunities he gets.


Slovenes Are in No Mood to Celebrate
With most of Europe supporting its independence, Slovenia has become one of the world's youngest states, midway through a Balkan winter that has mixed hope with hardship and the sense that freedom brings no quick fixes.
Since Wednesday -- the European Community's deadline for recognition of Slovenia and Croatia, two former republics of Yugoslavia -- some 30 nations had by tonight pledged to raise their pennants at embassies here and in Zagreb, the capital of Croatia.
But the transformation from the rebelliousness of secession from Yugoslavia to the respectability of acknowledged nationhood drew little passion: not a bang or even a whimper -- rather, just a shrug.


He Came. He Soared. And He's Conquering.
Five months after he broke the 23-year-old long jump record, MIKE POWELL is still flying.
Yesterday, he claimed another high honor.
He was named the recipient of the Jesse Owens International Trophy as the athlete who best personifies excellence in athletic achievement and promotes sincere understanding among people of all nations.
Powell, whose leap of 29 feet 4 1/2 inches won the world championship in Tokyo last August, will receive the trophy at a dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria on Feb. 4.


Quotation of the Day
"What we do is write a statute book. In New York, you don't have to say that much in a contract because the obligations are clear in laws and in precedent, but here you have to spell out everything." -- A. JAMES REDWAY, an American lawyer in Moscow.  [ A1:3. ]


Review/Theater; Career Choice: Crime
Faced with two choices, going on the dole or being a petty thief, the protagonist of Tony Kavanagh's "Down the Flats" decides the second is the more remunerative and even the more self-respecting option.
"P.C.'s, professional criminals, that's our trade," this ex-convict says with pride to his street crony.
There is, of course, a third possibility, to leave Dublin and emigrate to the United States, a course eventually taken by the playwright.
The substance of "Down the Flats" (at the Irish Arts Center) has been frequently encountered in theater and in life.
Mr.
Kavanagh's distinction, like that of Miguel Pinero, is that he himself exchanged a career in crime for one as a playwright, and in his first play seems to have a natural affinity for the theater and an instinct for writing dialogue.


East Jerusalem Property
To the Editor:
"Battle on Jerusalem's Future Has Roots 3,000 Years in Past" (front page, Jan. 6), on conflicting property claims in a part of East Jerusalem called Silwan, lacks crucial context.


Criticized Police Captain Disputes City Hall's Report on Crush
The police commander who was criticized in the Dinkins administration's official review of the deadly crush at a City College gymnasium defended himself yesterday, as Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown released a preliminary report of his own that found that the 66 officers on duty at the time had acted properly.
Both the commander, Capt.
Daniel P. Carlin, and the Brown report differed from the Dinkins administration's report, which concluded that the police had been slow in responding to the incident, in which nine people died.


Correction


Gibson Hospitalized
ALTHEA GIBSON collapsed while giving a speech in East Orange, N.J., Tuesday night and has been hospitalized in Newark for unspecified treatment.
The 64-year-old Gibson, whose 56 major championships over a 23-year career include two singles and two doubles championships at Wimbledon, was giving an address at a Boy Scout dinner when she slumped into her chair.
She did not lose consciousness but was unable to continue, dinner officials said.
She was taken to University Hospital in Newark, where a hospital spokesman said yesterday that she had asked that no information about her condition be released.


Hewlett and Prime Forming Alliance
Prime Computer Inc. and the Hewlett-Packard Company formed an alliance under which Prime will buy $400 million worth of Hewlett-Packard servers and work stations over the next three and a half years.
Prime also agreed to make its specialized software compatible with Hewlett products.


Sports of The Times; What About the Other $386 Million?
Whenever people say, "Isn't it awful how much money the athletes make?" my standard answer is, "I'd rather see Don Mattingly have the money than George Steinbrenner." The ball players, after all, can throw and run and hit a curveball, and do many other socially redeeming acts.
The owners, on the other hand, merely own.
Pardon my class identification -- my parents were union members when it was dangerous -- but I've always believed in sharing the wealth.
Whenever I see an athlete signing for $3 million a year, I figure some of the owner's money is going to trickle down to the player's relatives and friends, balancing things out a little.


Bear Stearns Earnings Jumped in 4th Quarter
Swept along by Wall Street's gush of new stock offerings and trading activity, the Bear Stearns Companies yesterday announced earnings of $77.4 million for the quarter that ended Dec. 31, up sharply from $16.9 million in the corresponding quarter of 1990.
It was the best quarter on record for the firm, surpassing its previous high of $63 million in the final quarter of 1988.
Revenue in the most recent quarter, the second in the firm's fiscal year, totaled $698 million, compared with $587 million a year earlier.


Neighbors of Rape Suspect Say He Taunted Children
Troy A. Rivera, the man accused of abducting and raping an 11-year-old boy on West 77th Street on Tuesday, used to taunt children with obscene jeers as they walked to school in the morning and later mingle with other children at a playground across the street, his neighbors said.
Yesterday, those neighbors wondered openly whether they should have warned the authorities more forcefully of their concerns about Mr.
Rivera's behavior.


James Is No. 1
DON JAMES didn't have to share anything with DENNIS ERICKSON last night.
James, who led the University of Washington to a 12-0 record and a share of the national championship with Miami, received the Bear Bryant Award in Houston as the college coach of the year.
James beat out Erickson and two other finalists, Georgia Tech's BILL LEWIS and Florida's STEVE SPURRIER.


Herminio Portell Vila, A Cuban Historian, 90
Herminio Portell Vila, a Cuban historian of Cuban-United States relations who taught Fidel Castro, gave him some unheeded advice and left Cuba after the rebel leader seized power, died on Monday at his home in Miami.
He was 90 years old.
The cause of death was not immediately disclosed.


Yale Panel Proposes Deep Cuts in Faculty And in Departments
In what would represent the most substantial changes to Yale University in 40 years, a faculty committee has recommended the elimination or consolidation of several academic departments and a 10.7 percent reduction in faculty positions.
While most major universities are struggling to cut costs, Yale's proposed reductions would be among the most stringent.
The departments of linguistics and of operations research, a mathematics discipline, will be closed outright if the recommendations are accepted by the Yale Corporation, the university's governing body, next month.
The sociology department's faculty would be cut by almost 40 percent, three separate engineering departments would be consolidated into one, and the departments of physics and applied physics would be scaled back and then merged.


Magic and Mr. Bush, One on One
Magic Johnson's visit to the White House this week left the impression that the basketball superstar is more Presidential than the President when it comes to fighting the spread of AIDS.
Mr.
Johnson, the newest member of the National Commission on AIDS, gave Mr.
Bush some cogent suggestions for improving AIDS treatment, prevention and research.
And he was right on the mark when he criticized the President for hanging back in the battle against this deadly disease.


Quarterly Profit Up by 20% At Bristol-Myers Squibb
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said yesterday that profits increased 20 percent in the fourth quarter of 1991.
Both the quarter and the entire year set records in profits and sales, the company said.
Analysts said the earnings reports consolidated the company's standing as one of the three or four strongest pharmaceutical concerns.


TV With Viewer Interaction Gets Go-Ahead From F.C.C.
The Federal Communications Commission today set aside a special radio fre quency for interactive over-the-air television services, which could soon make it possible for viewers to order pizzas, pay credit card bills or call up sports scores by pressing buttons on pistol-shaped remote-control devices.
Also, as expected, the commission voted 4 to 0 to propose opening up a large swath of frequencies for use by emerging communication technologies, from tiny cellular telephones to satellite messaging systems and digital radio that offers sound as clear as that from compact disks.


Warning on Sale of Music Is Canceled by the Police
The Police Chief of Guilderland, N.Y., issued a retraction yesterday of his letter warning three local music stores that they could face felony or misdemeanor obscenity charges for selling recordings that contained sexually explicit lyrics.
The letter, sent by Chief James R. Murley on Jan. 7, created a maelstrom of controversy in the small suburb of Albany and sent a chill through the stores' managers and owners.
While he did not specifically threaten arrest, the Chief had put the sale of any recordings with the label "Parental Advisory: Explicit Lyrics" under the specter of prosecution for obscenity.


Yeltsin Warning Those Who Obstruct Reforms
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, fresh from encounters with angry shoppers during a tour of the country, vowed today to continue his painful economic reform despite vocal opposition, and to crack down hard against the "mafia-type structures" that are trying to drag it off course.
In a report to the Russian Parliament, Mr.
Yeltsin praised Russians for their patience and faith as they adjust to prices that have tripled and more since Jan. 2.
But he warned, "The reform is still not irreversible, and is easily interrupted."


The Art of a Russian Deal: Ad-Libbing Contract Law
Although there are not yet laws to govern the free market quickly emerging in the Commonwealth of Independent States, contracts are being signed for all sorts of deals as lawyers make up their own rules to cover what is not on the statute books.
The free market, in effect, is not waiting for a legal system.
Deals march on, although the contracts that are bringing new ventures to life might be difficult to enforce.
That is particularly true of provisions that assign to a new private company such things as machinery, aircraft or buildings still technically owned by the state.  'Goods Have to Move'
"Russian businessmen have gone ahead of the law, but goods have to move," said Armen Kazaryan, a 38-year-old broker whose company trades such items as timber, cotton, oil and tires on Russia's not-yet-legal commodity exchanges.
And in that spirit, Russians are signing thousands of contracts, from short-form agreements for the sale of Mr.
Kazaryan's commodities to elaborate documents specifying the terms of joint ventures between Russians and Americans.


Serbs Denounce Breakup of Yugoslavia
Leaders of Serbia and the Serb-controlled Yugoslav Government today denounced as illegal and dangerous the formal recognition of Croatia and Slovenia by the European Community, which effectively closed the book on Yugoslavia as it had existed since the end of World War II.
"The presidency considers this an intentional breakup of Yugoslavia and stresses that it does not solve the Yugoslav crisis but only worsens it," a statement by the Serb-controlled Yugoslav presidency said.
The statement said recognition of Croatia and Slovenia violated the United Nations Charter and other international accords.


Algeria's Military Appoints A 5-Member Ruling Council
A new five-member High State Council was sworn into office today by the military-backed Government that seized power in Algeria after bringing about the resignation of President Chadli Benjedid last weekend.
The council, which is to act as a collegial presidency, is headed by Mohammad Boudiafe, a 74-year-old politician who returned today after living in exile in Morocco for 27 years.
He is a founder of the Algerian revolutionary group that began a war of liberation against France that led to independence in 1962.
But the strongman in the new High State Council is widely believed to be the Algerian Defense Minister, Gen.
Khalid Nizar.


For Anderson, Bench Is No Joy Ride
The clock showed 8 minutes 58 seconds left in the game before Nets Coach Bill Fitch inserted Kenny Anderson against the Celtics in Boston on Wednesday night.
Why did Fitch wait so long?
The coach's answer was almost the same as the one he gave for taking out Mookie Blaylock, his starting point guard, with 7 minutes 50 seconds left in the third quarter.


Ousted Chief Returns to Georgia, Raising Fear of Renewed Fighting
The ousted President of Georgia, Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia, returned to his stronghold in western Georgia today, raising the specter of renewed warfare in the tumultuous Caucasus republic.
Tass reported that Mr.
Gamsakhurdia and his followers flew into Sukhumi, a city on the Black Sea, in the early morning, and from there drove to Zugdidi, center of the region from which Mr.
Gamsakhurdia comes and where he has his strongest support.


Chang's In, but McEnroe's Out
John McEnroe is off the Olympic list and Michael Chang is on it.
The United States Tennis Association has completed the selection process for the men's and women's tennis teams that will compete in the Barcelona Games this summer, provided that the United States Olympic Committee likes what it sees and submits that list to the International Tennis Federation by the deadline tomorrow.


Art in Review
Rachel Whiteread  Luhring Augustine 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Feb. 8
Rachel Whiteread, a promising young English sculptor, is making her New York debut with a group of works that combine the simplicity of early 1970's Process art with psychological overtones of a more contemporary sort.
The artist works primarily by casting fairly familiar objects in inappropriate materials and letting the suggestions proceed from there.
Most of the pieces in this exhibition are casts of mattresses, so the suggestions tend toward bodies, sex and dreams and also childhood.
Several are cast in foam so dense they appear to be immovable, with their leaning, propped and bent positions echoing the early soft lead sculptures of Richard Serra.
The most evocative work in the show is a pair of child's mattresses cast in the slightly soft sand-colored cement that dentists (especially orthodontists) use to make molds of teeth (especially children's).
In another work what seems to be an old mattress, its springs making nipple-like protrusions in its surface, has been cast in a dense foam whose faint translucence and pale rust color suggest both flesh and blood.
It sags against a wall like a discarded body, while its color and physical density impart a fresh and defiant air.
Ms.
Whiteread is not nearly so successful when she leaves the bedroom and departs from pliant materials.
A work that consists of a rounded slab of marble with a raised rounded edge looks like a monumental version of a small, chic cutting board such as one might find on a wet bar.
All it needs is a knife with a matching handle.


War of Hams Where the Stage Is All
HAM actors may be a horror, but fine actors playing ham actors are almost always a joy.
Brian Bedford, cast as the 19th-century British tragedian William Charles Macready in Richard Nelson's new play, "Two Shakespearean Actors," is no exception.
Very grand, often pickled and prone to forgetting the end of any sentence well before he has made it to the verb, Mr.
Bedford's puffed-up Macready would be right at home in the hapless theatrical companies of "Nicholas Nickleby," "The Dresser" and "Noises Off." Even his version of the actor's nightmare is egomaniacal: when Macready dreams this dream, he does not forget his lines but instead plays all the parts at once.
Mr.
Bedford, a British actor who has been a mainstay of Broadway and Stratford, Ontario, over a 30-odd-year stage career, pours a lifetime of both classical and boulevard-comedy experience into this role.
In Mr.
Nelson's play, Macready is a tired, fading figure who arrives to perform "Macbeth" in the New York City of 1849 only to find his supremacy challenged by a younger local upstart, the first great American Shakespearean, Edwin Forrest (Victor Garber),who is performing his own "Macbeth" elsewhere in town.
It's an ugly situation.
A symbolic target for enraged nationalistic forces beyond his comprehension, Macready suffers the indignity of less-than-full houses, a pelting with stones and, finally, a full-scale Anglophobic riot that leaves more than a score dead outside the Astor Place Opera House.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS ON BIAS CRIME


At the Movies
Keitel in Motion
Bedecked with laurels and off to Oz.
That, in brief, is the news of Harvey Keitel.


Appointment Will Not Alter Family Control
The appointment of a new publisher at The New York Times yesterday entailed no change in the ownership structure of the newspaper or its parent New York Times Company.
Since the purchase of The Times by Adolph S. Ochs in 1896, control of the newspaper and related properties has rested with his family.
In February 1990, on the death of Mr.
Ochs's daughter, Iphigene Ochs Sulzberger, control passed to her four children through the automatic termination of a trust established by her father.


Art in Review
Alexis Rockman  Jay Gorney Modern Art 100 Greene Street SoHo Through Feb. 1
Alexis Rockman is painting himself into a corner as visually rich as it is reactionary.
His new paintings (eight small and six medium-size) describe in greater and more macabre detail than ever an irrational Bosch-like world of bizarre biological mutation and inter-species violence, while playing down the jewel-like transparent colors that were previously the artist's trademark.
In "Barnyard Scene," a raccoon appears to be raping a rooster, while "Eastern Woodland Scene" features a raccoon with a duck's bill for a mouth, a bird claw for a paw and a worm appended to its bushy tail that is eating a multi-eyed fish.
Whereas Mr.
Rockman's creatures used to waver between abstraction and representation, his new protagonists are conventionally realistic.
The artist has relegated his painterly flourishes to the backgrounds, where crackling, scumbled surfaces conflate Color Field abstraction with primal ooze and decay and suggest that each canvas starts out as a kind of abstract tabula rasa.
See, for example, the thick-thin layers of pinks, lavender and white that occupy the lower portion of "The Larder," a painting whose bird-on-limb motif brings to mind the tropical paintings of the 19th-century Luminist Martin Johnson Heade. (Until, that is, you spot the lizard skewered on a giant thorn.)
These images are in many ways riveting: the eye devours their freaks and dramas, their colors and details as surely as Mr.
Rockman's creatures devour one another.
But the experience can also leave an aftertaste not unlike that brought on by watching a bad horror movie.
Perhaps Mr.
Rockman is becoming more and more the genuinely eccentric artist that he seems singularly equipped to be.
Still, as with so much Neo-Romantic landscape painting to which his work tangentially relates, it frequently appears that age-old narrative and pictorial devices have been brought out, dusted off, recombined in dizzying complexities and presented as something new.
A final note: the exhibition is accompanied by a catalogue that contains one of the best essays of the season.
Written by Douglas Blau, it is simply a lengthy index that might accompany a book about Mr.
Rockman's work; the references cited run the absolute gamut of art, science, literature and popular culture, including, of course, horror movies.
This fantastic effort, in both senses, is a fitting codicil to the paintings and also conjures the writer's eternal dream of doing the research without having to write the book.
But the index also inadvertently reduces Mr.
Rockman's images to the sum of their myriad references and affinities.


War of Hams Where the Stage Is All
HAM actors may be a horror, but fine actors playing ham actors are almost always a joy.
Brian Bedford, cast as the 19th-century British tragedian William Charles Macready in Richard Nelson's new play, "Two Shakespearean Actors," is no exception.
Very grand, often pickled and prone to forgetting the end of any sentence well before he has made it to the verb, Mr.
Bedford's puffed-up Macready would be right at home in the hapless theatrical companies of "Nicholas Nickleby," "The Dresser" and "Noises Off." Even his version of the actor's nightmare is egomaniacal: when Macready dreams this dream, he does not forget his lines but instead plays all the parts at once.
Mr.
Bedford, a British actor who has been a mainstay of Broadway and Stratford, Ontario, over a 30-odd-year stage career, pours a lifetime of both classical and boulevard-comedy experience into this role.
In Mr.
Nelson's play, Macready is a tired, fading figure who arrives to perform "Macbeth" in the New York City of 1849 only to find his supremacy challenged by a younger local upstart, the first great American Shakespearean, Edwin Forrest (Victor Garber),who is performing his own "Macbeth" elsewhere in town.
It's an ugly situation.
A symbolic target for enraged nationalistic forces beyond his comprehension, Macready suffers the indignity of less-than-full houses, a pelting with stones and, finally, a full-scale Anglophobic riot that leaves more than a score dead outside the Astor Place Opera House.


Islanders Want Malakhov
The Islanders have never employed a player from the former Soviet Union but that could soon change.
When General Manager Bill Torrey travels to France next month for the Winter Olympic Games, he hopes to sign Vladimir Malakhov, a 23-year-old defenseman drafted in the 12th round by the Islanders in 1989.
"I've told him I want my hands on him as soon as I can get my hands on him," Torrey said.
"We've negotiated, on again and off again, for five months."


Senate Counsel to Subpoena 2 Over Reports on Thomas
A special counsel hired by the Senate to investigate the disclosure of Prof.
Anita F. Hill's sexual-harassment accusations against Judge Clarence Thomas is preparing to subpoena the two journalists who first reported those accusations.
The move raises the possibility of an eventual constitutional confrontation.
Peter E. Fleming, a New York lawyer who is in charge of the Senate's inquiry, has told lawyers for the reporters, Nina Totenberg of National Public Radio and Timothy Phelps of Newsday, that he will probably subpoena them to appear before him on Feb. 5.
They are expected to be asked then to identify those who helped them obtain copies of Professor Hill's statements, which had been given to the Senate Judiciary Committee but not made public.


One China, and the Moment of Truth
We are slowly approaching a moment of truth in the more than 40-year saga of Taiwan's status.
Beijing, Taipei and Washington agree on the unity of China.
In the National Assembly election last month, the people of Taiwan voted for the status quo, for prudence and prosperity -- for not alienating Beijing but not embracing it either.
Flawed or not, that election -- 75 percent voted for the ruling Nationalist Party -- was a skirmish, not the end of the affair.
Events in Taiwan, China and elsewhere may well undermine the "unity of China," although we should not underestimate the ability of the Chinese to devise an arrangement between the two parties.


Teamster Officials Forced To Surrender Their Posts
The officers of a teamsters' local in Hempstead, L.I., who were defeated in an election last month but had refused to relinquish their posts, left their offices last night after a Federal judge threatened them with fines and contempt citations.
The defeated slate left the union hall last night through a rear door a few moments after a 5:30 deadline as the newly elected slate of insurgents walked in the front.


New York Takes Hertz To Court Over Surcharge
New York City and New York State sued Hertz yesterday over its two-week-old surcharge for renters from four New York City boroughs, calling it illegal discrimination.
At a City Hall news conference announcing the suit, Robert Abrams, the Attorney General, said the Hertz Corporation "can charge whatever rate it wants." But he added, "What it cannot do is charge different people different rates based on where they live."


UAL Sees Loss
The UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, said it expected its fourth-quarter net loss to be the largest quarterly loss in its history and would "substantially" exceed the previous largest quarterly net loss, of $157 million recorded in the first quarter of 1991.
The fourth-quarter loss will include a significant amount of nonrecurring expenses, it said.
UAL, based in Elk Grove Village, Ill., expects to release its earnings for the quarter and all of 1991 on Jan. 30.


Hertz's Unfair Liability
The suit filed yesterday by New York City and State against the Hertz Corporation may be technically correct in its main thrust: The surcharges Hertz has imposed on car rental customers who live in the city appear to be illegal under state law.
But the ultimate villain is not Hertz.
The surcharges result from an archaic liability law that inflates the cost of doing business in New York by tens of millions of dollars a year.


Trade Deficit Narrows To Smallest in 9 Years
Plunging demand for imports and a slight increase in exports shrank the nation's trade deficit in November to $3.57 billion, the smallest level in almost nine years, the Commerce Department said today.
October's trade deficit was also revised downward, to $6.32 billion from an initial estimate of $6.73 billion, further impressing economists, who look at the average of a string of monthly trade deficits rather than a single month's total.
The deficit in November 1990 was $9.54 billion.


Review/Dance; Tyrant Falls, So Does Angel, And Lo, All Ends Happily
"Three Roses and a Sacred Cow" certainly wasn't dull.
The plot kept taking peculiar twists in this dance drama presented by Byron Suber on Sunday afternoon at the Kitchen.
Lisa Heijn portrayed a woman the program called a dominatrix.
Wearing a leather mask and brandishing a whip, she pushed three naked, blubbering people onstage from the wings.
Cast as these hapless figures, Juliet Burrows, Patrick Rawlins and Mr.
Suber resembled big babies.


Teacher Found Dead On Burning Mattress
A New York City schoolteacher was found dead on a burning mattress in a bedroom of her Brooklyn home on Thursday, in a blaze that the Fire Marshal's office has labeled suspicious.
The cause of death of the teacher, Cherril McPherson, 45 years old, of 660 Belmont Avenue in East New York, has not been determined.
The Medical Examiner's Office had not completed an autopsy yesterday.


Fire Season, Mild Despite Oakland Blaze, Is an Ominous One
California made history last year with its most devastating urban wildfire, in Oakland.
The state also appears to have set another fire record, for the mildest recorded season in terms of acres burned.
Both records hold the sparks of possible future disaster.


Aimee Ewers Wed in Hawaii
Aimee Marie Ewers, a daughter of Elvira M. Ewers of Washington, was married in Honolulu yesterday to Douglas Leon Povich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Povich of Washington.
The Rev.
Edwin Sproat, a Pentecostal minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Manoa Valley Inn.
Mrs.
Povich, 37 years old, is an assistant to John Hunting, who heads an environmental investment and philanthropic concern bearing his name in Washington.
Her father, the late William B. Ewers, was a Washington lawyer.


Jets Hire Haley
On the theory, perhaps, that the road to the Super Bowl begins with the college draft, the Jets have hired a director of player personnel who has made the trip four times.
He is DICK HALEY, who spent 22 years as the player personnel director of the Pittsburgh Steelers before his resignation last week.
He replaces RON WOLF, who left the Jets to be general manager of the Packers.


All-Star Coach Clinches
Coach PHIL JACKSON of the Chicago Bulls has clinched the head coaching job for the Eastern Conference All-Star team more than a week before the cutoff date for determining the post.
The Bulls have a six-and-a-half-game lead over Cleveland in the race for the best record in the conference, too large a margin for the Cavaliers to make up by Jan. 26.
The coaches of the teams with the best records in each conference after games of that date will be the head coaches for the All-Star Game at Orlando, Fla., on Feb. 9. (AP)


BUSNIESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. said it lost $1.38 billion in the quarter, resulting in its first yearly deficit ever.
And revenues were off 6.1 percent for the year, the first time in 45 years that growth had faltered.
Calling the year disappointing, the company blamed a declining world economy, increased competition and the difficulties associated with introducing new product lines.  [ Page 37. ]


Westinghouse Reports a Profit for 4th Quarter
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said yesterday that it had returned to profitability in the fourth quarter after losses in several earlier periods.
It has been working to shrink its troubled financial services subsidiary, which was heavily invested in real estate, junk bonds and leveraged buyout securities, and had taken big write-offs in previous quarters to reflect the lower market value of the assets.
The company reported earnings of $171 million, or 51 cents a share, in the fourth quarter, compared with a loss of $449 million in the 1990 period.
For the year, though, it reported a loss of $1.08 billion because of the write-offs.


RESULTS PLUS
SKIING  Swiss Sweep Downhill


Courthouse Arrest Throws Teaneck Trial Into Turmoil
The trial of a policeman charged with shooting a teen-ager was thrown into turmoil today when a prosecution witness was arrested in the courthouse lobby after testifying.
The incident prompted prosecutors to charge that the Bergen County Sheriff's office was attempting to undermine the trial.
The arrest further strained the uneasy relations between the New Jersey Attorney General's office and the sheriff's office over the case of Gary Spath, the white Teaneck officer charged in the fatal shooting of a black teen-ager, Phillip Pannell, in April 1990.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Jan. 9 about activity in the credit markets referred incorrectly to the rating status of a $2 billion offering of Tennessee Valley Authority debt securities.
The securities are not rated by either Moody's Investors Service or the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.





Taking Life in Stride, With Baby
Holding a baby in one's arms for hours at a stretch is beneficial for parent and newborn.
Bonding is much greater and babies, comforted by another heartbeat after developing alongside such sounds in the womb, are less likely to cry in complaint.
Still, carrying a baby is not always convenient or comfortable.
The adult's arms tire; the neck and back start to ache, and there are always chores to be done with the hands, like laundry, cooking and writing thank-you notes for baby gifts.


Hitler's War Didn't Start With Dresden Raid
To the Editor:
It is surprising to read that the proposed erection of a statue in central London of Sir Arthur Harris, the late commander of the British Royal Air Force during World War II, "has deeply disturbed some German officials" (news article, Jan. 6).


Shots Fired at High School
A 15-year-old boy was charged with firing shots into the air outside a Manhattan high school yesterday afternoon after a crowd watching a fight between two girls in the school cafeteria spilled out into the street, the police said.
No one was injured in the incident, which occurred outside Norman Thomas High School, at 33d Street and Park Avenue, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.
The 15-year-old, whom the police did not identify, was charged with reckless endangerment.


Your Money; Some Cautions On Stock Funds
Distressed by the current low yields of money market funds and short-term bond funds, many mutual fund investors are seeking to reposition their assets for a greater return.
Last year's stunning 35.57 percent average gain among general equity funds and a 14.5 percent total return on intermediate-term Government bond funds make them more alluring.
But A. Michael Lipper, president of Lipper Analytical Services, which compiles the statistics on fund performance, as well as managing accounts for fund investors, is sounding a note of caution.


Hitler's War Didn't Start With Dresden Raid; Berlin Bombings
To the Editor:
With regard to your Jan. 6 news article, I lived through Sir Arthur Harris's daily saturation bombings while growing up in Berlin.
I was in the isolation ward of a (clearly marked) children's hospital in a rural area some 50 miles outside the city, 7 years old and ill with scarlet fever, when the hospital was bombed to bits and pieces by Harris's jolly group.


California Governor Tells of Suffering, But Question Now Is Whose Was It
In his State of the State Message last week, did Gov.
Pete Wilson invent a cast of brave California characters struggling with the recession?
Even his press office did not seem to be sure today.
In a portion of the speech that he wrote, Mr.
Wilson gave a detailed account of a farm worker, a businessman and a carpenter who had impressed him with their suffering and determination.
But when reporters tried to track them down, his press office said they did not exist but were composites.


Natural Gas Explosions in Chicago Kill One Person, Damage 18 Buildings


Strange History of Silicone Held Many Warning Signs
For decades, doctors and scientists have thought it unlikely anything as inert as silicon could cause significant health problems.
Besides breast implants, silicone plastics made from silicon have been used in valves, tubes and artificial parts in the body.
They seemed benign.


JAPAN APOLOGIZES ON KOREA SEX ISSUE
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan made a formal public apology here today for Japan's actions in forcing tens of thousands of Korean women to have sex with Japanese soldiers during World War II.
In a speech to South Korea's National Assembly, Mr.
Miyazawa said: "Recently, the issue of 'comfort women' in the service of the Imperial Japanese Army has come into light. I cannot help feeling acutely distressed over this, and I express my sincerest apology."


Guidepost
Off to School Safely
Some 9,000 children are injured and about 35 are killed each year in accidents related to school buses.
Most occur while the children are waiting for a bus or getting on or off it.
In many of the deaths, the child is struck by the school bus, not by other traffic.
Safety is taught at many schools but parents should remind their children of safety rules regularly.
Here are some tips from school and safety experts.
The Danger Zone
There is a blind spot of 10 feet around a school bus where the driver may not be able to see a child.
Children should learn to move away from the bus quickly after getting off and not to circle close to the bus before boarding.
A child should never enter this blind spot to pick up a dropped book or other object, but should wait until the bus has left and traffic is clear in all directions.
Waiting for the Bus
Children should get to the bus stop a few minutes early.
Adults should accompany small children or have a volunteer at the stop.
Clothing
Clothing should be securely fastened so as not to catch on anything when a child is boarding or getting off the bus.
Books and papers should be carried in a roomy book bag or backpack; anything more bulky should be in a shopping bag.
Hats and mittens should have designated pockets.
Information
Booklets offering safety tips are available from National School Bus Safety Week, P.O.
Box 2639, Springfield, Va. 22152, and from the National Association for Pupil Transportation, P.O.
Box 745, East Moline, Ill. 61244.


For 2 U.S. Divisions in Germany, Taps
Two United States Army divisions that landed at Normandy 48 years ago and later defended American interests in the cold war marked their last day in Europe today as they were officially disbanded.
As flags came down, the commander of the Third Armored Division, Maj.
Gen.
Jerry R. Rutherford, said: "The cold war is over. Our mission is accomplished. It's time to go home."


Donations to the Neediest Cases Fund Are Road Map of Generosity
From the pioneer days to the days of Jack Kerouac to today, Americans have charted journeys across the country following every imaginable route.
But there is no evidence that anyone has ever traced a route using contributions to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund as signposts.
Start in Hanover, N.H., home of Wendy Lamb, who gave $200.
"Although we have moved away from New York, we still feel connected to the city," she wrote.
"Right now we hope that life will improve -- somehow -- for people in need."


Quotation of the Day
"How dare we celebrate when more than 40 million Americans are without health care? How dare we celebrate in the midst of a recession, when nobody is sure whether their jobs are secure?" -- THE REV.
BERNICE KING, daughter of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., at his birthday commemoration.  [ 1:5. ]


Sports of The Times; Barefoot Down the Bobsled Run
What seemed at first to be a harmless controversy has escalated into an international embarrassment for the troubled United States Bobsled Federation and the United States Olympic Committee.
At one level, the issue, which centers on procedure, involves questionable maneuverings in the federation's process for selecting an Olympic team and a low tolerance for outsiders.
More important, the case underscores the U.S.O.C.'s failure to mediate a deteriorating marriage between professional and amateur athletics in this country.


Arthur Karasz, 84, World Bank Official
Arthur Karasz, who headed the World Bank's European office from 1968 until his retirement in 1973, died on Wednesday at his home in Paris.
He was 84 years old.
His family said he died of respiratory failure.


Police Study on City College May Set Stage for Conflict
Two days after a mayoral report sharply criticized a New York City police commander's handling of an unruly crowd that crushed nine people to death at City College, the police have yet to accept the report's conclusions or decide whether to reprimand the officers involved.
Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown has reacted coolly to the report, saying he would await the outcome of his own department's internal inquiry before deciding what to do.
His reaction has set the stage for a potential confrontation between City Hall and Police Headquarters, especially should the department's investigation determine that the police were not at fault.


Comsat President Adds Title of Chief Executive
Bruce L. Crockett, president of the Communications Satellite Corporation, the provider of satellite telecommunications, added the title of chief executive yesterday.
Comsat, as the Washington, D.C., company is known, also named Melvin R. Laird, 69, Defense Secretary during the Nixon Administration, as chairman of the 15-member Comsat board.


Fielder Clears the Roof In Salary Arbitration
Cecil Fielder, the most productive hitter in the major leagues for the last two seasons, established one salary-arbitration record and helped create another yesterday, notifying the Detroit Tigers he wants a $5.4 million salary for the 1992 season.
Barry Bonds of Pittsburgh and Ruben Sierra of Texas joined Fielder in breaking arbitration's $5 million barrier, each submitting $5 million as his desired salary.
Fielder's number is the highest submitted in the 16-year history of the procedure, eclipsing Glenn Davis's $3.65 million entry a year ago.
The Tigers simultaneously submitted a $3.2 million salary, creating a $2.2 million gap, the largest ever.
The previous widest gulf between player and club was the $1.3 million established last year by Mark McGwire and Oakland, and Jose Rijo and Cincinnati.


Hooper Wins Eclipse
FRED W. HOOPER, 94 years old, was named yesterday as the recipient of the 1991 Eclipse Award of Merit.
Hooper's career has been full of achievement, including victory in the 1945 Kentucky Derby with his namesake, Hoop Jr.
Hooper, who operates Hooper Farm in Ocala, Fla., is credited with introducing the influx of riders from Panama, including BRAULIO BAEZA, LAFFIT PINCAY JR. and JORGE VELASQUEZ. (AP)


Friendship (Not Match) Made Near the Ring
Nobody's taking potshots at their friendship, but put it this way: It's a good thing EVANDER HOLYFIELD, MELDRICK TAYLOR and PERNELL WHITAKER aren't the same size.
The three have been close friends since the 1984 Olympics when Holyfield was the only one who didn't win a gold medal, while Taylor was winning as a featherweight and Whitaker as a lightweight.


MISS MILLS Wed To James Byrne
Melissa Ohlandt Mills, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bradford F. Mills of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to James Peter Byrne, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark F. Byrne of Hartsdale, N.Y., and Boca Raton, Fla.
The Rev.
Stuart Brush performed the ceremony at the North Greenwich Congregational Church, with Msgr.
Patrick Barry attending.
Mrs.
Byrne, 31 years old, is a private-label manager at Lord &amp; Taylor in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father is a partner in Decolam, a maker of building products in Orangeburg, S.C.


Passing Buck, Not Puck
The way Coach MIKE KEENAN of the Chicago Blackhawks sees it, it was all the officials' fault: they simply lost control of the Blackhawks' game against the Toronto Maple Leafs on Thursday night.
The way the officials saw it, the only thing that was out of control was Blackhawks wing STU GRISSOM.
When a fight broke out in the last period of the 4-0 Chicago victory, Grissom left the bench, breaking away from Keenan after being ordered back to the bench and being tackled by Referee DAN MAROUELLI.


Review/Rock; Sound and Fury Aside, Dancing Is the Point
A new format has been turning up at dance clubs in the early 1990's.
Disk jockeys combine industrial rock (brutal mechanical rhythms and agonized vocals), techno (crisp electronic rhythm tracks, largely instrumental) and some alternative rock (edgy guitars and synthesizers behind ambiguous lyrics).
It's a post-punk, suburban reaction to the urban dance rhythms of house music and hip-hop.
The Palladium, the Macy's of New York clubs, inaugurated its new weekly Hype Alternative Radical Dance, or Hard, nights on Wednesday, reflecting the popularity of similar nights at Limelight, the Building and other clubs.
Like the Limelight, the Palladium will present live bands along with recorded music.
Its first Wednesday featured three bands: Cop Shoot Cop, the Unsane and Foetus Inc.
With free admission before 11 P.M., the club was well attended but not packed.


F.B.I. and Russian Agency Thwart a Kidnapping
As if elements of the novel "Gorky Park" had sprung to life, the F.B.I. and Russian security police teamed this week to crack a $1.6 million kidnapping-and-ransom scheme that threatened the lives of two foreigners in Moscow.
The kidnapping ended Thursday morning, when agents of the newly formed Russian Agency for Federal Security, one of the successors of the K.G.B., which has been abolished, swooped down on a hotel on a busy highway outside Moscow and freed Daniel Weinstock, an Australian computer-company executive who had been taken hostage on Jan. 8.


AIDS Drug Found Less Effective Than AZT and Maker Halts Tests
A new drug being tested to treat people with AIDS is less effective than the standard one for many patients, the drug's manufacturer announced Thursday.
The company, Hoffmann-La Roche of Nutley, N.J., said it was halting its one-year study comparing its drug, dideoxycytidine, or DDC, to AZT, or azidothymidine, in patients who had not previosuly used AZT or had used it for fewer than three months.
There were fewer deaths among those who received AZT in the study, the company said.


Yes, Stay Strong. What's Strong?
Former Soviet technicians are offering to sell their science to the West; it's the latest evidence of the Red Menace crumbling before our eyes.
But that raises a new question.
If the Soviet threat is no longer a yardstick for measuring America's strength, how is that strength to be measured?
It's idle to speculate about potential enemies.
Military planners take a more practical, quantitative approach.
They examine how much of a threat future situations might pose.
And wherever they look, the threats they see are far smaller and more diffuse than those so long posed by the Soviet Union.


Italian President Visits Croatia and Slovenia
President Francesco Cossiga of Italy today became the first European head of state to visit Croatia and Slovenia since the European Community recognized their independence from Yugoslavia two days ago.
Mr.
Cossiga met with President Franjo Tudjman in Zagreb, the capital of Croatia, as officials signed an agreement setting up diplomatic relations.
He later met President Milan Kucan in Ljubljana, the capital of Slovenia, to oversee a similar ceremony.
The visit, in a high-speed armed convoy of vehicles across the border from northern Italy, was depicted by Italian officials as a show of resistance to strong German influence in an area where Italy has historical interests, including commerical links, an Italian-speaking minority and what some Italians still call regard as lost territory.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. said it lost $1.38 billion in the quarter, resulting in its first yearly deficit ever.
And revenues were off 6.1 percent for the year, the first time in 45 years that growth had faltered.
Calling the year disappointing, the company blamed a declining world economy, increased competition and the difficulties associated with introducing new product lines.  [ Page 37. ]


Governing New York: Simplify, Simplify
New York City's approach to the fiscal crisis is deeply flawed.
Mayor David Dinkins' incremental budget cuts will ultimately fail because they ignore the root of the problem: New York City is badly managed.
Let me offer three
unexceptional
examples from my nine years in city government.
Though based largely on my experiences in the Department of Transportation, they are typical of all the city's agencies.


New Lottery Game Begins
A new lottery game began yesterday in New York, replacing the Cash 40 game.
The new game, Take Five, will be played on Fridays and costs $1.
Lottery officials will draw five numbers, from 1 to 39.
For the top prize, players must match all five; lesser prizes are awarded for matching four, three or two numbers.
Lottery officials expect the prize pool for the new game to be about $200,000 a week, to be split among the winners.
The last Cash 40 game was played on Monday.


Consumer Report Shows Spirits Have Yet to Revive
The nation's spirits have yet to revive from last fall's recessionary levels, according to the closely watched University of Michigan Survey of Consumer Sentiment.
"Sentiment has remained largely unchanged" from December, its report to subcribers said.
The sentiment index edged down from 68.2 in December to 67.1 in January, but a decline of a point or so is not statistically significant.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. said it lost $1.38 billion in the quarter, resulting in its first yearly deficit ever.
And revenues were off 6.1 percent for the year, the first time in 45 years that growth had faltered.
Calling the year disappointing, the company blamed a declining world economy, increased competition and the difficulties associated with introducing new product lines.  [ Page 37. ]


Cavaliers Close In on the Elite
The Coliseum was filled to its private boxes at the top, jammed with people who had come across a frozen landscape south of Cleveland to create a feeling of spring.
Their Cavaliers had the second-best record in the National Basketball Assocation, and the defending champion Chicago Bulls were in town, and the flashbulbs and the noise were generating a playoff kind of heat.
And even after the Bulls had led the Cavaliers into a series of uncharacteristic failures, thoughts of springtime did not leave the home dressing room.
To the Cavaliers, Cleveland's recent 11-game winning streak says more about the future than their recent past.


National Westminster Appoints an American
The National Westminster Bank P.L.C., one of Britain's most profitable banks, has named an American, Richard Karl Goeltz, to be director and group chief financial officer, effective March 1.
He succeeds John Burns, 56 years old, who is leaving after 40 years to become finance director of the TSB Group P.L.C., a British banking and financial services group, which earlier this week reported its first-ever yearly loss.


Makers of Small Planes Wait for Brighter Skies
Domestic makers of small airplanes sold fewer last year than at any time since World War II.
One major manufacturer, Piper, is in bankruptcy; another, Cessna, is up for sale.
But like flying the rickety little machines that gave rise to the modern aviation industry, making small planes today has some long-term promise to compensate for the immediate perils.
The industry is developing many new products, with exports and sales of business jets growing.


Dinkins's Role In Sanitation Is Faulted
The departing Sanitation Commissioner of New York City is faulting the Dinkins administration for failing to acknowledge the fact that it is running out of ways to get rid of its garbage.
The Commissioner, Steven M. Polan, said that while Mayor David N. Dinkins has offered "tepid" support for new incinerators, he has failed to move forward in building them.
The Mayor has also failed to fully support recycling, Mr.
Polan said.


I.B.M. Loss In Quarter And Year
Closing the books on its most difficult year in decades, I.B.M. said yesterday that it lost $1.38 billion in the fourth quarter, resulting in its first yearly deficit ever.
In addition, revenues were off 6.1 percent for the year, the first time in 45 years that growth has faltered at the world's largest computer maker.
Calling the year disappointing, the company blamed a declining world economy, increased competition and the difficulties associated with introducing new product lines.


Black Burial Ground Deserves More Than Just a Bronze Plaque
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 26 news article on the Negroes Burial Ground recently uncovered in lower Manhattan recalls the painful existence of black New Yorkers pressed into slavery in the 1700's, but it does not say what will happen to this plot after the archeologists have finished their work.
Will the graveyard return to anonymity?


Fans Will Not Be Left in the Cold
The sun was shining on Minneapolis yesterday, nine days from Super Bowl XXVI.
But the Super Bowl Task Force isn't fooled.
The high temperature was 19 degrees.
And even though the game is going to be indoors, there is a cold-weather strategy in place for the fans.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Express Travel Related Services Co., New York, a unit of American Express Co., named Anne M. Busquet senior vice president and general manager of its merchandise services business. *
Dresser Industries, Dallas, a maker of energy and mining products, named Donald C. Vaughn senior vice president-operations.
He also remains president and chief executive of the company's M. W. Kellogg Co. unit.


Croatia Assures Rights of Ethnic Minorities
To the Editor:
"No War. No Peace. No Yugoslavia" (editorial, Jan. 4) contains some assertions that do not square with facts.
The Croatian territory now occupied by the (once) federal Army and "Serbian ethnic militias" still belongs to the Republic of Croatia.


Orchha Journal; See the Ruins (Before They Vanish)
More than 400 years ago, the majestic battlements, parapets and palaces of this small village in central India rang to the thunder of battle as Hindu chieftains fought invading Mogul armies and one another.
These days the battle is quieter but even more remorseless, as Orchha and many other ancient towns and villages across India struggle against the ravages of time, weather, vandalism, greed and official neglect.


METRO DIGEST
CAR THEFT, 90'S STYLE
Spurred by a foreign clientele willing to pay up to double the value of a luxury automobile, armed thieves have been hijacking cars on highways, in parking lots and on the streets of New York City and its suburbs, the police say.
In one case, the thieves, dubbed "car pirates," cut off a man driving along Grand Central Parkway in Queens, pulled a gun on him and ordered the man and his passengers out of the car.
In another, three young men accosted a woman at a Long Island shopping center, dragged her out of her car by the hair and drove off.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY HERTZ IS SUED OVER SURCHARGES


Observer; The Middle Riddle
It is typical of the mental gimcrackery that passes for a public philosophy these days that our rulers are suddenly frantic to grant boons to the middle class.
And what is it, this middle class, which all statesmen from President to Congressional doorkeeper now yearn to pelt with blessings?
It is an abstraction, a fragment of a campaign slogan, a piety on a demagogue's tongue, an insoluble calculus problem for demographers, a verbal crutch for economists and political writers required by the cruel nature of their trades to sound eloquent while waiting for an idea to pull into the station.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.80
4.00
6.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.76
3.78
6.11
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.87
3.87
6.26
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.79
6.88
7.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.60
7.66
8.18
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.85
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.67
6.66
7.44
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Hitler's War Didn't Start With Dresden Raid; No Concern for London
To the Editor:
Re your Jan. 6 news article on the plan to dedicate a statue of Sir Arthur Harris, who commanded the British bombing campaign against Germany in World War II:


Classical Music in Review
David Geringas Cellist The Frick Collection
David Geringas played the cello on Sunday afternoon with big gestures and passionate bear hugs that were more than a little reminiscent of his teacher and now colleague, Mstislav Rostropovich.
Bach's C-major solo Suite sounded like a major excavation managed by powerful digging equipment.
Phrases were marked by wide separations; tempos were telescoped, a few notes were even dropped, all in pursuit of a continuous and hot-breathed musical momentum.


Knicks Hit the Road, and The Rim
It was a different town and a different opponent, but a familiar scenario for the Knicks.
Instead of making shots when it counted, the Knicks made mistakes.
Their defense was outstanding.
But at times, their offense was outrageous.


Friends Face the Mystical World of Words
Harvey Robinson and Robert Best are best friends, which makes sense as they have so much in common.
Both are sons of North Carolina sharecroppers and each have 12 brothers and sisters.
Both came to New York City, raised families, pursued successful careers and are now semi-retired.
Mr.
Robinson, who is 60 years old and taciturn, is chairman of the board of trustees of the New Canaan Baptist Church in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Best, 50 and garrulous, is the church's Minister of Music.


Jewelry: Admire Glitter, but Count Karats
This Valentine's Day, jewelry may e a more practical gift than usual.
The sales that began before Thanksgiving and Christmas are continuing, and the prices of gold and silver jewelry have been further reduced at many stores.
But how does a customer know that the pieces on display are, indeed, gold and silver?
There are important marks to look for.


Deeper Consumer Gloom Lifts Bond Prices
The credit markets stabilized somewhat yesterday, as buying of Treasury securities was enough to push prices of notes and bonds higher for the first time in a week.
The better tone was established in overnight trading in Asia, after results of the University of Michigan's midmonth snapshot of consumer attitudes became known.


Fundamentalists in Algeria Ask Followers to Stay Calm
Algerian fundamentalist leaders appealed to their Muslim followers today to avoid provoking the country's security forces as troops were deployed in strength across the capital on this holy day of prayer.
The Friday prayer services were the first since President Chadli Benjedid resigned last weekend and the Government canceled a second round of elections that were expected to give the fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front control of the Algerian Parliament.


A High, Hard One: Cone Wants $4.25M
The Mets, with a multiyear, multimillion dollar contract proposal for David Cone on the negotiating table, yesterday filed a salary-arbitration figure of $3 million for the right-hander.
For his part, Cone, who is likely to reject the club's long-term offer as it is now constructed, registered a request for $4.25 million for the 1992 season.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; HARKIN COURTING DISABLED VOTERS
Don Anderson has never worked for a Presidential candidate before.
But this year, Mr.
Anderson, who is paralyzed from the chest down and has only partial use of his arms, is enthusiastically supporting Senator Tom Harkin's drive for the Presidency.
For Mr.
Anderson, a 38-year-old resident of Lansing, Mich., what makes the Iowa Democrat stand out from the pack is his stand on the disabled.


U.S. LATIN POLICY YIELDS SOME GAINS
As the Government of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro was preparing for today's first visit to Nicaragua by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, the Sandinista leader and former President, was clamoring for a meeting with Mr.
Baker in Mexico before his arrival here.
Mr.
Ortega's request was denied, and he had to content himself with seeking out the Secretary of State at an official lunch in Mexico City on Thursday.
However, Mr.
Baker was drawn into conversation not with Mr.
Ortega, the Secretary of State told reporters later, but with the Cuban Foreign Minister, Isidoro Malmierca, who was at his table.


News Summary
International 2-5 OFFICERS GATHER IN KREMLIN
Fuming over hostile civilians and loyalty oaths, about 5,000 officers of the former Soviet military met at the Kremlin to demand that the armed forces remain intact and that soldiers not be abandoned.
But the officers were quick to reject any hint of nostalgia for the Communists.  1


Police Say Brooklyn Man Faked Bias-Attack Story for Attention
A black man claimed yesterday that he was beaten by five white men in Brooklyn in retaliation for a previous bias incident, but later confessed that he made up the story to get attention, the police said late last night.
The initial report quickly led to a high-priority police investigation and a harsh statement from Mayor David N. Dinkins condemning the attack.


Your Mercedes or Your Life: New York's New Car Thieves
Spurred by a foreign clientele willing to pay up to double the value of a luxury automobile, armed thieves have been hijacking cars on highways, in parking lots and on the streets of New York City and its suburbs, the police say.
In one case, the thieves, dubbed "car pirates" by the police, cut off a man driving along Grand Central Parkway in Queens, pulled a gun on him and ordered the man and his passengers out of the car.
In another, three young men accosted a woman at a Long Island shopping center, dragged her out of her car by the hair and drove off.


Slovenia And Croatia Are Invited
The International Olympic Committee yesterday invited Slovenia and Croatia, states of Yugoslavia that gained independence earlier this week, to send separate teams to the Winter Olympics next month in France.
In so doing, the I.O.C. granted the new republics provisional recognition, a status that is expected to become formal when the full I.O.C. membership meets Feb. 5-6 in Courcheval, France.
The Games begin Feb. 8.


Patents; New Cereal: Popped Seed of Amaranth
Cereals made from popped grains and seeds from Quaker Puffed Rice to the puffed wheat in Post Sugar Golden Crisp -- have been a staple of American breakfast tables.
But a farmer and entrepreneur in Minnesota is hoping to sell consumers on a new one: popped amaranth seeds.
Amaranth is a tall and willowy plant that produces thousands of hard yellow seeds that are a bit smaller than poppy seeds.
The seeds are inedible in their raw form, but can be ground into flour or popped like popcorn by placing them on a hot griddle.
Rich in vitamin E and other proteins, amaranth is consumed in various forms in Mexico, Peru and India and is believed to have been a big part of the diet of ancient Aztecs in Central America.


Classical Music in Review
St. Luke's Chamber Ensemble Weill Recital Hall
Born two years before the 20th century and the subject of some severe cultural dislocations, Vittorio Rieti has always written music admirable for its equilibrium.
Italian in background, with beginnings in Egypt, for many years French by adoption and now with 50 years in the United States, Mr.
Rieti long ago found a musical voice that suited him no matter where he was.
He has been speaking in it ever since.


Bridge
The most cosmopolitan of the small tournaments played around the world is no doubt the contest in St.
Moritz, high in the Swiss Alps, which began yesterday.
Zenkel and Andersen, who live in Chicago, may be the world's most-traveled bridge partnership.
In the past nine months they have been in Prague; Killarney, Ireland, and Yokohama, Japan.
Their current trip to St.
Moritz will be followed by a visit to Hungary and Austria in April.
The diagramed deal was played in a knockout championship in Reno last month.


Despite Protests, Florio Is Expected to Sign Bills to Revise Welfare
Turning aside protests and threats of lawsuits from civil rights, church and women's groups, Gov.
Jim Florio is expected to sign a sweeping welfare revision package on Tuesday.
The package would deny extra benefits to welfare mothers who have additional children and reduce or eliminate payments for recipients who refuse to train for work or go to school.
A broad coalition of social welfare and civil rights organizations, led by the New Jersey Council of Churches, today implored the Governor to veto the six-bill package, which was approved by the lame-duck Democratic Legislature on the next-to-last day of the session.
But an aide to the Governor who spoke on the condition of anonymity said that Mr.
Florio was inclined to sign it.


Hitler's War Didn't Start With Dresden Raid; Prior Arguments
To the Editor:
Your discussion of the "British and American firebomb attacks of Feb. 13-14, 1945" (news article, Jan. 6) was informative, but did not mention the prior arguments among the military leaders.
Though little known, they were made public many years ago.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a New York City Police Department report on the deaths in a crowd stampede at City College misidentified the official who made the report public.
It was Deputy Mayor Milton Mollen, not Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown.


Start Nuclear Prevention in North Korea
To the Editor:
If the International Atomic Energy Agency inspects North Korea's nuclear facilities and finds that they were actually designed for reprocessing power plant fuel, those facilities could actually be safeguarded against nuclear weapons proliferation ("North Korea Opens Up," editorial, Jan. 7).


Mr. Bland Goes to Trenton, and Takes Over the Senate
Donald T. DiFrancesco likes to recall that when he met his wife, Diane, while they were students at Pennsylvania State University in the 1960's, she was entranced with President John F. Kennedy and Camelot.
Now, said Mr.
DiFrancesco, the new President of the New Jersey Senate, "she is more conservative than anybody in the Senate."


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the breakup of Yugoslavia referred incorrectly in some editions to the year of Tito's death.
It was 1980, not 1979.


A Pre-Election Israel: Focus on Talks With Arabs
With his governing coalition about to implode, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir seems to be preparing for imminent parliamentary elections by casting himself as Israel's best peace candidate, one flexible enough to talk with the Arabs but sturdy enough to protect vital national interests.
Not that Mr.
Shamir has suddenly become a born-again dove.
His position, restated more times than an electronic calculator can register, is that if peace means giving back even one square inch of Israeli-held territories to the Palestinians and Arab countries, forget it.


Another Dow High: 3,264.98, Up 15.43
Blue-chip stocks rose modestly yesterday, again in busy trading, aided by the expiration of stock and index options and major market index futures.
While smaller stocks showed weakness, the Dow Jones industrial average clicked off yet another record, ending at 3,264.98, up 15.43 points for the day and 65.52 for the week.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was heavy, at 287.4 million shares traded, but down from 336.2 million on Thursday.
Gaining issues were ahead of losers by a margin of 922 to 831.


When a Reservation Doesn't Get You a Car
After a long flight, you walk up to the car rental counter at the airport with a confirmed reservation.
But that appears to make little difference, because the agent behind the counter tells you there are no cars available.
During the recent holiday travel period, some of the major car rental agencies overbooked reservations.
If your reservation is not honored, what are your options?
That depends on the rental company and whether you know its policy.


A Fugitive, the Police and the Media
Real life seemed to have turned into a bad movie here today as this quiet community was ruffled by an intensive manhunt for a transvestite convicted killer and escaped convict who slipped away on Thursday from the F.B.I. as a fellow escapee was captured.
All Thursday night and today, hundreds of officers -- followed by teams of reporters -- crossed and recrossed this area of Rockland County, knocking on the doors of frightened residents and shopkeepers.
They were looking for Frank Vandever, 37 years old, who terrified residents of Somers, Conn., by escaping from a maximum-security prison there on New Year's Eve.


CHRONICLE
Galvanizing the already lively scene in Palm Beach, Fla., the DUCHESS OF YORK and STEPHANIE POWERS are sharing the limelight at a round of social and charitable events this weekend.
The Duchess, popularly known as Fergie back home, arrived in Florida on Thursday with her father, Maj.
RONALD I. FERGUSON, who will head the British team at the Cartier International Polo Day tomorrow.


Corrections
A holiday schedule yesterday for this Monday's observance of Martin Luther King's birthday listed N.J.
Transit incorrectly.
All N.J.
Transit trains and most buses will be on regular weekday schedules; some buses will be on Saturday schedules or reduced schedules.


Dunbar Defeats St. Raymond's
Donta Bright scored 30 points and Michael Lloyd added 18 as Dunbar, the nation's top-ranked high school basketball team, defeated St.
Raymond's of the Bronx, 93-82, in the semifinals of the first Charm City Classic tournament.
Bright, a 6-foot-6-inch senior, grabbed 14 rebounds and blocked 2 shots as the unbeaten Poets improved to 15-0.
Dana Dingle scored 30 points for St.
Raymond's (12-3).


The Finger Points at City College
An official report from City Hall casts blame on nearly everyone connected with the celebrity basketball game last month at New York's City College that led to nine deaths: disorganized student sponsors, inattentive college officials, lazy police, even the unruly crowd itself.
So broad an indictment diffuses responsibility and blurs accountability.
There were clearly two main culprits: City College (and its parent, City University) and, to a lesser extent, the police.
Both are now obliged to review and revise their procedures and punish those responsible.


New Philip Morris Cigarette Emphasizes Less Nicotine
In the tobacco industry's latest marketing wrinkle, the Philip Morris Companies, the world's largest cigarette company, introduced a major cigarette brand yesterday with 90 percent less nicotine than standard brands.
Philip Morris's low-nicotine cigarette is an attempt to appeal to smokers who want a seemingly healthier cigarette, but with more taste than other brands making similar claims.
The industry's first such innovation, low-tar cigarettes, has now won a majority of sales.


A Feast Of Wit? Not Quite. Bile Flows.
It seemed like a good idea at the time.
Put Dennis Potter and Steven Bochco, Britain's and America's foremost television writers, on the same stage.
Then let one of their most ardent champions, the critic James Wolcott, fire away with questions.
The ensuing "cross-cultural dialogue," as the Museum of Television and Radio billed its seminar on Wednesday, would provide a feast of wit and imagination.
As it turned out, the bile flowed like champagne and the main dish was spleen.
Mr.
Wolcott, who writes the Mixed Media column for Vanity Fair, began gracefully with some introductory observations on the national differences between the work of Mr.
Potter, best known for two mini-series, "The Singing Detective" and "Pennies From Heaven," and Mr.
Bochco, the producer of "Hill Street Blues," "L.A. Law," "Civil Wars" and the ill-fated police musical "Cop Rock."


Sauers and Elkington Soar With 2 Eagles Each
Everyone knows you have to make bushels of birdies to have a chance to win the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic, but Gene Sauers and Steve Elkington flew to the top of the leader board after the third round today by making eagles.
Both Sauers and Elkington made eagle 3's on the par-5 6th and 11th holes at La Quinta Country Club in the third round.
Sauers shot an eight-under-par 64 that gave him a 54-hole total of 18-under-par 198, while Elkington shot a 66 that left him one shot back.


Review/Film; Scurrying Back in Time In Search of a Healthy Body
One of the few interesting notions in "Freejack" is the thought that body snatchers of the future will be forced backward in time.
In the year 2009, when most of this overlong and unsightly film takes place, mind transfers are available to the rich and ailing, but pollution has made healthy bodies hard to find.
So donors-to-be, like the brash young race-car driver Alex Furlong (Emilio Estevez), are rounded up from the past under the supervision of Vacendak (Mick Jagger), a bounty hunter in search of tender young flesh.
Mr.
Jagger, managing to combine a sneer and a monotone, and revealing only the occasional flash of humor, is fun to watch but lucky to have other employment.
Anthony Hopkins appears only briefly (in the thankless role of the mastermind who must explain the plot's machinations) and seems to be the only real actor in the cast.
Mr.
Estevez and Rene Russo, who were supposedly ardent lovers in 1991 and are dramatically reunited in 2009, never set off the slightest spark.
Amanda Plummer, as a gun-toting nun, delivers some unexpectedly lively lines and slugs one of the villains, but mostly seems to have wandered in from some other film.


Massachusetts Governor Seeks Tax Cuts
At a time when other governors are being forced by soaring deficits to make unpopular tax increases, Governor William F. Weld introduced a package of tax cut proposals today that would reduce personal and business taxes as part of an effort to reinvigorate the Massachusetts economy.
Mr.
Weld's proposals include lowering the personal income tax rate, cutting the capital gains levy and offering a series of investment credits to businesses that hire new employees, expand their plants or offer job training and child care.


I.R.S. Explains New Sponsorship Rules
The Internal Revenue Service yesterday outlined its guidelines for taxing the income that tax-exempt groups like college-bowl and golf-tournament organizers receive from corporate sponsors.
The guidelines were issued as a result of an I.R.S. ruling last year that organizations running the Cotton Bowl and the John Hancock Bowl had to pay taxes on their sponsorship cash because the money constituted advertising, an activity deemed unrelated to the business of the games.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Difference in Presidential and Campaign Trips Is Who Pays
What is the difference between a Presidential trip and a Bush campaign trip?
(Hint: Guess who pays for official trips.)


W. John Kenney Is Dead at 87; Was Marshall Plan Administrator
W.
John Kenney, a top official in the United States Navy during World War II and in the Marshall Plan program for postwar recovery overseas, died Thursday at his home in Washington.
He was 87 years old and died of pneumonia, his family said.


James Mark Talent Agent, 83
James Mark, a talent agent who was a prototype of the colorful agents celebrated in Woody Allen's film "Broadway Danny Rose," died yesterday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old.
He died of cancer, said his son, Laurence, a film producer in Los Angeles.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
AAI Corp., Hunt Valley, Md., a unit of United Industrial Corp., has acquired ACL Technologies Inc., Santa Ana, Calif., a unit of Scitech Corp. *
Citizens Gas Supply Corp., and National Fuel Resources Inc., a unit of National Fuel Gas Co., have formed Citizens National Gas Co.


Theodore Small, 52, an Innovator In Finding Jobs for Disadvantaged
Theodore D. Small, a pioneer in training and placement programs that found jobs for tens of thousands of disabled people, died on Monday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 52 years old. The cause of death apparently was heart failure, his family said.


INSIDE
A Slump in Production
The nation's industrial output sagged two-tenths of 1 percent in December, the third modest decline in a row.
This pushed production to its lowest level since June.
Page 37. 7 Killed in Blast in Ulster
A roadside bomb blew apart a van in rural Northern Ireland, killing seven men.
The toll in the blast was the province's highest since 1988.
Page 3.
Goodbye to 2 Army Divisions
As flags came down and a band played, the Third Armored and Eighth Infantry divisions ended their cold-war mission in Europe.
Page 3.
Escaped Killer Hunted
A quiet Rockland County town was turned upside down by a search for a murderer who escaped from a Connecticut prison.
Page 25.
Hertz Sued on Surcharge
New York City and State filed suit against the rental company for the charges it is levying against residents of four boroughs.
Page 27.
New Sphere of Influence
With the Cold War over, the number of former Soviet hockey players being embraced by N.H.L. teams is rising steadily.
Page 31.


Holiday on Monday
The birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK


Say What You Will: Not in My Newspaper
To the Editor:
Richard F. Hixson cites Louis D. Brandeis's concurring decision in Whitney v.
California (1927) in support of his argument that David M. Oshinsky and Michael Curtis of Rutgers University are wrong in recommending that college newspapers reject revisionist advertisements contending the Holocaust never occurred (letter, Dec. 30).


Newmark &amp; Lewis Stores to Close
At the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, Nev., last week, while other retailing executives roamed the floors searching for hot new gadgets, Ronald Fleisher, president of Newmark &amp; Lewis Inc., raced between meetings in a last-ditch effort to find a buyer for his struggling company.
None materialized.
And Mr.
Fleisher said yesterday that Newmark &amp; Lewis's remaining 26 stores would be closed.
That action makes the 68-year-old electronics chain the latest victim of the lethal retailing pox of overexpansion and anemic sales.


Classical Music in Review
Hakan Hagegard Baritone Carnegie Hall
Singers trade on a balance of attributes, the most crucial of which are vocal beauty, interpretive instinct and the kind of guiding intelligence that transforms the words and the music into a believable if transitory emotional world.
At his recital on Monday evening, Hakan Hagegard demonstrated the relative merits of those attributes.


Mystery Remains in Church Theft Case
For the Rev.
Kenneth G. Murphy of the St.
Aloysius Catholic parish in Great Neck, the assorted chalices, candleholders, cups and plates spread on a grimy evidence table today -- all stolen property that twinkled in solid gold and silver -- were bittersweet treasures.
Twenty separate pieces on the table had been taken in the dead of night on Nov. 14 from St.
Aloysius, one of 500 churches and synagogues in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and Massachusetts that the police say may have been burglarized over the last 10 years by a 45-year-old Manhattan church organist and piano teacher who is now in a Nassau County jail awaiting trail.


7 WORKERS KILLED BY BOMB IN ULSTER
A large bomb hidden in a roadside culvert blew apart a van carrying construction workers home tonight in rural County Tyrone, Northern Ireland, killing seven men instantly and wounding seven others, the police said.
The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility for the attack.
In a statement to news organizations, the I.R.A. said the bombing had been carried out by its County Tyrone Brigade.


5,000 Angry Military Men Gather With Complaints in the Kremlin
Unsure whom they serve or for how much longer, some 5,000 officers of the former Soviet military gathered in the Kremlin today to angrily demand that the armed forces remain intact and that troops not be abandoned.
The assembly in the Palace of Congresses was the first such officers' gathering since the Soviet era began.
All through the day and late into the evening, one officer after another rose from the sea of olive-drab uniforms dotted with black-and-gold naval dress to fume at hostile civilians in the Baltic states, murderous weapons raids by armed Georgian bands, a loyalty oath demanded by Ukraine, attempts by various republics to claim portions of the military, shortages of housing, low pay, and the dubious prospects for the future.


2 Athletes Are Upheld By Ruling In Bobsled
A dispute among athletes hoping to make the United States Olympic team as bobsledders ended yesterday when the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court of New York State overturned a lower-court ruling that had effectively blocked two of the athletes from competing.
The court's decision allows Willie Gault, the Los Angeles Raider wide receiver, and Greg Harrell, a former football player, to join 10 others in push competitions today and tomorrow in Altenberg, Germany.
The results will determine the eight positions on the Olympic team for sidemen and brakemen.


Birmingham Mayor Cited for Contempt
Mayor Richard Arrington Jr., the first black Mayor of a city that was at the heart of some of most violent civil rights demonstrations of the 1960's, has been embroiled for much of his three terms in office by Federal corruption investigations that his supporters say have racial overtones.
Today the Mayor was cited by a Federal judge for contempt of court for failing to honor a Federal grand jury subpoena for his appointment logs.
He now faces the prospect of having to run the city from a jail cell for some time if he does not produce the documents by Thursday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; DEMOCRATS VYING IN '92 RACE OFFER PAINLESS RECOVERY
Taking their cue from the successful scripts of Ronald Reagan and George Bush, the Democratic candidates for President this year offer voters mostly painless solutions to the nation's economic problems.
Day after day in their campaigns, the candidates say the economy is the pivotal issue, and they repeat a common theme about ending a recession caused by the Bush Administration and launching a period of sustained economic growth.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; PRESIDENT JOINS KING OBSERVANCE
President Bush came to the resting place of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. today, locked arms with his widow and sang "We Shall Overcome" in a trip clearly aimed at smoothing the edges of the Presidential image on race.
But before Mr.
Bush left the stage of the Martin Luther King Jr.
Center for Nonviolent Social Change, he heard an angry benediction from one of Dr.
King's daughters, the Rev.
Bernice King.
In her prayer, she said the problems of racism, poverty and violence that her father had fought against remained a blight on the land, although she did not link their persistence directly to Mr.
Bush.


Papandreou, Unfazed, Plans Return
For many Greeks, Andreas Papandreou might still be the nation's most artful demagogue and unpredictable power broker.
But after his acquittal on corruption charges early today, it is clear that the former Prime Minister is aiming to return to government.
Even at 4 o'clock this morning, just minutes after the high court's final verdict, he lost no time in declaring that he was vindicated and demanded elections immediately.
The late hour and his age -- he is now 72 -- appeared to have stemmed none of his past vigor.


16 Hours Ahead, McEnroe Turns Back Clock
For at least one brief shining moment, John McEnroe was once again John McEnroe.
Camelot for the tennis legend came tonight on the Australian Open's center court, where he produced sheer magic to outclass the defending champion, Boris Becker, 6-4, 6-3, 7-5, in a third-round match.
McEnroe was exuberant over the result; he pumped his fists in the air and grinned proudly as the crowd cheered wildly.


U.S. Output Down 0.2% Last Month
Industrial output sagged two-tenths of 1 percent in December, the third modest decline in a row, the Federal Reserve reported today.
This pushed production at the nation's factories, mines and utilities to the lowest point since June, when it appeared that the industrial sector -- about 30 percent of the overall economy -- had begun to lead the economy out of recession.


Review/Dance; In Jodhpurs, He and She, She a Scold, a Martinet He
Sally Silvers's choreography is dominated by an antic streak and a lot of it does not go a long way.
In theory, choreographers should do whatever they please.
As artists, they should please only themselves.
Unfortunately, audiences have a way of voting with their feet and a good part of the house was not around after intermission on Wednesday night to see the better half of the Sally Silvers and Dancers program in the Altogether Different series.


Ex-Soviet, Ex-Oddity
In the old days, under the old ways, this winter would have been orderly and predictable for Sergei Fedorov and Aleksandr Mogilny.
In the red uniforms of the hockey team of the Soviet Union, they would have played in France next month in the Olympic Winter Games, defending the gold medal the U.S.S.R. won in 1988.
Afterward, they would have returned home, not to be seen again in the West until the next major international tournament.
But so much has changed since the last Olympics.
Today, as a team representing the Commonwealth of Independent States prepares for the Winter Games, Fedorov and Mogilny will be in Philadelphia, appearing in the National Hockey League All-Star Game, the first players from the former Soviet Union so honored in the world's best professional hockey league.


F.D.A. Panel Supports Cancer Drug by Cetus
After more than a year's delay, an advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration unanimously recommended today that interleukin-2, the Cetus Corporation's flagship drug, be approved for use.
Cetus, one of the earliest biotech companies, was acquired by the Chiron Corporation last year.


Review/Music; Summoning Up Ghostly Images, in the Manner of Haiku
In describing the composition "Shadows": Four Dirge-Nocturnes for Orchestra by Claude Baker, which received its New York premiere in Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday night, I risk critical cliche.
For the work consists of impressionistic evocations of ghostly images, huge orchestral exclamations and misty quotations of music suggesting nostalgia or loss.
This musical style, combining exotic sound effects, tonal cadences and recollected melodies, may now be the most dominant one of our time.
It can be extraordinarily effective (as in some of David del Tredici's or Alfred Schnittke's music) or almost formulaic in impact, as Mr.
Baker's work seemed in this performance by the New York Philharmonic conducted by Leonard Slatkin.
"Shadows" (1990) is, in the composer's words, "nonverbal commentary on four haiku texts of macabre imagery." The music is meant to illustrate the images, which in these cases are of moonlight, grave mounds, autumn winds and bitter tears, and amplify them with additional associations.
The movements are also meant to suggest haiku style in their structure.


Bronx Man Held in Deaths of 4 in Mott Haven Shooting
A 21-year-old Bronx man whom the police describe as an enforcer for a drug gang was arrested and charged yesterday in a shooting spree last month that left four people dead and one critically wounded.
The shooting, in which gunmen sprayed a street in Mott Haven with at least 60 rounds from 9-millimeter semiautomatic weapons, was a result of a rivalry between two drug outfits, the police said yesterday.
But some of the wounded were bystanders struck by stray shots, officers said.


Undeserving 'Grandfathers'
It's shameful enough that members of Congress are allowed to fill huge campaign war chests with contributions from special interests.
But the House compounds that shame.
A grandfather clause will allow senior members retiring this year to transfer these funds to their personal bank accounts.
When Congress outlawed personal use of surplus campaign funds in 1979, the House added small print exempting the incumbents who approved the reform -- that is, members elected before 1980.
The House repealed that loophole in a new ethics bill 10 years later.
True to form, however, it created
another
grandfather clause benefiting members who retire or lose an election by January 1993.


Muslim Protesters in Turkey Protest in Support of Algerians


Philharmonic to Play During Talks
The latest extension of the New York Philharmonic's contract with its musicians expired yesterday, but spokeswomen for both management and the players' union, the American Federation of Musicians, Local 802, said the musicians would continue to perform while the discussions continued.
The Philharmonic's last three-year contract with its players expired on Sept. 20, and the musicians agreed then to continue performing during the negotiations.
On Oct. 30, the players authorized their negotiating committee to call a strike if they felt that progress was not being made.
Since then, there have been several contract extensions.


Patents; Fingerprinting To Deter Fraud
Hoping to give companies a way to deter fraud, an inventor in Springfield, Ill., has patented a "fingerprint mirror" that can obtain and preserve a person's fingerprint without the need for any messy inks and powders.
Invented by David C. Reardon, an electrical engineer, the mirror looks like a patch of highly reflective adhesive tape, with a transparent plastic cover, that can be easily attached to a document.
Mr.
Reardon said his idea was that a car rental company, for example, could take a customer's fingerprint and have it available if the car disappeared.
It might also be attached to traveler's checks, employment applications and other documents.


CHRONICLE
A lot of literati showed up for a party on Thursday night in honor of the New Press, the latest publishing venture of ANDRE SCHIFFRIN.
Mr.
Schiffrin, former managing director and editor in chief of Random House's Pantheon division, said the goal of the New Press is to publish books "rejected by the larger houses as risky or insufficiently profitable."
The celebration in the Trustee's Room of the New York Public Library grouped more than 200 people from the literary world, including Studs Terkel, Calvin Trillin, Barry Commoner, Barbara Ehrenreich, Peter Mayer, Robert Bernstein, Victor Navasky and Gordon Lish.


Marion M. S. Isaacs, 83, Backer Of Scranton Community Projects
Marion Margery Scranton Isaacs, who was long active in Pennsylvania civic affairs and Republican politics, died on Thursday at the Scranton family home in Hobe Sound, Fla.
She was 83 years old and lived in Dalton, Pa.
Her family said she had a stroke on Dec. 25 and never recovered.


BUSNIESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. said it lost $1.38 billion in the quarter, resulting in its first yearly deficit ever.
And revenues were off 6.1 percent for the year, the first time in 45 years that growth had faltered.
Calling the year disappointing, the company blamed a declining world economy, increased competition and the difficulties associated with introducing new product lines.  [ Page 37. ]


Building Leg Muscles, Side to Side
A speed skater derives power from strong leg muscles that propel the athlete forward in sweeping strokes.
A company in Gresham, Ore., is now selling a fitness device inspired by Olympic-caliber speed skaters.
The product, called the Kneedspeed, was designed three years ago by Jeff Markland, a former football player with the Miami Dolphins.
Mr.
Markland injured his knee during a game in 1988, and was looking for ways to rehabilitate the weakened joint.
He heard about a homemade training board used by Eric Heiden, the 1980 Olympic gold medal speed skater, and decided to build one for himself.


U.S. Sues Over Dismissal for Accent
Citing a rarely used Federal law, the Bush Administration has for the first time charged a company with discriminating against an employee because he speaks English with an accent.
The suit, filed today by the Equal Employment Opportunities Commission in Federal District Court in Los Angeles, charged that Eiki International Inc. of Laguna Niguel violated the civil rights of an Indian-born employee when it dismissed him because of the way he spoke English.


The Making of a Totem Pole


Beliefs
Rabbi Arthur Schneier might be called the James A. Baker 3d of religious freedom.
But Rabbi Schneier's tireless shuttling to foreign capitals to pry concessions from reluctant governments began long before Mr.
Baker became Secretary of State
Rabbi Schneier, born in Vienna, has been promoting religious liberty around the world since 1965 through the Appeal of Conscience Foundation, which he founded.
Like many other people, Rabbi Schneier, senior rabbi of Manhattan's Park East Synagogue, fears that the freedom of belief newly won in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union will only be a pause between persecutions, this time not of all religious beliefs by the government but of minority faiths by dominant ones.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 27 about a neighbors' feud that led to a murder in Machiasport, Me., misstated a detail in the background of Richard Uffelman, who served briefly as the town's police officer in 1978 and then, in 1989, killed two of his neighbors.
It was not Robert Kord, a former first selectman, who hired Mr.
Uffelman for the police job, but Mr.
Kord's predecessor.


Canwest Global Commun reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Some Hit It Far but Few Have Bradley's Staying Power
Unless it eventually wants its Hall of Fame to be better known as the Dead Players Society, the L.P.G.A. should stop requiring that inductees have at least 30 career victories.
But in the case of Pat Bradley, who was officially inducted as only the 12th member of that ultraselect club at a gala ceremony in Boston last night, hard-to-attain hard numbers are the cleanest evidence of one of the greatest, and most overlooked, careers in the history of women's golf.


Thorn Apple Valley reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 13


Keeping the Burning Fireplace Smokeless
FIXING a smoky fireplace is usually not too difficult.
Arrangement of the logs and how they are tended are often responsible.
Always arrange the logs on andirons or on a raised grate set as far back into the fireplace as possible.
Raising the logs lets air to enter from underneath, enhancing combustion.
Raising the logs also raises the height of the flames, so that smoke is less likely to waft forward before being channeled upward by the fireplace's overhanging upper edge, the chimney breast.


Aurora Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Harris Bankcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Dance; Works by a Trio of Choreographers
Live music, spoken texts and sculptural props adorned the ambitious dance program that Laura Pettibone, Susan Cherniak and Phyllis Rose presented Friday night at the Evolving Arts Theater in Lower Manhattan.
The trappings were welcome, but it was the skill -- or lack of it -- with which the choreographers handled content that determined the strengths and weaknesses of their works.
Ms.
Rose's "Oh Anita," the evening's most unusual offering, was not really a dance but rather a choreographed play with a text derived from the Senate confirmation hearings of Judge Clarence Thomas.
Tony Palmieri was sometimes needlessly smirky as a senator and Tanya Cummingham and Ms.
Rose occasionally overplayed their roles as spectators.


Bank of South Carolina reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Metropolitan Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Donnelly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Bank South reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Melamine Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Citizens Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Greentree Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Wrapped Up Nice and Snug


Unifi Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Autodie Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


American List Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Miss Campbell Plans Wedding
Dr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Campbell of Haverford, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nancy MacLean Campbell, to William Cook Bussey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lynn M. Bussey of Bath, Me.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Campbell, 24 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and is the campaign coordinator in the development office of the Noble and Greenough School in Dedham, Mass., where she coaches lacrosse and field hockey.
Her father is the chairman of the radiology department at the Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.


The Historical Jesus
To the Editor:
Martin Goodman unfairly attacks John P. Meier's book "A Marginal Jew," which is certain to become a classic in the study of the historical Jesus.
Although he does not use the term "anti-Semitic," Mr.
Goodman in substance insinuates that that is what Father Meier's book is.
Father Meier's fault, apparently, is his assertion that Jesus was a marginal rather than a mainstream first-century Jew who antagonized not only the Romans but also significant elements of the Jewish power structure in Palestine.
That, however, seems to me to be an irrefutable conclusion; Jesus' clashes with Herodians, Pharisees and Sadducees are simply too deeply rooted in the traditions about Him to be wholesale creations of the early church.
As for the specific question of what role, if any, these groups played in Jesus' death, why doesn't Mr.
Goodman wait and see what Father Meier actually
says
about that subject in Volume Two?
Many Christian scholars have been guilty of an anti-Semitic bias in their depiction of the Jewish world out of which Jesus sprang.
John Meier is not one of them.
JOEL MARCUS Princeton, N.J.


The Lean Season
THE ARDENT RESOLVE TO EAT LEANER AND healthier in 1992 is already fading to a whimper.
Life is once again a meal-by-meal battle between nefarious fatty temptations and the best intentions.
Diet professionals have borrowed the term "seasonal affective disorder" for this annual cycle.
The first week of the year is boom time in the weight-loss industry; yet the first month of the year has one of the highest rates of diet failure.
Extreme resolutions have a way of drifting back to the middle.
Chefs at luxury spas also see a preponderance of grand resolutions in the weeks following the holidays.


After 10 Years, an All-New Montero
ACCORDING to conventional wisdom, the Japanese like to copy things American, but that is not always so.
They take good ideas where they find them, and this time the nice notion comes from England.
The vehicle in question is Mitsubishi's Montero, a fancy sport-utility wagon that looks like nothing so much as the British Range Rover and that carries the upscale effort to nearly the same extreme.


Getting Blacks and Whites Together Under One Cultural Roof
THE yearly spotlight on the achievements of black Americans will shine in the county tomorrow, the official observance of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday, and will beam throughout what the county has designated as African-American History Month next month.
As in past years, the county's cultural calendar is filled with lectures, films and exhibitions planned by public and private organizations to pay tribute to the two national celebrations.
But who in the county will attend these events?
Will black and white people share equally in their American heritage or will audiences be mostly black, as they have been in the past?


Home Federal Savings (Ind.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Will Jay Property Case Ever Come to an End?
I am concerned about the failure of Westchester County officials to bring the case of the Jay property in Rye to a close  [ "County May Give Up State Grant for Jay Property," Dec. 22 ] .
The full parcel of property adjacent to the Marshlands Conservancy must be saved if the marshland is to remain a healthy wetland area.
The fact that it has taken over 10 years to accomplish this is troubling.
Any development of land near the Marshlands Conservancy, the only viable marshland on Long Island Sound between New York City and Westport, Conn., would be detrimental to the natural habitat and would rob the Sound of a natural pollution filter.
Failure to preserve the Jay mansion would be a loss of New York's heritage, as John Jay was a founding father of our nation and a native New Yorker.


Town Hall Really a Scar?
A perhaps casual comment in an article would not normally call for a response.
But there can be an exception.
I was sorry to see Philip Johnson's citation of the Salisbury Town Hall, designed by Kliment &amp; Halsband (Dec. 8).
Despite what Philip Johnson said, I know of no one else who thinks that it fits into the town.
It is almost the only scar in the otherwise lovely village.
Having known him in years past, I assume that he had not actually seen it.
As a Salisbury resident, I know that, without exception, the town's residents loathe the building.
I have heard not one favorable comment on it.
It is the worst building of its kind that I have seen in over 40 years as an architect.
It is overbearing and awkward, if not ugly, in appearance.
It lacks either grace or power.
And, it functions very poorly.


Gen. Vernon E. Megee, 91, Dies; Was Pioneer in Combat Aviation
Vernon E. Megee, a pioneer in combat aviation for the Marine Corps and the only person in that service to rise from private to the service's highest rank, four-star general, died Tuesday at the St.
Francis Gardens nursing home in Albuquerque, N.M.
General Megee, who was 91 years old, was a resident of Albuquerque the past three years and previously lived in Austin, Tex.
He died of pneumonia after a long illness, his family said.


California Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rooms in Prague
To the Editor: Before leaving on a recent trip to Prague, we had heard about private accommodations offered to tourists.
We had also read in the Times Travel section ("A Touch of Home on Dlouha Street," July 14) about apartments or rooms available through two agencies.
Hotel space was reportedly scarce.
At the main train station in Prague (Hlavni Nadrzi), we saw two "private accommodations" offices with computerized lists and rooms for $30 a night.
The government hotel service told us that at Pension Tesla at the end of one of the subway lines we could have an apartment with shared shower, bathroom and kitchen for $15 a night.


Jenny Jae Yoon to Marry David Lee
Dr. and Mrs.
Hong C. Yoon of Manlius, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jenny Jae Yoon, to David Lee, a son of Drs.
Bong S. and Mi Wha Lee of Haddonfield, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Yoon, 25 years old, is a first-year student at the Yale University School of Organization and Management.
She graduated cum laude from Amherst College.
Her father is an anesthesiologist at the Central New York Anesthesia Group in Syracuse.


UST Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Old Kent Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Goodfellow Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Keeping the Burning Fireplace Smokeless
FIXING a smoky fireplace is usually not too difficult.
Arrangement of the logs and how they are tended are often responsible.
Always arrange the logs on andirons or on a raised grate set as far back into the fireplace as possible.
Raising the logs lets air to enter from underneath, enhancing combustion.
Raising the logs also raises the height of the flames, so that smoke is less likely to waft forward before being channeled upward by the fireplace's overhanging upper edge, the chimney breast.


High-Rising Terminal Declarative, Eh?
To the Editor:
I was interested on a recent visit to New York to read comments in your pages about the tendency some (especially young) speakers of American English have to finish declarative statements with a rising intonation pattern (letters, Dec. 28).


The Historical Jesus
To the Editor:
John P. Meier's book "A Marginal Jew: Rethinking the Historical Jesus" makes a better case than Martin Goodman suggests (Dec. 22).
To deny Jesus was a marginal Jew, Mr.
Goodman has to maintain there was no Judaism, only Judaisms.
No doubt -- but no Judaism known to us maintains its founder superior to the Torah's teaching, as Jesus does in His own words ("You have heard it said . . . but I say. . . ."), and none declares, as does Jesus in His own words, that Israel should deny at least two of the Ten Commandments (the Sabbath, honor of parents).
Mr.
Goodman trivializes an important argument and ignores the plain sense of all four Gospels; his historical Jesus is a fabrication of mere apologetics.  (Rabbi) JACOB NEUSNER Tampa, Fla.


Leonard L. Osten, Advertising Executive, 87
Leonard L. Osten, an advertising salesman and executive for national magazines for more than five decades, died on Friday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 87 years old and was a resident of Great Neck.
He died of natural causes after a brief hospitalization, relatives said.


Johnson Worldwide Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Killum Suffers Stroke
Earnest Killum, an Oregon State player, suffered his second stroke in six months on Friday and remained in a semiconscious condition yesterday at Daniel Freeman Hospital in Inglewood, Calif.
A spokesman for the school, Steve Fenk, said that Killum, 20 years old, was undergoing tests and that there had been no change in his condition since he was stricken.


Walker Gets Off To Fastest Pushoff
Herschel Walker, the Minnesota Vikings running back, burst out of the block and blasted down the 50-meter indoor ice track to register the fastest time today in the bobsled pushoff competition by which a United States Olympic team is being selected.
The top four finishers today were guaranteed spots on either the two two-man or the two four-man Olympic squads to compete for the United States next month in Albertville, France.


Focus: Los Angeles; Despite the Doldrums, Downtown Bustles
WHILE construction of new office buildings approaches a standstill in this city's downtown, the center city remains abuzz with new public works and developer-government collaborations.
Among projects in contruction or planning are a subway system and stations, a concert hall, a convention center, museums and public amenities.
Planning for most of them has been going on for years and their arrival seems unrelated to the current softness in the real estate market.


Old Canada Investment reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


National Westminster Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reynolds Metals Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Carter-Wallace reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ferrofluidics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Frann E. Ziskin Marries on L.I.
Frann Ellen Ziskin, the daughter of Philip F. and Edis Ziskin of Floral Park, Queens, was married last evening to Steven Denis Greif, a son of Miriam Greif of East Falmouth, Mass., and the late Charles K. Greif.
Rabbi Haskell Bernat performed the ceremony at the Harrison Conference Center in Glen Cove, L.I.
Ms.
Ziskin, 40 years old, is keeping her name.
A cum laude graduate of the State University of New York at Buffalo, she is the president of the Weather Store and the secretary-treasurer of the American Umbrella Company, both in New York.
Her father is American Umbrella's president.
Her mother is an interior designer in New York.


2d Chance for Dempsey
He was released after the end of last season by the Milwaukee Brewers, perhaps because the Brewers couldn't remember just how valuable a catcher he could be.
Now 42-year-old RICK DEMPSEY is getting another chance.
He has been invited to spring training by the Baltimore Orioles as a non-roster player.
The Orioles do remember.
Dempsey, they recall, was the most valuable player when the Orioles beat Philadelphia in the 1983 World Series. (AP)


There's This Dentist. And He Writes Routines for Comedians. Seriously.
Hunched over a patient in his dental office and armed with a whirring drill, Dr.
Jeffrey L. Gurian might appear to be a character in a madcap comedy.
Indeed, Dr.
Gurian has the countenance of a deranged futon: hair disheveled and clothing askew.
He not only looks the part of a comedy turn, but Dr.
Gurian's alter ego actually writes gags.
Woody Allen and his entourage gave the cosmetic dentist his start as a serious writer of funny lines just after he finished dental school at Temple University in 1975.


Legal System Is Assailed on AIDS Crisis
Eleven years into an epidemic that has claimed more than 130,000 lives, AIDS-related cases fill the courts and governmental agencies of America, and in many instances, the courts seem guided more by stereotypes and misperceptions than by scientific evidence, a study released yesterday says.
The survey, the most comprehensive to date on legal actions arising out of the AIDS crisis, examined 372 of the more than 1,000 AIDS-related cases in courts and governmental agencies throughout the country.
These cases raise a panoply of legal issues, including transfusions of contaminated blood, discrimination against people with AIDS in education, employment, housing and insurance coverage to state regulation of bathhouses to the power of local governments and the military to quarantine those carrying the virus.


Meridian National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


As Silicone Issue Grows, Women Take Agony and Anger to Court
Brenda Toole, an Atlanta school librarian, was 31 years old when she got silicone implants to make her breasts larger, and for seven years she was happy with her implants.
But in 1988, hard, painful capsules of scar tissue formed around the implants.
Her doctor tried to break them up by what was then a widely used treatment: squeezing and twisting the hard masses.
But instead of breaking up the scar tissue, the pressure ruptured both implants, spilling silicone gel inside Mrs.
Toole's chest.
She later had surgery four times to remove lumps of silicone in her breasts and armpits, and now has immune system disorders that she attributes to the silicone.
A $5.4 Million Award
Mrs.
Toole sued the Baxter Healthcare Corporation, the successor to the implant manufacturer, the Heyer-Schulte Corporation, for marketing a defective product and for negligence.
Last July a Federal District Court jury in Dothan, Ala., awarded her $5.4 million, which the judge later reduced to $2.27 million.
The case is now on appeal.


LSB Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bonilla's Stance Makes Sense
To the Sports Editor:
When Bobby Bonilla, a 1981 graduate of Herbert Lehman High School, became the highest paid athlete in professional team sports by signing a $29 million contract with the Mets, he expressed his eagerness to give something back to his old neighborhood in the Bronx, but not to his alma mater ("Millions for Bobby Bonilla, but None for His Old School," The Times, Dec. 5).
Why?


Stew: Old-Fashioned Winter Warmth
ON a cold winter day, forget grilled fish with salsa.
Nothing beats an old-fashioned stew.
In England recently, on a particularly bone-chilling day, a friend made a beef stew with dumplings, a dish I hadn't had for years.
The dumplings were light and airy, the stew rich and dark, filled with potatoes, carrots and green beans along with chunks of meat.
The dumplings contained an ingredient more familiar in the British kitchen than in America: suet.


Tristate Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Salvaging Forced Bulbs
Q.
I've been forcing tulips, crocuses and daffodils indoors since early autumn.
After they flower, should I toss them out, save them for next year to force again or plant them outdoors? -- Brenda Greenberg, Queens.


BEST SELLERS: January 19, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
15
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
3
9
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the lives and fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
3
2
14
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
4
10
4
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
5
4
22
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
6
8
16
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II. (LP)
7
5
19
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate an accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force. (LP)
8
1
BLINDSIGHT, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $21.95.) A woman physician seeks to find the cause of a series of strange deaths of Manhattan yuppies.
9
7
45
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
10
9
5
THE JOLLY CHRISTMAS POSTMAN, written and illustrated by Janet and Allan Ahlberg. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) A mailman delivers letters to nursery rhyme and fairy tale characters.
11
12
12
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) A diplomat, returning to his native Gloucestershire, finds that his past life in horse racing may help save others.
12
11
7
WLT, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $21.95.) The birth, prosperity and decline of a down-home Minneapolis radio station.
13
13
12
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $22.50.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide. (LP)
14
14
94
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
15
15
10
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Macmillan, $21.95.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
3
14
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
2
5
7
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
3
1
18
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
4
4
7
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) An account of a championship season spent with Michael Jordan and the Bulls.
5
2
21
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces. (LP)
6
10
9
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
7
1
PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, by Mark Lane. (Thunder's Mouth/Publishers Group West, $22.95.) A lawyer's presentation of the case for believing that the C.I.A. was involved in the death of John F. Kennedy.
8
6
11
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel.
9
13
59
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
10
9
5
THE WORLD IS MY HOME, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) The autobiography of the popular novelist. (LP)
11
14
3
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning from the 19th-century American Indian.
12
16
10
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
13
12
31
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
14
11
12
PRAIRYERTH, by William Least Heat-Moon. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A close look at the people and mores of Chase County, Kansas.
15
8
22
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
16 *
7
11
CHILDHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Putnam, $14.95.) The entertainer reflects on his boyhood and kids today.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
7
THE BEST TREATMENT, by Isadore Rosenfeld. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Advice from a physician on a host of medical problems.
2
1
FRENCH FOR CATS, by Henry Beard and John Boswell. (Boswell/Villard, $9.95.) A cat's life, told in French, English and pictures.
3
2
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
4
7
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
5
4
45
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE TAX INSPECTOR, by Peter Carey. (Knopf, $21.) This disturbing Australian novel chronicles life in the Catchprice family, a clutch of loonies who enlarge our sympathies and our understanding as we see more of them and the world around them.
BENEVOLENCE AND BETRAYAL: Five Italian Jewish Families Under Fascism, by Alexander Stille. (Summit, $25.) Mr.
Stille's meticulous research and comprehensive understanding yield a fresh perception of the victims, casualties, heroes and villains, Jews and gentiles alike, who arose in that terrible time.
AN ACT OF TERROR, by Andre Brink. (Summit, $25.) A compulsively readable, tautly handled novel whose hero, a 13th-generation Afrikaner, becomes an antiapartheid terrorist.
SLEEPWALKER IN A FOG, by Tatyana Tolstaya. (Knopf, $19.) The short stories in this collection are truer to dreams than to life: excessive, urgent, extravagant, in a voice so personal it seems irrelevant that they were written under the Soviet regime.
JEFFERSON DAVIS: The Man and His Hour, by William C. Davis. (HarperCollins, $35.) Mr.
Davis (no relation) has written the best and fullest biography so far of a man who, despite his faults, was probably the best available leader for the doomed Confederacy.
COWBOYS ARE MY WEAKNESS, by Pam Houston. (Norton, $19.95.) Short stories, mostly first-person, told with verve and perfect pitch by women entangled with wild men in a cruel world.
MYSTIC CHORDS OF MEMORY: The Transformation of Tradition in American Culture, by Michael Kammen. (Knopf, $40.) Mr.
Kammen, a brilliant cultural historian, explores the creation of a usable American past (Margaret Mitchell's Southland, for instance) in the teeth (or behind the back) of the facts.


1992 Campaign: Players; In Brash Profession, Modest Organizer for Kerrey Stands Out
Perhaps there is something about living on take-out food and sleeping on an air mattress that keeps a man looking young.
Certainly, it has done the trick for Paul Johnson, a 40-year-old who might, on a good night, be carded.
For the better part of 20 years, Mr.
Johnson has been living the life of an itinerant campaign worker.
A native of Minnesota, he has labored on behalf of almost a dozen candidates, all of them challengers, in half a dozen states.
Now he is running Senator Bob Kerrey's New Hampshire campaign from a folding table in Manchester, while his furniture sits in storage in South Dakota.


Commerce Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


1992 Campaign: Republicans; Bush Campaign Scrambles to Put Forth a More Caring Candidate
Racing to overcome a late start and an unexpected primary challenge, the Bush re-election forces have sent the President forth in a burst of appearances intended to show that he cares about the home front and understands the suffering of the recession.
The strategy seems intended to reap maximum political advantage from the State of the Union Message on Jan. 28, when the President will lay out his program for easing the problems he now so openly acknowledges.
Indeed, some Republicans are already worrying that the White House has raised expectations for the State of the Union that it will be unable to meet.


Trips to Watch Newborn Seals
For decades the birth of thousands of harp seals in the Gulf of St.
Lawrence attracted hunters with clubs.
Now the process is greeted with tourists who take their cameras on Sealwatch tours to the gulf's Magdalen Islands in eastern Canada every March.
This year there are five trips on which travelers on one day or another -- depending on the weather -- will see mother harp seals and their fluffy whitecoat babies on the ice floes.
The tours originate in Halifax, Nova Scotia, and each is led by expert guides.
Dr.
Gary Miller, a University of New Mexico lecturer in biology, who will talk about his work in Antarctica and studies of North American wildlife, is the guest lecturer on all the tours.
The Sealwatch departures from Halifax on Feb. 29 and March 4 and 8 are six-day programs priced at $1,595 a person, in double occupancy.
A five-day trip leaves March 12 and costs $1,495; the last tour, departing March 15, which gives travelers the opportunity to visit the nurseries of both harp and hood seals, is for six days and costs $1,995.


Cincinnati Bell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


UJB Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


This Week: Seed Test
Before ordering a ton of new seeds, check the old ones for vitality.
Take a few from each packet, wrap them in a damp paper towel and place them in a plastic bag.
Check every few days to see what germinates; keep the towel damp.
Many seeds will be viable.
Raise the humidity around house plants by placing them on trays of pebbles filled with water.
Grouping plants helps retain moisture, but don't inhibit air circulation.


Stone &amp; Webster reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Italian Newcomer in a Familiar Locale
FOR years, discriminating diners trekked to the gourmet palace in Glen Cove known as Restaurant Zanghi, later called Nicola's.
Now Romantico Ristorante is there.
Diners who loved Nicola Zanghi's exciting, innovative food know that his is a tough act to follow.
Comparisons are as inevitable as they are unfair.
Romantico is no Nicola's, but nonetheless a splendid Italian restaurant that needs no apologies.


Corrections
An article on the Life Style page last Sunday about Mercedes Moore, a teacher and blues singer, rendered the name of another singer incorrectly.
She is Koko Taylor.


Southern Exposure


Parker-Hannifin Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Esthetic Pleasure of Trees in Winter
WINTER walks are wonderful to take.
Just being outdoors is a pleasure, and walking is one sure way to see the architecture of trees.
The leaves are gone, and their barks are exposed.
One of the trees that really stands out at this time of year is the sycamore.
It can be seen for quite some distance, because the glorious bark is never as clearly visible as it is now.
Without leaves the outline is truly spectacular.
The massive tree has exfoliating bark.
That is a fancy botanist's term to describe bark that flakes off in irregular patterns to reveal what is underneath.
This pattern is what makes the sycamore worth a second look.
Some may want to describe the massive trunk as having a jigsawlike pattern.
Others may say the tree's bark appears mottled.


Corrections
A map in The Times Magazine last Sunday with an article about a hydroelectric project in Quebec carried an erroneous credit.
The map was by Garnet Henderson.


CAMPUS LIFE: Rutgers; Student Groups Censor Students On 3 Campuses
Cries of censorship at colleges and universities are usually directed at administration officials, but recent incidents of students censoring students have set off debate at Rutgers University here.
Student governing associations at three of Rutgers's campuses in New Brunswick have been accused of violating First Amendment rights by stifling free speech in recent months.


Despite Protests, Panel Approves Razing of Central Park Band Shell
Over the protest of the donor's descendants and numerous neighbors and preservationists, the New York City Art Commission has authorized demolition of the 69-year-old Naumburg Bandshell in Central Park.
It will be torn down by spring, said Betsy F. Gotbaum, Commissioner of the Parks and Recreation Department, to coincide with the formal reopening of the Concert Ground, on which it sits, which has just been renovated in Victorian style.


Connecticut Has High Hopes For New Casino
Tourists in southeastern Connecticut usually head for Mystic Seaport or the Coast Guard Academy in New London, but starting next month they will also be able to gamble in a casino.
State tourism officials say the Foxwoods Casino at Ledyard on the Mashantucket Pequot Indian Reservation, seven miles from Mystic, may well prove to be the state's No. 1 attraction for 1992.
As of last week the opening date had not been set.
An official of the reservation said poker, blackjack, roulette, baccarat and craps would be available, although there would be no slot machines.
There will also be a Big 6 money wheel.
Reservation officials hope the casino will attract between 5,000 and 10,000 people a day.
The reservation has been conducting giant bingo sessions, with up to 2,000 people a game, for five years.
The official added that the casino would try to present itself as a family destination with entertainment.
More information: (800) 752-8946.


Anchor Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lidak Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Red Sox Hire Rice
JIM RICE is getting a second major league chance, but not as a player.
The 38-year-old former Boston outfielder has been hired as a roving minor league hitting instructor by the Red Sox organization. (AP)


Boston Mayor to Keep Embattled Police Head
With the appointment this week of William J. Bratton, the chief of the New York City transit police, as the No. 2 official in Boston's Police Department, Mayor Raymond L. Flynn has apparently found the capable manager who will allow him to disregard a special commission's recommendation that he replace the city's Police Commissioner, his boyhood friend.
Asked on Friday whether he planned to reappoint the Commissioner, Francis M. Roache, whose term expires in April, Mr.
Flynn said, "I intend to."


SAUDIS PRESS U.S. FOR HELP IN OUSTER OF IRAQ'S LEADER
Saudi Arabia is pressing the Bush Administration to organize a large covert action campaign in Iraq aimed at dividing Iraq's army and toppling Saddam Hussein, United States and allied officials say.
The Saudi initiative seeks an allied effort to supply arms and intelligence to Kurdish rebels in northern Iraq, Shiite Muslim fighters in the south and Sunni Muslim opposition forces in central Iraq.
The aim is to draw out and divide Mr.
Hussein's last Republican Guard divisions protecting his strongholds around Baghdad and subject them to allied air assaults.


Barry's Jewelers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


When Little Things Mean a Lot, It's Chekhov
Anton Chekhov's "Three Sisters" is a profoundly ridiculous play, and I mean that as a compliment.
His characters are bumblers and daydreamers, mired in a dull, provincial town that might as well be built on quicksand.
Their lives are foolish and aimless and amount to nothing.
If their emotions ran less deep, you could almost mistake them for those mismatched creatures in a Feydeau farce who are always slamming into closed doors or embarking on illicit affairs that end up under the bed, not on it.


Morality Is Key To Rose Issue
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson's comment that "there's nothing immoral about betting on your own team" is wrong.
Suppose Manager Pete Rose, having studied his opponent's weekend pitching rotation, decides not to place a bet on Friday night's game; he does decide to bet $50,000 on the Reds to win Saturday afternoon's game.


U.S. Cites Risks In Philippines
Americans face security risks in the Philippines, but short-term tourists and business visitors with no visible connection to the United States Government face substantially less risk than Government officials and military personnel, says a travel advisory from the State Department.
It reports that continuing dangers to residents with official connections will remain during the withdrawal of United States forces from the Subic Naval Base.
Travel to Northern and Southern Luzon should be avoided, the advisory adds, because of the presence of the New People's Army and armed bandits, and visiting some areas of the Visayas and Mindanao Islands is not advised because of crime and insurgency.
Visitors are urged to check with the American Embassy in Manila or the consulate in Cebu about conditions in areas they plan to visit.
The department also warns about mud flows that can inundate low-lying areas and wash away bridges.


Precision Castparts reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Sharpton and 200 Followers March Against Bias Crimes
Diana Paul, wrapped in a thin light blue trench coat and clutching her brown handbag, ran across Pelham Parkway yesterday afternoon to see what all the fuss was about.
In her 35 years of living in her Bronx neighborhood, she had never seen anything quite like this: 34 motorcycle police officers in the middle of the street, dozens of other officers climbing out of buses and a police helicopter hovering overhead.


DCX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Christmas Bird Count Lifts Hopes
AS the results of the 1991 Christmas Bird Count in Westchester are being tabulated, new sightings and several promising trends are being reported by birders and ornithologists.
Most notably, the bald eagle, not seen in the county since the 1960's, appears to be making a comeback, primarily the result of a State Department of Environmental Conservation effort to reintroduce the species.
Members of the Bronx-Westchester Christmas Bird Count team spotted a young bald eagle at the Edith G. Read Natural Park and Wildlife Sanctuary in Rye on Dec. 22, the first time the species had been counted in 40 years.


Rail Europe
To the Editor: In March we too had a problem with Rail Europe, and felt we should warn about trying to purchase French Rail tickets for the overnight train from Venice to Paris.
We were informed that we had to make our train reservations for the T-2 sleeper by telephone to White Plains.
After numerous attempts with the always-busy telephone lines, we contacted a travel agent with American Express to get reservations for early June.


Mexicans Come to Work, but Find Dead Ends
Bordered by factories and docks, the Magnolia Park neighborhood has long been a beacon for generations of Mexican immigrants seeking sturdy homes and steady wages.
Over time, most found jobs, assimilated and moved on to a better life.
But that is much less the case nowadays.
The neighborhood is as much a place to stay poor as it is to start poor.
Upward mobility among the 14 million people of Mexican descent in the United States -- the nation's fastest-growing major ethnic group -- is faltering, and on Magnolia Park's shady streets the signs of trouble are everywhere: high-school dropouts, teen-age mothers, families doubled and tripled up in bungalows, and day-laborers who gather at street corners hoping to sell their services.


Central Bancshares-South reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Colonial Bancgroup reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
INTREPID RESCUERS
WHEN major byways are made of water not asphalt, a different type of rescue squad is in order.
In East Hampton, the Dory Rescue Squad is a waterized version of the local volunteer ambulance crew.


Outboard Marine Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kelly Hughes To Be Married
Mr. and Mrs.
John Hughes of Millbrook, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kelly Ann Hughes to Gurdon Williams Hornor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
DeWitt Hornor of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Hughes, 27 years old, is an account manager at the Boston advertising agency of Lawner Reingold Britton &amp; Partners.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is the chairman of the First National Bank of North Tarrytown, N.Y.


Many Depressions Are Chemically Based
"Detecting Depression in the Elderly"  [ Dec. 8 ]  brought up the subject of using medication to treat depression, but only in passing.
Medium to major forms of depression are always biochemically based, and antidepressant medication has been proven to be an effective treatment in all populations, including the elderly.
Yet the stigma attached to any form of "mental illness" is so great that patients do not seek the help they need.
If someone required medication to treat diabetes, you can bet they would see a doctor and get it.


Johnson Controls reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jeffrey Burns to Wed Ms. Robertson
Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Robertson of Clifton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laura Ann Robertson, to Jeffrey William Burns, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William F. Burns of Pompton Plains, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Robertson, 24 years old, is in a teaching certification program at William Patterson College.
She graduated cum laude from Smith College.
Her father is the director of equal opportunity programs for the Prudential Insurance Company in Newark.
Her mother formerly taught at Clifton High School.


S O S: They're Scrapping Our Finest Liner
To the Editor:
America is about to let its last symbol of maritime supremacy get scrapped.
On Feb. 10, the S.S.
United States will be auctioned off to the highest bidder in Newport News, Va.
In all probability, she will be lost to a scrap yard from Taiwan if something isn't done soon.


Anne Crocker To Be a Bride
Dr.
Diane W. Crocker of Chicago has announced the engagement of her daughter Anne Haslell Crocker to Jeffrey Scott Hefter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence R. Hefter of Chevy Chase, Md.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Crocker, 25 years old, graduated from Brown University and is studying for an M.B.A. degree at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her mother is the chairwoman of the pathology department at Cook County Hospital in Chicago.


Atlantic Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Standard Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


MNC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Amfed reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Headliners; . . . Now You Don't
It was a fairly abrupt disappearance for a planet 10 times as massive as Earth.
But Dr.
Andrew G. Lyne, who reported in July that he had discovered the first planet outside this solar system, confessed last week that he had discovered something new: the body supposedly orbiting pulsar PSR 1829-10 was instead a figment of his miscalculation.
Dr.
Lyne and his colleagues at the University of Manchester in England study radio signals emanating from the spinning core of a collapsed star 30,000 light-years away.
They found fluctations every six months and assumed they were caused by the gravity of an orbiting planet.
But they had apparently failed to compensate for variations in Earth's orbit around the sun.
Once this was taken into account, Dr.
Lyne said, the "planet just evaporated." Other scientists said Dr.
Lyne retained his reputation as a careful researcher and, recalling past science scandals, praised the straightforward way he had corrected his work.


Dauphin Deposit Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


At Longwood Gallery, Selections Both Natural and Otherwise
EDGAR BUONAGURIO'S show is in the right space here at the Longwood Arts Gallery: a dazzling white room lighted by a window so large that on a sunny day visitors need dark glasses.
His display is titled "Selections: The Archeological Find Series," but in this setting it looks more like a harbinger of spring.
At a distance, the eight pieces on the walls pass for manhole covers made, unaccountably, of flower petals.
But in reality they are mandalas cut from thick plywood -- circles with edges smooth and serrated, an open- work star -- which are smoothly primed and painted.
Having applied his pigment in small puddles, side by side and one on top of another, Mr.
Buonagurio then takes an industrial sander and other more conventional tools to the surface so that the burnished results resemble inlay, marbling, even Islamic ornament seen through water.


Whitman Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Human Rights Office Grows in Influence
Patricia M. Derian, the first Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, has vivid memories of her early days in office.
She recalls that she was often resented, ridiculed or ignored, and certainly not taken very seriously.
"After I had been there awhile, I invited all the other assistant secretaries to a meeting so that I could tell them what it was that I was there to do," she recalls.
"It was one of those times when you're talking and people look away, extremely embarrassed at this naive display. They thought, this is going to be some little creampuff here."


The Silly Putty Story
To the Editor:
The full story of Silly Putty's origins ("Silly Putty, Now a Classic," All About/Silicone Products, Dec. 29) is one of the zaniest chapters in the history of the General Electric Research Laboratory, and offered some welcome relief from the feverish activity of World War II.
I was not a participant but I was privy to the details because of my work in the lab's pilot plant.


On the Street; A Sporty Way to Bundle Up
Variations on the parka and anorak are gaining favor with women who are wearing them both day and evening in the city.
Designers, anticipating a shift from traditional coat styling to sportswear-inspired outerwear, capturing today's nonchalant look..
The parkas are worn with skirts of any length and with trousers or leggings.
A number of women known for their fashion leadership have been seen wearing fur-lined quilted parkas from Fendi (above right and bottom left).


Miss Oravetz to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Oravetz of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Carrie Lynn Oravetz to Harold Eric Butler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold C. Butler of Sparta, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Oravetz, 24 years old, is an assistant vice president of International Strategy and Investment Inc., fixed-income money managers in New York.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
Mr.
Butler, 25, is a job supervisor with Naporano Iron and Metal Company, a metals reclamation firm in Newark.


High Above Garden, A Look at Neil Smith
WE are sitting together in a Madison Square Garden skybox, the general manager of the Rangers and I, but we might as well be watching different games.
I am trying to track the puck as it skids among white sweaters and blue sweaters, while Neil Smith winces and twists and cries, "Geeeez," at mis-skates I will never know about.


Commerce Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Currency; Fed Intervention Sparks Yen Rally
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.45
127.05
132.50
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5925
1.5850
1.4985
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1505
1.1546
1.1585
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7960
1.7885
1.9465
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$354.00
$356.25
$374.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Tense Encounter
The British interviewer David Frost likes to give the impression of relaxation when interrogating world leaders on television.
Yet in his most recent annual chat with President Bush, the key word was
tense
.
"Do you sometimes wish," Mr.
Frost wondered as if innocently, "that as a condition of the cease-fire you had asked for Saddam Hussein to be handed over?"


Keep 'Big Brother' Out of Newspaper Sales
To the Editor:
As someone with no satisfactory conservative alternative to The New York Times, I can sympathize with Stephen R. Barnett's frustration at the growing concentration of power in the newspaper industry ("A Conservative Look in Newsprint," Forum, Dec. 29).
Faced with rising costs, falling circulation and competition from other media, many newspapers are in financial trouble.
It's understandably tempting to look to the government to "do something" as Professor Barnett advocates.
But market forces cannot be permanently suppressed and it is counterproductive to attempt to hold them back.


Westinghouse Electric Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rowan Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Archer-Daniels-Midland reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gourmet Or Gourmand?
To the Editor:
I read with interest the article "Bob Ross, the Frugal Gourmet of Painting"  [ Dec. 22 ] .
As an arts educator, I am dismayed that anyone thinks of Mr.
Ross as either an artist or art teacher.
Making art is saying something, taking a risk and solving a problem.
Mr.
Ross does none of these.
He paints the same trite composition over and over.


Ann Harrisburg to Marry in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Harrisburg of Portland, Me., have announced the engagement of their daughter Ann Leslie Harrisburg to Dr.
Jeffrey Sable Oppenheim, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Justin S. Oppenheim of Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Harrisburg, 29 years old, is an institutional saleswoman in New York for the Delaware Bay Company, an investment banking concern.
She graduated from Bowdoin College and is a chartered financial analyst.
Her father is the president of the Bosal Foam and Fiber Company, a maker of foam rubber and polyester fiber in Limerick, Me.
Her mother, Saralee Harrisburg, is the president of Gail-Ann Fabrics, a store in Scarborough, Me.


Sheila Coelho and Michael E. Sohr Are Married
Sheila Coelho and Michael Edward Sohr, both analysts at the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association in New York, were married yesterday by the Rev.
Charles Sullivan at St.
Helena's Roman Catholic Church in Edison, N.J.
Mrs.
Sohr, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Connecticut.
Her father is the vice president of Sentra Securities in San Diego.
Her mother is a human resources officer at First Fidelity Bank in Newark.
Mr.
Sohr, 26, graduated from Johns Hopkins University and has an M.B.A. from New York University.
His father is a partner at Deloitte &amp; Touche in New York.


Sunday Outing; A Winter Retreat, Only 90 Miles From New York
From the tower at Sky Top, the highest point along the hiking trails in and around the Mohonk Preserve here, the 360-degree view is a spectacular introduction to the winter landscape of the Shawangunk Mountains and beyond.
On a clear day, visitors who climb up an interior stairway to the top of a 50-foot-high stone tower at Sky Top, which is 1,500 feet above sea level, can see six states -- New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Massachusetts and Vermont.
Below, visitors will see a network of trails that open up the rugged terrain of the Shawangunk range to hikers, horseback riders, bird watchers and cross-country skiers.


Transcending The Ordinary
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein misses the point entirely, using overanalysis and opaque logic, in his essay on John Corigliano's new opera, "The Ghosts of Versailles"  [ "At the Met, Ghosts Come to Applaud 'Ghosts,' " Jan. 5 ] .
Mr.
Corigliano's opera should cause us to remember what draws us to opera in the first place: to transcend the ordinary through a unique art form, as well as to be entertained by the best the lyric stage has to offer.


The Executive Computer; New Ways to 'Paste' a Photo Into Your Documents
Logitech Inc.'s new Fotoman camera is designed expressly to capture images for the personal computer, bypassing conventional film in favor of memory chip.
And using it is a snap.
While the quality of Fotoman's images leaves a lot to be desired, Fotoman is an interesting harbinger of the future of photography.
The digital Fotoman camera, which sells on average for under $600, is but one of several types of unconventional cameras that are emerging in the computer and video age.
The computer offers new ways to capture, store, manipulate and use photographs -- eliminating film processing and other production chores.


Karen Malakoff To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Malakoff of Woodmere, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Lynn Malakoff to Bret Ian Herman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Herman of Searingtown, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Malakoff, 25 years old, is an associate marketing manager at Random House in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a founding parter of the accounting firm of Malakoff, Wasserman &amp; Pecker in Garden City, L.I.


Jane Jackson Marries
Jane Lowe Jackson of Rowayton, Conn., the retired owner of the Jane Jackson Associates real-estate concern in Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Malcolm J. Edgerton Jr. of Stamford, Conn., a retired partner in the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.
The Rev.
Anne B. Kimball officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.
Mr.
Edgerton was a widower.


CLOSED BEACH TIED TO MAN ON BARGE
Because a New Jersey man has a back problem, a major New York City beach was shut down for part of last Labor Day weekend, law-enforcement authorities say.
The beach, at Jacob Riis Park on the Rockaway peninsula in Queens, was closed after 150 used hypodermic needles and empty drug bottles washed up.
It was the first major dumping of medical trash discovered in the metropolitan region's waters since the summer of 1988.
That year, such debris and other pollutants drove away vacationgoers on beaches from Montauk Point, L.I., to Cape May, N.J., and reduced income from tourists.


SCEcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Karen Greaves Wed in Darien
Karen Julie Greaves, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Clive W. Greaves of Walmer, Kent, England, was married yesterday to Philip Kelly Nuelle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank B. Nuelle of Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Frederick Bender officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien, Conn., assisted by the Rev.
Gregory LeStrange, a Roman Catholic priest and a cousin of the bridegroom.
Mrs.
Nuelle, 29 years old, is a marketing specialist at MCI International Inc. in Rye Brook, N.Y.
She graduated from Union College.
Her father is the secretary of the Royal Cinque Ports Golf Club in Deal, Kent.


Slaughter of Wild Birds Should Be Discouraged
A longstanding member of the National Audubon Society, I was saddened and stunned by the article entitled "Matching Wits With Ducks and Geese," which appeared Dec. 29.
In this age of "environmental enlightenment" it seems contradictory, indeed, that such questionable practices as the wholesale slaughter of wild birds continue to be encouraged with impunity despite the drastic decline in the numbers of existing waterfowl in recent years.
The most chilling aspect of your informative commentary is the photograph of a child cheerfully clasping a gun.
Is this a preview of our future "age of enlightenment" or will the year 2000 usher in yet another century of indifference to the survival of wildlife?
LINN L. SOLOMON Putnam Valley


By Any Name, Lviv Has Hard Times
The people of this handsome but weary 700-year-old city, once the heart of western Ukrainian culture, seem too busy in the first weeks of national independence to enjoy the less tangible benefits of freedom from Russia.
They are busy, like the rest of the country, trying to find food at reasonable prices, worrying if their salaries will go up, wondering if independence might mean a bigger apartment.
And they wonder what the Government of President Leonid M. Kravchuk, 300 miles to the east in Kiev, is going to do for them.


In the Mafia, Too, a Decline in Standards
ON the surface, the struggle for dominance between two factions of the Colombo crime family that has claimed the lives of five gangsters and an innocent bystander in Brooklyn in the last two months flaunts the power and ruthlessness of the Mafia in the New York region.
But many organized-crime experts believe the gunfire signals the decay, not the strength, of the New York City area's five Mafia families.
The Colombo family civil war, the experts maintain, is solid evidence of a widespread phenomenon: the breakdown of autocratic leadership and dissension in the lower ranks.


Americans Are Daring To Dream on the Slopes
The little upstate New York community of Lake Placid has always been a place for American optimism.
After all, it's where the hockey team captured the 1980 gold medal and draped itself in the flag.
But rarely have this country's followers -- yes, they're out there -- of the Nordic combined and ski-jumping events been so optimistic as they are about the Olympic teams that will be selected on the man-made snow at Lake Placid starting Wednesday.
These young Americans might not be good enough to win.
No American has ever taken a medal in the Nordic combined (ski-jumping coupled with cross-country skiing), and it has been 68 years since an American won this country's one and only medal -- a bronze -- in ski jumping.
But they are good enough to inspire dreams.


POSTINGS: Teeing Off on Randalls Island; Mostly for Golfers
Construction will begin this spring on a 25-acre private sports complex on Randalls Island that will include a golf driving range, two 18-hole, illuminated miniature golf courses, a batting-cage complex with 18 batting stations and a clubhouse.
The $2.5 million project, which is being financed by the American Golf Corporation of Santa Monica, Calif., is scheduled to open in the spring of next year on land leased from the Department of Parks.
The company will pay the city a minimum of $500,000 a year as part of the lease agreement.


CRIME
Part police procedural, part Big Boys' Adventure Book, THE BLACK ECHO (Little, Brown, $19.95), a first novel by Michael Connelly, a Los Angeles Times reporter, is one of those books you read with your knuckles -- just hanging on until it's over.
The story burrows into dangerous foreign territory for a procedural -- the Vietnam background alone yields a tortuous subplot about war profiteering -- but the force of the narrative keeps shooting it around these tricky bends.
Even at their most implausible moments, Mr.
Connelly's claustrophobic scenes of robberies and manhunts in airless underground chambers are good and thrilling.


Judith Germeroth, a Teacher, Is to Marry in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Germeroth of Nesconset, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Judith Anne Germeroth to Philip John Conner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Conner of Amherst, N.Y.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Germeroth, 25 years old, is a special-education teacher at the Niagara Street School in Niagara Falls, N.Y.
She graduated from the State University College of New York at Geneseo, as did her fiance.
Mr.
Conner, 26, is a landscaper.


The Genius of Jaisalmer
DESERTS and their mirages have long inspired poets: the pitiless sun reflected by the burning sand, the golden city shimmering on a hill are compelling images, as are the long lines of swaying camels.
Occasionally, however, the fantasy proves to be real: that is the case of Jaisalmer, once a major stop for the caravans that crossed the Indian state of Rajasthan, and now a magically beautiful survivor of the past.
Even the approach to Jaisalmer takes the traveler into a fairy-tale world: hire a car and driver at Jodhpur, and you will find yourself crossing a semi-desert of gently rolling tawny hills inhabited by troops of camels, gatherings of deer and large congregations of free-roaming peacocks.
Then, about two-thirds of the way, the sand takes over.
For a while, there is nothing much to see except the changing light; and then, in the distance, crowning a hill, a silhouette appears.


Amy Schulman Is to Be Married
Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Schulman of Harrison, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amy Elizabeth Schulman, to David Lawrence Nagler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stewart Nagler of Great Neck, L.I.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Schulman, 24 years old, graduated from Johns Hopkins University and is a law student at Yeshiva University.
Her father, a lawyer, owns an accounting business in New York.
Her mother, Loretta Schulman, teaches in the public school system in Rye, N.Y.


Topics of The Times; Mother Nature vs. Hollywood
On the street at the southeast corner of New York City's Central Park Thursday morning, a sturdy red fire engine from Windsor, Vt., was noisily pumping water from a city hydrant into a hose that snaked into the park.
At the nozzle end, beside the duck pond, it sprayed the trees and paths with mist, making snow for a scene in Hollywood's "Home Alone II." Another hose, high on a crane, sprayed nearby.
It was all very pretty -- and unnatural.


Calnetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Englewood Considers A Longer School Year
WHILE most discussion about a longer school day and year remains in the abstract, Englewood schools are on their way to making the concept a reality.
This month the district convened a committee of community and school representatives to investigate whether to extend the school year to a minimum of 200 days.
As in most school districts in New Jersey, Englewood's public schools are currently in session 180 days.
The proposal would also lengthen the school day to at least seven hours from six and a quarter hours.


An Artist Infuses Niches and Walls With Light and Life
MARINA RASINI loves to bring the outdoors inside.
Her trompe l'oeil lemon trees bear ripe fruit in foyers, and her porpoises leap exuberantly on screens.
And always, there is sunlight.
"I try to achieve light," said the 36-year-old artist as she sipped tea in the living room of her home in Darien.
Drawing on the Mediterranean light of her native Italy, Mrs.
Rasini's landscapes bask in the sun.
She is frequently called to paint Old World-style scenes in dark or small entrance halls.
"Lemon trees I use a lot," she said.
"They are happy, very colorful and nice. I love the big pots of clay."


Mutual Funds; Closed-End Gains for 1991
As a group, closed-end stock funds rocketed in 1991, gaining an average of 41 percent for the year, compared with a rise of 30.5 percent in Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index.
Prices for closed-end funds, which trade on exchanges like common stock, are set by supply and demand so fund shares can trade at a premium or discount to the value of the securities in their portfolios.
Their 1991 performance showed how the leverage built into closed-end funds works: because the stock market was so strong, the shares held by the funds rose.
And because the funds did well, investors clamored for them, pushing up prices of the closed-end-fund shares themselves, said Thomas J. Herzfeld, a Miami-based investment adviser.


Mr. Bush's Momentum for Peace
President Bush, who needs a lift, deserves high praise for skillful promotion and deft nurturing of the Arab-Israeli peace talks.
For the first time in 43 years, old adversaries have actually engaged in direct negotiations -- and what appears to be falling is not the heavens but an Israeli Government whose divisions have been an obstacle to peace.
For all the gloomy day-to-day tidings about deadlocked talks, political rows in Jerusalem and clashes between Palestinians and Israeli settlers, the underlying news may be hopeful indeed.


Anne Swinton Plans Wedding
Dr. and Mrs.
Neil W. Swinton Jr. of Newton, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Bradley Swinton to Rudy Lamont Ruggles 3d, a son of Rudy L. Ruggles Jr. of Ridgefield, Conn., and the late Nancy O. Meeker.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Swinton, 25 years old, graduated from Princeton University and until recently taught at the Obirin High School in Machida, Japan.
Her father, a cardiologist, is the assistant chief of the medical division of the Lahey Clinic in Burlington, Mass.
Her mother, Elizabeth de Sabato Swinton, is the curator of Asian art at the Worcester (Mass.) Art Museum.


Sunday Menu; A Hearty One-Dish Dinner
Rather than turning up one's nose at all things frozen, it is more profitable to pick and choose judiciously.
There are three frozen vegetables worth keeping in the freezer: corn niblets, peas and lima beans.
With that in mind, a trip to the store for this meal would entail only the purchase of some low-fat sausages, like those made by Bruce Aidells, and a few mushrooms.
The Aidells sausages are sold at many fancy-food markets.


CORRECTION
The Recent Sales column on Jan. 5 in copies distributed in New York City and New Jersey misstated the location and price of a Pound Ridge, N.Y., house.
The house is at 99 Rolling Meadow Lane; it was sold for $300,000.


The Man Who Dreamed of Fairyland
How fine it would be if one were able to wander the Irish countryside accompanied by an erudite friend capable of spouting precisely appropriate lines by William Butler Yeats at the proper moments.
In Sligo, in the shadows of Ben Bulben, or in Galway, at Coole Park, the words of the man who dreamed of Faeryland still echo.
W.
B.
YEATS: Images of Ireland (Macmillan, $35) captures well the Ireland that Yeats knew and loved and wrote about, "where all outward things were the image of an inward life." Alain Le Garsmeur's reserved yet knowing photographs, in both color and black and white, are untainted by any nostalgic glow.
They are accompanied by the scholar Bernard McCabe's useful and informative chronology and introductory essay, and paired with exceedingly well-chosen extracts from Yeats's poetry, memoirs, essays and plays.
The photographs illuminate the text, while the text adds depth and meaning to the pictures.
This elegant volume makes accessible the subtle passions and simplicities of the mental and physical Irish landscapes.


At Home With a Zebra Table And a Skeleton Chair
William McCartyCooper used two kinds of period furnishings in the interiors he designed -- conservative (for his clients) and eccentric (for himself).
Among the exotic objects in his Los Angeles home were chairs carved in the shape of an elephant and a human skeleton, plus a table with stuffed zebra legs.
On Saturday, these witty, some might say weird, items will be auctioned, along with 300 other furnishings from the McCarty-Cooper estate, at Christie's in New York in a sale estimated to bring as much as $3 million.


Eagle Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Consolidated HCI reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Denise Davis Weds
Denise Colleen Davis, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George M. Davis of South Bend, Ind., was married yesterday to Paul Joseph Patus, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rudolf Patus of South Bend.
The Rev.
Thomas Shoemaker officiated at the Roman Catholic Cathedral of St.
Matthew in South Bend.
Ms.
Davis, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Notre Dame and its law school.
She is an associate at the New York law firm of Kelley Drye &amp; Warren.
Mr.
Patus, 28, is an accounts manager at Instant Auto Finance in South Bend.


In Peril


Portsmouth Bank Shares Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Infrasonics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Editors' Note
A review of "Seize the Moment," by Richard Nixon, on page 3 of The Times Book Review today lists Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia in some copies among Presidential candidates who might profit by reading Mr.
Nixon's book.
On Jan. 8, after the section had gone to press, Mr.
Wilder withdrew as a candidate.


Some Comic Anarchy From Joe Orton
"YOU can't be rational in an irrational world. It's not rational." Such a blast of irrefutable logic could have sprung up in the wonderland of Lewis Carroll.
But what about an exchange like this?
"We must tell the truth!" "That's a thoroughly defeatist attitude." Is this not stylistically worthy of Oscar Wilde?
How about the observation that "the high reaches of the civil service are recruited entirely from corpses or madmen"?


1992 Campaign: Political Memo; Using Ads to Cast Star of White House Series
Thanks to the Presidential advertising campaigns that began this week, television viewers here have been learning day and night about some tough yet compassionate men who can swim the butterfly, shake hands with construction workers, defend a hockey net and still find time to personally provide health care and a job to everyone in America, including the middle class.
Faced with such frequent messages from such caring individuals, many citizens here have done their best to forget the entire experience.
It is still easy to find serious television viewers who cannot recall the name of a single Democratic candidate.
Some people even claim they have not seen any of the advertisements.


Signs of Hope For a Cultural City In Fiscal Distress
Yes, New York is in trouble.
Yes, the city's spirit is down in the dumps.
And yes, it's getting almost tiresome to hear everyone point to the city's cultural richness as one of the very few reasons to have any hope about New York's future.
After all, since there's no money, the cultural institutions that make New York what it is can hardly be getting any better, right?
By now it's a commonplace to observe that some museums and theater companies are struggling just to pay the electric bill.
True enough.
But somehow in this time of recession, three of the city's greatest cultural institutions -- the Brooklyn Museum, Lincoln Center and Carnegie Hall -- have managed to expand their reach and their range with superb new construction that enriches the city considerably.
All three projects represent skillful mergings of private philanthropy and public funds, and if the seeds for them were sown in the prosperous 80's, the benefits are ours to reap in the troubled 90's.


Headliners; In Limbo
"Who am I?" the book begins.
"A name on a waiting list. A Muslim by heredity. If I were born in an atheist mold, I would have been one." For those and other sentiments offensive to Islamic fundamentalists in "The Distance in a Man's Mind," Alla Hamed, an Egyptian government clerk who writes novels in his spare time, finds himself in a frightening limbo these days.
Last month a judge found the book to be "a threat to national unity and social peace" and sentenced the author, along with the book's publisher and distributor, to eight years in prison.
International writers' organizations are protesting the sentence, which is being appealed to the Prime Minister's office.
Meanwhile, Mr.
Hamed has stopped going to work because his colleagues ostracize him and has left his apartment because of death threats.
"I never thought it would result in this," he said.
"I thought maybe it would be banned, but not see us all go to prison."


Frosty Aqueduct Draws 11,988 'Franchise Players'
On the frostiest weekend of the winter, 60 horses ran in 9 races without complaining yesterday at Aqueduct while their riders pulled on thicker gloves, woolen headbands and longsleeved cotton undershirts and said, in effect, the show must go on.
And the show did go on before an audience of 11,988, with the temperature struggling to stay in the 20's while the whipping wind made it seem more like 6 below.
Most of the stars of the business, horses and trainers and jockeys alike, were doing their January thing at Gulfstream Park in Florida or at Santa Anita in California, warming up for the main events of the racing year.
But back in arctic New York, the rest of the cast was still staging nine races a day, six days a week.


Hoya Guard Drops Out
Sophomore guard CHARLES HARRISON, Georgetown's second-leading scorer this season, has dropped out of school, Coach JOHN THOMPSON said yesterday.
"Charlie has decided that attending a junior college would permit him to step away from basketball and enable him to strengthen his g.p.a.," Thompson said, referring to the player's grade point average.
"Charles and I will make a decision at a later date as to whether he will return to Georgetown."


1992 Campaign: Democrats; Kerrey vs. Clinton, Round Two: This Time It's Still About Salaries
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas engaged again today in what has become a series of political spats between the two over campaign strategy and tactics.
All five major Democratic candidates are scheduled to participate in a televised debate on Sunday that is expected to provide a critical statewide showcase for candidates seeking to defuse Mr.
Clinton's early fund-raising successes.


FCS Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ms. Gallagher to Wed Andrew Eills
Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher C. Gallagher of Concord, N.H., have announced the engagement of their daughter Caitlin Mary Gallagher to Andrew Brewer Eills, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Eills of Princeton, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Gallagher, 24 years old, is the manager of community relations for the New England region for Wheelabrator Environmental Systems, a trash-to-energy company, in Hampton, N.H.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm of Gallagher, Callahan &amp; Gartrell in Concord.
Her mother, Ann Gallagher, owns a real-estate brokerage in Concord.


Noted With Pleasure
How to Create a Cuisine
Reflecting on the qualities necessary for the creation of a uniquely American cuisine, the writer and gourmet ("buongustaio") Angelo Pellegrini suggests that the crucial element is our attitude toward life.
This is from "Vintage Pellegrini: The Collected Wisdom of an American Buongustaio," edited by Schuyler Ingle (Sasquatch Books).
The American, lacking the spur of necessity and engrossed in the exploitation of resources with which no other nation has been blessed in anything like the same degree, has been understandably satisfied to feed on plain meat and potatoes.
His curiosity about culinary matters, of relatively recent origin, is an encouraging sign.
If he would proceed wisely, however, he must remember that the evolution of a traditional cuisine requires time.
His immediate concern should be a willingness to experiment, an insistence upon quality, a purging of his mind of all culinary prejudice, and the development of a humane attitude toward the dinner hour.
These, and not a slavish imitation of foreign recipes and esoteric menus, are the bases upon which a sound American cuisine may be eventually developed.
The Writer as Worker
Our image of writing as a magical act obscures the reality of the hard work that writers do and the true nature of a writer's life, according to the novelist Valerie Miner.
This is from "Rumors From the Cauldron: Selected Essays, Reviews and Reportage" (University of Michigan, paper).
Tensions arise between audience and author when we confuse the writing with the writer herself.
Most Americans romanticize art as magic.
We perceive literature as the result of "creativity" rather than "creative labor," forgetting that writers are workers.
We invest the writer with special powers, in part because we want to experience the romance vicariously. . . .
When we confuse the writing with the writer, we often expect her to be a stronger or more sensitive or more developed human being. . . .
Acknowledging writing as work might have pervasive consequences.
It might result in a less neurotic relationship between writers and readers.
It might encourage better wages and working conditions for artists.
It might inspire a clearer portrayal of working-class people in our books.
It might open a light on how art can emerge from and contribute to an impulse for social change.
Doing Without the Gods
Cultures define themselves in the stories of their beginnings, and for that purpose, the scholar Dudley Young suggests, mythology has often been a more efficient tool than science.
This is from "Origins of the Sacred: The Ecstasies of Love and War" (St. Martin's).
Science, to put it bluntly, is uneasy with beginnings.
Mythology, on the contrary, is concerned above all with what happened "in the beginning." . . .
Its signature is "Once upon a time," and its characteristic way of bridging the gap between nonbeing and being is to imagine gods and goddesses to step over it.
But it differs most importantly from science in that its explanatory account of how we began is also a prescriptive account of how subsequent beginnings (which renew the cosmos) should proceed; the Last Supper, for example, tells us not only how the Christian era began but how its energies can be periodically renewed in a communion meal that commemorates and recalls its inception.
Modern poets such as Wallace Stevens have inherited from the myth makers of old the disposition to supply the perennial human need for once-upon-a-time stories that also inform our own beginnings, but they realize that such stories must on the whole do without the gods and goddesses of old, about whom we have become skeptical.
Our Restless Species
Humans, the biologist John Janovy Jr. observes, are among the most footloose of species, relying in part on travel to help us define ourselves.
This is from "Vermilion Sea: A Naturalist's Journey in Baja California" (Houghton Mifflin).
Pilgrimages seem to be almost instinctive, or at least derived from behaviors now so ingrained in our species that it's difficult to distinguish between genetic and social origins.
Of all the animals that migrate, we are surely among the most restless.
But humans retain the influence of the geophysical habitat in which they pass their formative years.
And often, it seems, we are drawn back to our childhood homes -- if not physically, then mentally; if not out of love, then out of curiosity; if not by necessity, then by desire.
Through such returnings we find out who we are.
The Decline of Artful Swearing
We tend to believe that we live in the most enlightened of times, a view not borne out -- at least in the arena of frank language -- by a close study of history, as Geoffrey Hughes notes in "Swearing: A Social History of Foul Language, Oaths and Profanity in English" (Blackwell).
Although the view that there has been considerable liberation in modern times has much truth in it, the interpretation of a steady advance to enlightenment is simplistic.
Such a view would hold that the constraints of medieval times were overthrown in the Renaissance, that there was a steady liberalization through the Enlightenment, a Puritanical regression in Victorian times, and a final throwing off of the shackles in the postwar era.
Curiously, nearly all of these generalizations are inaccurate.
Chaucer and many medieval writers had more freedom than their Renaissance successors; the Enlightenment saw a steady clamping down on strong or risque language, while the Victorian era showed a remarkable efflorescence of strong and foul language, in some ways surpassing that of modern times.
However, it took place out of earshot of "polite society."


Rockwell International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Correction
The Practical Traveler column last Sunday misstated the price then in effect for Delta Airlines' eight-coupon senior travel book.
With tax, the book would have cost $792; the price became $896 on Wednesday.


Avesis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


First Hawaiian reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


David Gelernter's Romance With Linda
Last fall, computer scientists at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California unplugged a Cray supercomputer and replaced it with 14 I.B.M.
RS/6000 work stations, each the size of an orange crate, and wired them together.
When the scientists turned on the new network, which cost about $1 million, they discovered that it was just as powerful as the old Cray X/MP, which had cost $20 million several years before.
And the scientists believe that for solving some types of scientific problems, the network can easily be made as powerful as the latest-model Cray, the Y/MP C-90, which costs $20 million to $30 million.


Assailing Iran, Algeria Recalls Its Envoy
Reflecting the deterioration of what used to be warm relations, Algeria recalled its Ambassador to Iran today and asked the Iranian Ambassador here to leave the country.
The moves were a reaction to Teheran's unabashed support of Algeria's Islamic fundamentalist opposition, which was in the process of winning a majority in the new Algerian Parliament before the Government canceled the vote.
A senior Algerian foreign affairs official said tonight that Algeria had demanded a "clear and public" reversal of the criticism of the Algiers Government that has appeared in the official Iranian press in the week since the cancellation.


Mid-America Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Atlanfed Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


He Enjoys Being a Girl
MY GORGEOUS LIFE
The Life, the Loves, the Legend. By Dame Edna Everage
.
284 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $20.


Sherrod a Victim Of Depression
To the Sports Editor:
How tragic that Andre Sherrod died ("So Often a Survivor, Then a Suicide," The Times, Dec. 22).
The professionals failed this young man if he was never diagnosed properly as having a major depression nor received prescribed medications to treat his illness.
Major depression is the most common form of brain disease.
Talk therapy is out of date for the treatment of depression and the prevention of suicide.


FirstFed Michigan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Regal Communications Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cuttings; So the Seeds of the Past Can Give Future Delight
Saving species doesn't have to mean sending money to the Amazon rain forest.
You can save some in your own backyard by planting seeds that will produce the same kinds of grain, beans or flowers that were grown for thousands of years by Native Americans or farmers in Eurasia.
By doing so, you will help protect the gene pool, which has been seriously depleted by hundreds of years of hybridization.
When tomatoes, for example, are bred for high production, good looks and the kind of rubbery skin that can survive shipping, the genes that carry flavor or resistance to pests and disease are often lost forever.


Imcera Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Resurgence of Plagues and Pestilences of Yesteryear
TUBERCULOSIS.
Measles.
Scarlet Fever.
Diphtheria.
Syphilis.
All of these diseases were once thought to be under control, if not eradicated.
Now some of them have reached epidemic proportions in the United States, and the others are gaining.
Across the country, epidemiologists, the detectives of disease, are trying to figure out why these diseases are returning.


Despite Doldrums, Downtown Los Angeles Bustles
While construction of new office buildings approaches a standstill in this city's downtown, the center city remains abuzz with new public works and developer-government collaborations.
Among projects in contruction or planning are a subway system and stations, a concert hall, a convention center, museums and public amenities.


People's Savings Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Microsoft Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Zurn Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Citizens Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Continental Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nancy Rainer To Wed in May
Francis J. Rainer of Villanova, Pa., and Ruth J. Rainer of Coatesville, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Nancy Alison Rainer to James Edward Wallace, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward A. Wallace of Philadelphia.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Rainer, 32 years old, is a financial adviser and a vice president at Prudential Securities Inc. in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
Her father is president of the accounting firm of Rainer &amp; Company in Newtown Square, Pa.
Her mother is a psychologist in private practice in Coatesville.


Review/Dance; A Minimalist Segment Of 'Nixon In China'
It was smorgasbord night at the New York City Ballet on Thursday.
A program that offered everything from a chorus line in Chinese pajamas to expressions of existential angst and a display of good manners by dancers in tutus, made the company's artistic profile something of a blur.
Yet even here one could ferret out a common idea rooted in the City Ballet's esthetic, which is the use of music as a springboard.


Intertan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cannon Express Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Decline and Return of James Lofton
Immediately after he was cut by the Los Angeles Raiders in 1989, receiver James Lofton called six other National Football League teams, but only one, the Philadelphia Eagles, invited him to try out.
Lofton packed several suitcases, containing clothes for about six weeks, confident that he would nail down the job.


Arab-Israeli Chasm; After Third Round of Talks in Washington, The Old Adversaries Are Still Far Apart
There have been three rounds now of direct talks between Israelis and Arabs since the dramatic Madrid peace conference, and it is still hard to succinctly summarize exactly where the negotiations stand.
They have clearly not achieved the high expectations raised at the formal opening in Madrid last October of the regional peace conference, but they have not broken down either.
After much procedural wrangling, the old adversaries are finally talking substance, but their talks only show how far apart they really are.


Park Hikes Are Like 'Pages of Life'
WILLIAM J. MYLES is as familiar with Harriman and Bear Mountain State Parks as he is with his own backyard in West Orange.
After all, Mr.
Myles, a 78-year-old hiker, has been exploring the parks since he was a teen-ager.
He identifies closely with the two adjoining parks, which are only an hour's drive from his home and which were founded in the Hudson Highlands of New York in 1910, three years before he was born.


American Ship Building reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


... And Some Call for a Voice
When one young actor landed his first speaking role, in Brian De Palma's "Untouchables," he was understandably thrilled.
But when he took his girlfriend to see him perform what he considered to be five particularly meaty lines, his reaction was less enthusiastic.
There he was on screen, but when his mouth opened, the voice that emerged belonged to some other actor.
Perhaps he shouldn't have been so surprised.
As anyone familiar with the plot of the 1952 classic "Singin' in the Rain" knows, silent-screen stars with less-than-perfect voices made the leap into talkies by having their lines spoken by unknowns with more mellifluous tones.
Ever since, the movie industry has been using voice doubles -- performers hired to sing or speak for actors on screen, who may be less talented vocally, unavailable or even dead.


Keeping Warm and Dry in High Style
Women have ruined some of their best shoes in rain and snow.
And even though winter boots are much warmer and safer than stylish shoes, many women wear shoes even in the worst weather because they don't find boots fashionable.
For these women, there is now a wider variety of stylish, all-weather footwear to coordinate with almost any outfit.
These shoes and boots, which come in bright colors, are either water resistant or molded without seams to be completely waterproof.


Ms. O'Connor, Lawyer, to Wed
Donna Marie O'Connor and John Charles Donaher 3d, both lawyers in Pittsburgh, are engaged to be married in June.
Ms.
O'Connor, 28 years old, is a lawyer at Pittsburgh National Bank.
She graduated from Denison University and has a law degree from the University of Pittsburgh.
She is a daughter of Mary Ellen O'Connor of Penn Hills, Pa., and Donald T. O'Connor of Pittsburgh, where her father is a partner in the law firm of Buchanan Ingersoll.


Laurie Chandler Jarrett Is Married
Laurie Chandler Jarrett, an aviation policy analyst at the United States Department of Transportation in Washington, was married yesterday to Nathaniel Pendleton Rogers, a senior assistant attorney general of Virginia in Richmond.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Randolph Price performed the service at St.
Anne's Episcopal Church in Annapolis, Md.
Mrs.
Rogers, 29 years old, is working at the D.O.T. as a Presidential management intern.
She graduated from the University of the South and has a master's degree in public policy studies from Duke University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
William Hope Jarrett 2d of Atlanta, an ophthalmologist, and Mrs.
Marshall William Fishwick of Blacksburg, Va.
Her mother, Ann Fishwick, teaches religion and humanities at the Northcross School in Roanoke, Va.


Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Smith (A.O.) Corp. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wilmington Trust Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Miss Gavens to Wed Brian Margolis
Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Gavens of West Hartford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Michelle Gavens, to Brian Margolis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney O. Margolis of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Gavens, 26 years old, is studying for an M.B.A. degree at Harvard University.
She graduated from the University of Chicago.
Her father is a senior partner in Blum, Shapiro &amp; Company, an accounting firm in Farmington, Conn.


The Man Who Dreamed of Fairyland
How fine it would be if one were able to wander the Irish countryside accompanied by an erudite friend capable of spouting precisely appropriate lines by William Butler Yeats at the proper moments.
In Sligo, in the shadows of Ben Bulben, or in Galway, at Coole Park, the words of the man who dreamed of Faeryland still echo.
W.
B.
YEATS: Images of Ireland (Macmillan, $35) captures well the Ireland that Yeats knew and loved and wrote about, "where all outward things were the image of an inward life." Alain Le Garsmeur's reserved yet knowing photographs, in both color and black and white, are untainted by any nostalgic glow.
They are accompanied by the scholar Bernard McCabe's useful and informative chronology and introductory essay, and paired with exceedingly well-chosen extracts from Yeats's poetry, memoirs, essays and plays.
The photographs illuminate the text, while the text adds depth and meaning to the pictures.
This elegant volume makes accessible the subtle passions and simplicities of the mental and physical Irish landscapes.


BancFlorida Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Little Relief Seen for Connecticut Hotels
THE new year is not expected to bring much relief to Connecticut's beleaguered hotels.
Since 1989, the industry has been battered by the loss or contraction of corporations within the state, by a general cutback in business travel, a decline in tourism and the brute force of the recession in New England.
"In most cases Connecticut hotels are doing as poorly as last year or worse," said Ronald Balmer, director of the Connecticut Hotel-Motel Association in Hartford.
"They are hunkering down and cutting back. General managers are doing middle level-tasks. Some properties are closing entire floors and some are in the hands of lenders."


Correction
Three picture captions on Dec. 29 with an article about Japanese regional cuisine rendered incorrectly the names of the dishes shown.
The fish dish is kibinago, the rice cake is gohei-mochi and the wildfowl cooked in soup is jibuni-wan.


For Actors, TV Can Upstage Broadway
This past Fall, when The Fox comedy series "Roc" had its premiere, the sitcom was regarded as something of a first for network television.
Almost the entire cast, beginning with the star, Charles Dutton, had been hired from the 1990 Broadway production of August Wilson's Pulitzer Prize-winning drama "The Piano Lesson."
But "Roc" is only one of several series employing stage actors as regulars.
While television and the New York theater have often borrowed each other's players, lately there seem to be more stage-trained actors than ever on television.
Among those appearing on network shows are such theater veterans as Sam Waterston ("I'll Fly Away" on NBC), Angela Lansbury ("Murder, She Wrote" on CBS), Patti LuPone ("Life Goes On" on ABC), Swoosie Kurtz ("Sisters" on NBC), Barnard Hughes ("Blossom" on NBC) and the comedian and performance artist Ann Magnuson ("Anything but Love" on ABC).


Union Planters Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article on Dec. 29 about the Teleport Communications Group misstated the market share held by Teleport and other unregulated providers of local telecommunications services.
These companies control close to 1.5 percent of the local phone business in those markets where they are present.


Technology; Immune-Cell Modification Outside the Body
If you cannot deliver a drug to a cell, take the cell to the drug.
That is the premise behind Applied Immune Sciences Inc.'s Cellector, a novel biotechnology device for treating disease by manipulating immune system cells outside the body.
The company's ultimate goal: restarting a patient's own immune system.
For all their promise in the laboratory, many potential biotechnology drugs have proved disappointing in the human body.
One reason is that it is difficult to deliver them to the disease site in sufficient concentration without side effects.
Indeed, several biotech companies are primarily seeking to develop targeting mechanisms that could turn these drugs into "magic bullets" that could home in on diseased cells while bypassing healthy organs.


Health Care Property reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Elizabeth Erwin To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Jules Erwin of Stamford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Elizabeth Joy Erwin, to Mark Allen Blackman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard S. Blackman of Paramus, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.
Dr.
Erwin, 29 years old, graduated from Syracuse University and received a doctorate in education from Columbia University.
She is a research associate at Hunter College, where she is studying the effects of drug abuse on children.
Her father is a marketing executive for Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons in New York.
Her mother, Harriet Erwin, is a high-school English teacher in Stamford.


Jackson County Federal reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TCBY Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Topics of The Times; Jury's Out. So's the Judge.
While a Federal jury in Buffalo weighs the liability of New York officials in the bloody 1971 Attica prison uprising, the judge is vacationing in Barbados.
Such outrageous judicial indifference risks the reputation of the entire Federal bench.
It also risks legal error that could prolong litigation that has taken two decades and a three-month trial to reach this juncture.
Judge John Elfvin is an otherwise productive semi-retired judge who, at age 74, helps his colleagues by handling a reduced caseload for the Western District of New York.
But he has acted irresponsibly in going through with his long-planned vacation with the jury out.
He has left the case to a magistrate with instructions to call him if the jury returns with any "substantive question" about evidence or the judge's instructions.


Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Travels With Mom and Dad
JUST picturing several days -- and nights -- spent in close proximity to the folks who raised us is enough to make most of us quickly realize that going on vacation with our parents is an idea whose time, if it ever came, has gone.
It's hardly a grownup thing to do anyway, especially in a country where growing up has long meant going away.
Even returnees to the nest draw the line between living together (an economic necessity) and playing together (an emotional trial).


SAUDIS PRESS U.S. FOR HELP IN OUSTER OF IRQA'S LEADER
Saudi Arabia is pressing the Bush Administration to organize a large covert action campaign in Iraq aimed at dividing Iraq's army and toppling Saddam Hussein, United States and allied officials say.
The Saudi initiative seeks an allied effort to supply arms and intelligence to Kurdish rebels in northern Iraq, Shiite Muslim fighters in the south and Sunni Muslim opposition forces in central Iraq.
The aim is to draw out and divide Mr.
Hussein's last Republican Guard divisions protecting his strongholds around Baghdad and subject them to allied air assaults.


Designatronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Infinite Graphics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Central Indiana Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NBB Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Alpha Solarco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes Lagging Behind (or Is That Lurking?)
The defenders for the America's Cup laid their cards on the table last week in four races conducted under the watchful eye of international challengers.
But like the card shark who hides his ace under the table, Dennis Conner is perceived by others as holding back.
Top challenge skippers acknowledge that William Koch's America 3 effort could beat Conner in the defense trials.
But several maintain that the only way Koch can do it is with better technology.
They haven't seen that yet.


A Leaner A.T.&amp;T. Returns to Lower Manhattan
After nine years in mid-Manhattan, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company is returning downtown -- much smaller than when it left -- to a tower in TriBeCa that it built six decades ago.
Employees have already begun to leave the current headquarters at 550 Madison Avenue, between 55th and 56th Streets, the company said last week.
Most will move to a 27-story building at 32 Avenue of the Americas, between Walker and Lispenard Streets.
That structure, known as the Long Distance Building when it opened in 1932, will become A.T.&amp;T. headquarters on March 1.


Perverted Love vs. Revenge
The world's richest woman brings her sedan chair back to Broadway on Thursday when Jane Alexander opens in "The Visit" by Friedrich Durrenmatt, with the Roundabout Theater Company at the Criterion Center.
The mordant tragicomedy about money and a town's willingness to literally kill for it was directed by Peter Brook in 1958 to great success in New York and on the road.
The play's stars were the Lunts, making their final appearance, though not without some changes first.
Maurice Valency, the adapter, calls them softenings.
Robert Whitehead, one of the original producers, says adjustments.
In "The Fabulous Lunts," the biographer Jared Brown says that Mr.
Brook, Mr.
Valency and the Lunts wanted to make revisions "calculated to appeal to American audiences by eliminating some of the grotesque elements and emphasizing the love-hate relationship of the major characters." (Lynn Fontanne was the billionairess Claire Zachanassian and Alfred Lunt the betrayer Anton Schill, who pays the ultimate price. Harris Yulin plays that role in the current production.)


O'Meara Stays Clear Of Gridlock at Hope
Mark O'Meara, who still has a hard time believing he didn't win last year's Bob Hope Chrysler Classic, today put himself in position to close that wound by taking a one-shot lead going into the final round.
O'Meara fired a five-under-par 67 at La Quinta Country Club for a 21-under-par 72-hole total of 267.
One shot behind are five players -- Gene Sauers, Jeff Maggert, Lanny Wadkins, Kenny Perry and the hottest golfer on the PGA Tour over the last several months, Fred Couples.


Social Events
Historic House Trust
Jan. 21 -- The 16 historic-house museums in New York City will benefit from a cocktail reception sponsored by the Historic House Trust from 6 to 8 P.M. at the Forbes Magazine Galleries, 60 Fifth Avenue (12th Street).
The trust was established in 1989 in cooperation with the City Parks and Recreation Department.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 360-8123.


Political Talk
'Pins-and-Needles Time'
New York State is in the midst of a fiscal crisis right now, with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo set to unveil his plans Tuesday for closing a projected $4 billion budget gap.
But many lawmakers in Albany are at least as convulsed by the recommendations that are scheduled to be released the following day: reapportionment of their districts.
"It's pins-and-needles time in the Capitol," one lawmaker said.


Making a Difference; Payoff for a Hard Worker: A Second Place to Work
David V. Goeddel, the star gene cloner at Genentech Inc., is known as much for his high energy level and long work hours as for his brilliant science.
He is famous for having slept in his laboratory when necessary to help Genentech win the race to isolate a new protein for use as a drug.
Now Dr.
Goeddel will stretch himself even thinner.
While continuing to work full time at Genentech, he has become a co-founder and will be an acting head of research and development at Tularik Inc., a new Bay Area biotechnology company in which Genentech has an equity stake.


Anne Redfield Is to Marry in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter S. Redfield of Atherton, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Marie Redfield to Robert Blount Hrabchak, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Hrabchak of Watertown, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Redfield, 28 years old, graduated from Williams College and received an M.B.A. from the the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a research analyst with the Swiss Bank Corporation International in Taipei, Taiwan.
Her father is the president of the Redfield Management Company, a private investment concern in San Francisco.


Where to Find No-Frills Facts
THERE are a number of worthwhile travel leaflets and paperback books not often found in bookstores, usually because they are Government publications.
They provide tightly focused, reliable travel information -- no pictures and no chat, but plenty of facts.
Electricity -- A notable revival is "Electric Current Abroad," which has been reprinted for the first time since 1984.
It has been revised by the Department of Commerce, and is now for sale by the department and by the Government Printing Office.
It is not just people new to travel who forget that all electric current is not identical, or who buy a set of plug converters and figure the problem is dealt with.


Nellcor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 5


CORRECTION
The Recent Sales column on Jan. 5 in copies distributed in New York City and New Jersey misstated the location and price of a Pound Ridge, N.Y., house.
The house is at 99 Rolling Meadow Lane; it was sold for $300,000.


Review/Rock; John Mellencamp's Carnival
For John Mellencamp, it's not only rock-and-roll.
Before his show at the Brendan Byrne Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., on Thursday night, a classical string quartet recording was piped in over the speaker system.
Mr.
Mellencamp's warm-up act was a juggler, and a clown on stilts roamed the audience.
Behind a bright red stage that looked like a circus podium was a backdrop of a painting by the German Expressionist artist Max Beckmann; strands of bright lights hung from the ceiling in the outline of a giant tent.
It is seldom that an arena stage set so drastically affects the tone of a performance, but the dark carnival aura remained throughout the entire first half of the show.
Like a post- modern drum roll, a pre-recorded- tape of a synthesized dance beat ushered the band onto the stage, and the concert began with "Love and Happiness," the opening track from Mr.
Mellencamp's 10th and latest album, "Whenever We Wanted" (Mercury).
From there Mr.
Mellencamp constructed a loose and shadowy fable of Americana, made up mostly of songs from his three previous albums: "Big Daddy" (1989), "The Lonesome Jubilee" (1987) and "Scarecrow" (1985).


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Wednesday
Housing starts, millions
1.07
1.09
Thursday
Initial jobless claims, thousands
403
460
Budget deficit, billions
-$45.5
n/a
Auto sales, annual rate, millions
5.3
5.7
Money supply, change in billions
-12.8
6.2
Monday: Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday.
Wednesday: Federal Reserve's "beige book" report *
Auction of two-year Treasury notes.
Thursday: Federal budget *
Auction of five-year Treasury notes.
Friday: Fourth-quarter housing vacancies.  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Daka International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Stew: Old-Fashioned Winter Warmth
ON a cold winter day, forget grilled fish with salsa.
Nothing beats an old-fashioned stew.
In England recently, on a particularly bone-chilling day, a friend made a beef stew with dumplings, a dish I hadn't had for years.
The dumplings were light and airy, the stew rich and dark, filled with potatoes, carrots and green beans along with chunks of meat.
The dumplings contained an ingredient more familiar in the British kitchen than in America: suet.


Out of Sync With the 40's
To the Editor:
A bas "Bugsy"!
All three Times film critics include "Bugsy" in their reports on "the good news" of the year past  [ Dec. 29 ] .
Is there no one to say how falsely and contemptuously "Bugsy" treats its period?


BankAmerica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Jazz; Dizzy Gillespie &amp; Company
It didn't take long for Dizzy Gillespie's United Nation orchestra to get warmed up and hopping on Tuesday night.
A minute or two into the first tune, "Manteca," the horns started shouting together, the percussionists found the beat, and the band was off.
Mr.
Gillespie, in his second week at the Blue Note with a small orchestra featuring musicians familiar with both the Afro-Cuban and jazz traditions, was in his element.
In this case, his element included leading the band.
Mr.
Gillespie didn't play much trumpet, but he cued the other musicians, making adjustments in the rhythm section and calling on soloists to improvise.
When he did play -- on a swerving, bent solo during "Night in Tunisia," -- he sounded fine, with his accents placed irregularly, falling at odd places in phrases, making them jump with surprise.


Schubert: Eternally Feminine?
According to a recent "Great Composers" biography for children, Franz Schubert "fell in and out of love as frequently as any healthy young man" but was chronically poor and shy.
He was so much in awe of Beethoven that "he was petrified and ran out of the room when the great man asked him a question."
According to recent scholarship, Schubert was a member of a stigmatized and clandestine homosexual subculture.
His bohemian marginality signified not reticence but stubborn independence: freedom from familial constraint and social convention.


Data Bank/January 19, 1992
Business Inventories
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.4
0.4
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$37.5
$37.1
$35.3
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$41.0
$43.4
$42.3
Sales at Retail Outlets
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Monthly percent change
-0.4
-0.5
0.0
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.4
0.1
Industrial Production Index
Percent change
-0.2
-0.2
-0.1
Capacity Utilization
Output as percentage of capacity
79.0
79.3
79.6
Steel Production
Jan. 10
Jan. 3
Dec. 27
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,795
1,776
1,639


On Videophones and 'Talkies' . . .  . . . And Wishing A.T.&amp; T. Luck
To the Editor:
"Videophone: A Flop That Won't Die" is unfair to A.T.&amp; .T.
What happened in the 1960's with Picturephone is irrelevant to the 1990's Videophone.
In the 1960's, you needed special phone lines costing hundreds of dollars a month and you could only talk to the handful of others with those lines.
Not so today.
A.T.&amp; .T.'s Videophone works on normal phone lines.


The Executive Life CENTRAL CITY, Colo.; Charming His Way To a Second Gold Rush
Less than an hour's drive from the big city of Denver, this picturesque Victorian hamlet is so folksy that the nearest coffee shop -- a good 10 miles down the interstate -- keeps the mugs of its regulars conveniently hanging on one wall.
You'll find no shopping malls here.
You can't even buy milk or bread.
But you might pick up some nice Gold Rush memorabilia at the Lost Gold Mine, where tourists can root around the hollows of a closed-down shaft.
This is not exactly the kind of boom town where a flashy Hawaiian developer might be prone to plant his next project.
Yet it is here that Christopher Hemmeter expects to extract his next million -- mustering all his country-boy charms to convince the 336 year-round residents that his dreams of glittery casinos are their dreams, too.
"I'm not an interloper," he says.


Lisa Litt Engaged to Michael Knopf
Dr. and Mrs.
Irwin Litt of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Caren Litt to Michael Stuart Knopf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Knopf of Stamford, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Litt, 27 years old, is a magna cum laude graduate of the University of Pennsylvania and is a graduate student in psychology at Adelphi University.
Her father is a radiologist in New Brunswick, N.J.
Her mother is a special-education teacher in Princeton.


'Separation,' a Tale Of Trans-Atlantic Calls
"SEPARATION," a series of nine trans-Atlantic conversations, offset by two brief encounters, between a disabled American actress and an agoraphobic English playwright could exert a certain fascination for the concerned eavesdropper.
Tom Kempinski's play, which is having its American stage premiere at the George Street Playhouse, is otherwise a faltering two-character exercise, reminiscent of "Duet for One," the playwright's 1981 Broadway failure about a paralyzed cellist and her psychiatrist.


Headliners; Exoneration
When Greece's voters threw Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou and his Socialists out of power in 1989, the coalition of Conservatives and Communists who succeeded them quickly had Parliament prosecute the old leadership on corruption charges, focusing on accusations that they had plotted to skim millions of dollars in interest on state funds deposited in the troubled Bank of Crete.
Mr.
Papandreou called it a political vendetta, refused to testify in court, and boycotted his trial.
Last week, a 13-judge tribunal acquitted him of four charges that together could have put him into prison for life.
But two former Cabinet ministers were found guilty of related charges, and on the most serious count against Mr.
Papandreou the vote for acquittal was only 7-6, with the dissenting judges saying he must have known of the illegal activities.
Mr.
Papandreou also still faces further prosecution, on wiretapping charges, but a date for a trial has not been set.


International Game Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Keeping the Burning Fireplace Smokeless
FIXING a smoky fireplace is usually not too difficult.
Arrangement of the logs and how they are tended are often responsible.
Always arrange the logs on andirons or on a raised grate set as far back into the fireplace as possible.
Raising the logs lets air to enter from underneath, enhancing combustion.
Raising the logs also raises the height of the flames, so that smoke is less likely to waft forward before being channeled upward by the fireplace's overhanging upper edge, the chimney breast.


'Comedy Is Tragedy That Happens to Other People'
WISE CHILDREN
By Angela Carter. 234 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.


Repairs Planned for the Manhattan Bridge
The city's Department of Transportation plans to begin major repairs to the deteriorating Manhattan Bridge this spring.
The reconstruction of the 83-year-old bridge is the first of 17 bridge construction projects for which contracts will be awarded by April 15, said Joseph DePlasco, a department spokesman.


Laurie Cunningham Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
James Cunningham of Suffern, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laurie Elizabeth Cunningham, to Russell Joseph Wilson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Wilson of Suffern.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Cunningham, 20 years old, is a physical therapy major at Boston University.
Her father is a vice president of the Lehigh Fluid Power Corporation, a maker of industrial machinery in Lambertville, N.J.
Her mother, Anne Cunningham, is a special-education teaching assistant at the Viola School in Suffern.


Stew: Old-Fashioned Winter Warmth
ON a cold winter day, forget grilled fish with salsa.
Nothing beats an old-fashioned stew.
In England recently, on a particularly bone-chilling day, a friend made a beef stew with dumplings, a dish I hadn't had for years.
The dumplings were light and airy, the stew rich and dark, filled with potatoes, carrots and green beans along with chunks of meat.
The dumplings contained an ingredient more familiar in the British kitchen than in America: suet.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 19, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
37
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
2
3
COYOTE WAITS, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The murder of a Navajo tribal policeman involves an ancient artifact.
3
5
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Plume, $15.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
4
9
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
5
8
COLD FIRE, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A reporter tracks the course of a good Samaritan.
6
4
MURDER AT THE NATIONAL CATHEDRAL, by Margaret Truman. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A professor-sleuth investigates the death of an Episcopal priest.
7
12
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $6.99.) The experiences of a couple on a trek across Europe during the ice age.
8
4
THE WITNESS, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $4.99.) A Philadelphia cop finds himself on the hit list of a band of robber-terrorists.
9 *
2
SLIVER, by Ira Levin. (Bantam, $5.99.) An editor is watched, haunted and menaced by the man who owns her apartment building.
10 *
8
PRISONER OF MY DESIRE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 12th-century English belle seeks to capture the heart of a lord.
11 *
30
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
12
1
HOOK, by Terry Brooks. (Ivy, $5.99.) A lawyer is spirited off to Neverland, to which his children have been kidnapped; the Peter Pan story in modern terms.
13 *
5
STAR TREK VI: The Undiscovered Country, by J. M. Dillard. (Pocket, $4.99.) Enemies of the Federation capture Captain Kirk and Dr.
McCoy.
14
12
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The coming of age of Irish women.
15 *
6
THE FOURTH K, by Mario Puzo. (Bantam, $5.99.) The tumultuous career of President Francis Xavier Kennedy, cousin of John.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
4
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
2
113
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
3
35
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
4
27
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
5
428
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
6
43
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
7
28
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
8
12
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, feel, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
9
11
A LIFE ON THE ROAD, by Charles Kuralt. (Ivy, $5.99.) The memoirs of the television newscaster.
10 *
54
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
11 *
10
HIGH TREASON, by Robert J. Groden and Harrison Edward Livingstone. (Berkley, $6.99.) Evidence to suggest that the assassination of John F. Kennedy resulted from a massive conspiracy.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
23
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
6
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1992. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
3
16
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
4
52
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
12
UNNATURAL SELECTIONS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Far Side" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Inland Steel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sunrise Leasing Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Eye for Danger
Long Island Sound is glassy this morning, the breeze a steady whisper, and Bruce Kirby's two-masted, 26-foot coastal cruiser is cutting the waters just off Rowayton, Conn.
Kirby, who helped design Canadian challengers for the America's Cup, is out on the Sound for no other reason than simple pleasure on a pretty fall day.
On board with him is the novelist Robert Stone.
Stone, who lives in nearby Westport, has just completed a new book, "Outerbridge Reach," which takes as its central plot a solo sailor's attempt to circumnavigate the globe, and Kirby was an early reader of the manuscript, an adviser on technical matters.
Fittingly then, the two men are trading sea stories.


N.Y. Court Finds Agency Liable
The New York State Court of Appeals has upheld a lower court finding that a travel agent has an obligation to report to a client any information that might adversely affect the client's travel plans.
The ruling grows out of a case in which Zenith Travel, of New York City, is being sued for purportedly failing to inform two clients, Samuel and Renee Marcus, of reports that a tour operator was having financial difficulties.
Mr. and Mrs.
Marcus, who bought a tour to China through Zenith, say they were stranded in Japan after the tour operator, Hemphill Harris, ceased operations in October 1989.
The Marcuses' attorney, Thomas A. Dickerson, said the agency's personnel had read in the travel trade press that Hemphill Harris was having financial problems but did not pass on the information.
The case, in which Mr.
Marcus is suing for $50,000, is likely to go to trial soon.
Zenith denies negligence and breach of fiduciary duty.


In a Courthouse, Co-ops on the Block
ON most Fridays, usually around noon, a small knot of people gathers around a scuffed, steel-gray office table in the rotunda of the New York State Supreme Court Building on Foley Square for what has become a fast-booming sideshow to the region's depressed real estate market: co-op foreclosure auctions.
The auctions should not be confused with foreclosures on troubled co-op sponsors, those developers who have converted apartment buildings into co-ops and are now, because of the weakness of the market, drowning in debt.


First Federal Savings (Tenn.) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


USAir Discovers There Is Life After a Messy Merger
Since taking over USAir last year, Seth E. Schofield has won high marks for making the best of a bad hand.
But it is still far from clear that the troubled carrier, the country's fourth-largest airline, will wind up a winner.
When Mr.
Schofield was promoted to chief executive, replacing Edwin I. Colodny, USAir was hemorrhaging.
A pair of ambitious mergers in the late 80's, with Pacific Southwest Airlines and Piedmont Aviation, produced a raft of problems.
The carrier had also been battered, along with the rest of the industry, by the effects of the recession and the Persian Gulf war.


Romeo and Juliet, Divorced From Romance
Paris in the Springtime is not Paris in the winter, when a patch of blue in a gray sky is at a premium.
Even Angelin Preljocaj's "Romeo and Juliet," in the intriguing version of the Prokofiev score that I saw recently at the Theatre de la Ville, was unusually grim.
When the familiar music from the balcony scene begins in this production for the Lyons Opera Ballet, the balcony turns out to be a catwalk near a watchtower, patrolled by a guard with a flashlight and, later, a German shepherd.


Education Adviser Defends Duke, Raising Concern
An appointee to a national education panel has written newspaper columns supporting the message of David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader and a Republican Presidential candidate, but Education Secretary Lamar Alexander has no plans to remove him, a Government spokeswoman said today.
John C. Hirschfeld, president and chief executive officer of The Champaign-Urbana News-Gazette, expressed support for Mr.
Duke's message last November in two columns for the paper.
Mr.
Alexander appointed Mr.
Hirschfeld to the National Advisory Committee on Accreditation and Institutional Eligibility in October.


Criticare Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Public &amp; Private; Not About Breasts
"I am not a piece of machinery for which they manufactured a new part. I am real. I am somebody's mother and somebody's wife."
Because the plastic surgeon was using a local anesthetic, Mariann Hopkins heard his exclamation when he saw what was inside her.
She heard him call for an anesthesiologist.
She heard him say, "Both implants have ruptured." And then they put her under.


INSIDE
Algeria and Iran Now at Odds
Ties between Algeria and Iran have deteriorated because of Teheran's unabashed support of Algerian Islamic fundamentalists.
Page 3.
Stockbroker Captured
The former stockbroker and convicted killer who fled a Connecticut prison was captured in the parking lot of a New Jersey mall.
Page 26.


Making a Difference; The Tantalus of Trade Talks
Like the condemned Tantalus of Greek mythology, forever reaching up to pluck fruit from a branch that recedes from his grasp, the United States negotiator seeking a global trade pact in Geneva has been thwarted repeatedly by a tangle of seemingly insolvable agricultural problems.
Rufus H. Yerxa, the deputy United States trade representative and ambassador to the talks in Geneva, began reaching again for an agreement last Monday as negotiators from the 108-nation General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade met to start reviewing a nearly comprehensive draft text.
But the European Community, followed by Japan and Mexico, objected that the proposal went too far in curbing government assistance to farmers.


Chess
English grandmasters are currently among the strongest in the world.
The English team, having won two silver medals and one bronze in the last three Chess Olympiads, ranks second only to what used to be the Soviet team.
Still, the English championship, held Dec. 10-19 and sponsored by Duncan Lawrie, was technically the first.
Previously, there was the British championship, but it included the Scots and Welsh, who have their own Olympiad teams.
As a model for this event, the English organizers copied the two-game knockout system used in the last two United States championships.
The final was a four-game match.
The winner was Nigel Short, the top-ranking player in the world outside the former Soviet Union.
He defeated, in succession, Grandmasters Murray Chandler (formerly of New Zealand), Julian Hodgson and Michael Adams.
In the final, Short broke even at 2-2 but then won both of the two 15-minutes-per-player tiebreak games to defeat Adams.
Here is the second game of the series.


Life With Our Friends the Plants
THE GARDENS OF RUSSELL PAGE
By Gabrielle van Zuylen.
Photographs by Marina Schinz. 255 pp.
New York:  Stewart, Tabori &amp; Chang.
MODERN LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Redefining the Garden.
By Jory Johnson.
Photographs by Felice Frankel. 240 pp.
New York:  Abbeville Press.


Griffith Joyner Enjoys the Long Route
Once you get past the style and flash that helped make Florence Griffith Joyner a national celebrity, the most striking thing about the 1988 Olympic three-gold medal winner is her serenity.
Her smile, her even tone in conversing, her gestures all suggest a woman in control of her life.


World Markets; A Cross-Atlantic Rate Play
This is an unusual time for the United States bond market.
Short-term interest rates are near 20-year lows, while rates abroad are much higher.
That's an environment in which nimble risk takers might make a profit on the spread.
But it's also an environment that many corporte treasurers, who want to preserve capital while putting idle money to work, are not used to.
Given these circumstances, Robert N. Gordon, president of the Twenty-First Securities Corporation in New York, is seeking an opportunity for his American corporate customers with millions of dollars in cash on hand.
Paribas Asset Management, the investment subsidary of the French bank, is looking for entree to more American customers.
And both want to act quickly because the interest rate opportunity they see is not going to last long.


Ms. Wisbaum To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Wayne D. Wisbaum of Buffalo have announced the engagement of their daughter Wendy Sue Wisbaum to Jose Manuel Campa Fernandez, a son of Jose Maria Campa and Carmen Fernandez of Oviedo, Spain.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wisbaum, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan and has a master's degree in Spanish from Middlebury College.
She is studying for a master's degree in health policy and management at Harvard University.
Her father is a senior partner in the Buffalo law firm of Kavinoky &amp; Cook.


Grow Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Data Update
VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
(Residential in millions of dollars)
Nov. 91
Nov. 90
Change
New York
325.9
302.0
+ 8%
New Jersey
172.6
167.3
+ 3%
Connecticut
59.0
82.5
-28%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES
(Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.42
8.43
9.94
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.04
6.16
7.93
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.32
8.36
9.77
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.84
5.97
7.74
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.29
8.37
9.76
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.90
6.03
7.82
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.46
8.53
10.14
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.48
6.82
8.22
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.06
4.14
6.71
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.43
8.43
9.69
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Comptek Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Designcraft Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


The New Shapes Of Sounds to Come
Now that 1991 is all over (except for the hangover of last year's releases on the charts), it's time to look ahead.
In popular music, that means seeking out the undercurrents and subcultures that will sooner or later shake up the Top 10.
Behind the blockbusters and upstarts of 1991 were hints of new pop paradigms.
Where the 1980's offered the ascendancy of the image, and last-ditch battles over authenticity and misappropriation, the 1990's -- well, maybe we'll figure it out before the century ends.
For the moment, let's note some subtle stirrings:  Bye-Bye Boomers
Well into the 1980's, pop and rock were framed by the expectations of the baby-boom generation.
Guitar-slinging songwriters became the icons of rock authenticity and boomers with careers in radio, the recording business and, for that matter, rock criticism, continued as gatekeepers and tastemakers.


Wall Street; What's Behind the Sagging Utilities Prices?
The basic Wall Street catechism holds that utility stocks go up when interest rates seem to be heading down.
But while the broader stock market has soared on a firm belief in low rates, the utility stocks have staggered downward in recent weeks -- traditionally a signal that investors fear rates are heading back up.
Indeed, long-term rates
have
jerked up a bit since mid-December, as the plummeting Dow Jones utility index would suggest.
But there may be more to the move than that, said Kathleen Lally, a utility analyst with the County NatWest Securities Corporation.
"Electric utilities got very overvalued in late 1991 as portfolio managers shifted funds into electrics to hedge their market gains," she said.
When the Federal Reserve made its latest discount-rate cut, she added, "that money came out of utilities, and now the stocks have gone to extremes on the other side."


2d Terminal Set For Narita
A second passenger terminal building to accommodate 10 million passengers a year is scheduled to open next December at Narita Airport, outside Tokyo, Japan's largest international gateway.
The additional terminal is expected to ease congestion, Japanese tourist officials say, but will still not be large enough to deal with anticipated traffic.
Narita, which handled 19.5 million passengers in 1989, is ranked seventh worldwide in annual passengers by the International Civil Aviation Organization.


A Yank in the Manchu Dynasty
THE DEVIL SOLDIER
The Story of Frederick Townsend Ward.
By Caleb Carr.
Illustrated. 366 pp.
New York:  Random House. $25.


What Hollywood Got for Christmas
It was the moment of truth in Hollywood.
Nervous in the best of times, film makers and producers watched as more than two dozen movies sailed into theaters like giant ships (a handful of them Titanics) during the Thanksgiving-Christmas-New Year season, when moviegoing across the nation reaches a peak.
Virtually all studios acknowledge that, in the face of recession and in the shadow of big-name, big-budget flops like "Hudson Hawk" and "Billy Bathgate," marketing conferences before the holidays were unusually intense, involving secretive debates over strategy and timing that probably resembled the Allied planning for D-Day.
Not only were the multimillion-dollar investments in the films at risk; so, too, was the money committed for marketing -- $15 million for the average film and perhaps as much as $25 million for a movie like Steven Spielberg's "Hook."


Russell Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 4


Nan Hughes Marries Peter J. Poole
Marie Annette Hughes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark F. Hughes Jr. of Rumson, N.J., was married there yesterday to Peter John Poole, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Poole of Edmonton, Alberta.
Msgr.
John A. Esseff performed the ceremony at Holy Cross Church.
Mrs.
Poole, who is 28, is known as Nan.
A mezzo-soprano, she is a soloist with Continuum, an ensemble based in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received a master's degree in music from Boston University.
Her father is a partner in the Newark law firm of Robinson, St.
John &amp; Wayne.
Her mother, Marie Hughes, teaches English at Rumson-Fair Haven Regional High School.


Review/Music; 3 Premieres, and Debut Of a 29-Year-Old Work
In 1989, Michel Roux, a liquor importer, sponsored the first Absolut Concerto, a program of commissioned works named after the Swedish vodka his firm imports.
A second concert was offered last year, and on Wednesday evening, Mr.
Roux's company, Carillon Importers Ltd., presented the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Hugh Wolff, in a third installment at Avery Fisher Hall.
This year's program included three newly commissioned works and the New York premiere of a 29-year old piece by David Diamond.
The most ambitious of the new works was Aaron Jay Kernis's Symphony No. 2.
Mr.
Kernis, who is 32 years old, has had several works performed in New York City in recent years.
His style is eclectic, with Romantic leanings, and much of his music has a magic and originality that has made him a composer to watch.


IN SHORT: FICTION
CHARLIE PEACE A Fable. By Paul Pickering. Random House, $20.


Ruddick Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Kellogg Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eastex Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


F&amp;M National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Just Suppose '93 Giants Need a Coach
JUST suppose.
Just suppose the Giants struggle under Ray Handley again next season and decide to hire a new coach.


Miss Michalski To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Michalski Jr. of Madison, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Eileen Michalski to Andrew Mark Wang, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Wang of West Chester, Pa.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Michalski, who is 25 years old and a graduate of Connecticut College, is a pre-kindergarten teacher at the Chestnut Hill School in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Her father is the general manager of the transportation department of Exxon Company International in Florham Park, N.J.


Headliners; I.R.A. Man Loses
The protesters met at Joe Doherty Corner in lower Manhattan -- a measure of how unusual the case has become, since Joe Doherty is a convicted murderer who has been jailed in the United States for eight years while Britain seeks his extradition.
Mayor David N. Dinkins allowed the corner of Pearl and Park Streets to be named after the former Irish Republican Army guerrilla in 1990 because he became a symbol of opposition to British rule of Northern Ireland while in the Federal prison at that corner.
But the protesters had gathered to raise what may be one of their last outcries: Mr.
Doherty had reached the end of the road in his efforts to keep from being deported.
The United States Supreme Court ruled 5 to 3 last week that he was not entitled to a new hearing.
Mr.
Doherty escaped from a British prison while on trial in the killing of a British soldier in Belfast in 1980.
He was captured in 1983 tending bar at Clancy's on Third Avenue in Manhattan.


Sunday Dinner; All Yours for the Savoring: 3 Tastes of the Middle East
One of the best bets for budget dining in New York City is Middle Eastern restaurants.
The savory roasts, cumin-scented casseroles and vegetarian fritters can be had in a full-course dinner for as little as $20.
Here are three good choices.
Istanbul Kebap
303 East 80th Street (212) 517-6880 -- This compact family-run Turkish spot is a clean and well-organized place, with carnations adorning the paper-draped tables, Turkish rugs on the walls, copper lanterns and hanging plants.
Lamb is the foundation of Anatolian cooking: dishes include adana kebab, minced lamb seasoned with peppers and grilled on skewers; sis kebab, cubed marinated leg of lamb grilled on skewers; etli bamya, okra, lamb, tomato and onions, and yogurtlu kebab, a hearty casserole of pita triangles, chopped lamb, onions, yogurt, paprika and tomato.
For appetizers there are under coban, a mixed chopped salad combining tomatoes, onions and kirby (similar to cucumber); cubes of sauteed liver served with chopped onions; and stuffed grape leaves.
Appetizers range from $3.25 to $3.50; main courses $8.95 to $11.50.
Sunday service is from noon to midnight. (Diner's Journal, Nov. 3, 1989).
The Magic Carpet
54 Carmine Street (212) 627-9019 -- This is one of those inconspicuous Middle Eastern restaurants in Greenwich Village that rarely get attention outside their immediate neighborhood.
But Magic Carpet certainly gets plenty there.
And for good reason.
The food is tasty, inexpensive and copious.
The staff is cheerful and accommodating.
Excellent hummus, falafel or baba gannouj are a fine way to begin.
Among entrees are ouzi, which is puffed phyllo nearly the size of a rugby ball holding an aromatic assembly of rice, peas, raisins, almonds, chickpeas and cashews.
Of course, couscous is served, vegetable, chicken, lamb or beef.
Appetizers range from $3.95 to $4.25; main courses are $8.25 to $10.50.
Sunday hours are from 2 P.M. to 11 P.M. (Diner's Journal, May 17, 1991).
Sido Abu Salim
81 Lexington Avenue at 26th Street, 212-686-2031 -- Middle Eastern food has great appeal with its cooling vegetable purees, lemony salads and aromatic grilled meats.
This little spot, run by a Palestinian family, has always been one of the more reliable spots in town for this kind of cooking, and a real bargain.
The setting is spare and clean, with tile floors, wood wainscoting, white walls with botanical prints, and glass-topped tables.
You might start with a sampling of sprightly tabbouleh combining minced parsley, wheat germ, onions and tomato; excellent hummus, chickpea and sesame oil puree; the sesame spread tahini, and a wonderfully smoky rendition of baba gannouj, the roasted eggplant puree.
A mean-looking hot sauce set out on the table can send you screeching out the door in search of an open fire hydrant.
Other dishes include cumin-scented falafel, made with chickpea flour, ground lamb-and-onion-filled croquettes called kibbee; chicken, beef or vegetable couscous; and lamb or beef kebab.
Appetizers range from $1.60 to $2.95; main courses $8 to$14.
Sunday hours are 1 P.M. to 11 P.M. (Diner's Journal, May 20, 1991).
This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times, and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.


Dr. Susan Kreissman Wed in Boston
Dr.
Susan Gail Kreissman and Dr.
Philip Paul Breitfeld were married last evening at the Four Seasons Hotel in Boston by Cantor Joseph Markind.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Kreissman of Mount Kisco, N.Y., and Herman Breitfeld of Waterloo, N.Y., and the late Rose Breitfeld.
Dr.
Kreissman, who is 32 years old and will keep her name, is to become an assistant professor of hematology and oncology next month at Indiana University and the Riley Hospital for Children in Indianapolis.
A magna cum laude graduate of Dartmouth College, she received her M.D. degree from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Her father is the senior vice president of Combe Inc., a maker of health and beauty products in White Plains.


Miss West Wed To A. H. Madoff
Deborah Anne West, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas West of New York, was married last evening to Andrew Howard Madoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard L. Madoff, also of New York.
Rabbi Richard Chapin officiated at the Union League Club in New York.
Mrs.
Madoff, 24 years old, is a book-promotions consultant in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father is an investment broker at Bishop, Rosen &amp; Company, a stockbrokerage in New York.
Her mother, Susan L. West, is a managing editor at the Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group in New York.


The Region; Learning to Be Vicious Can Begin at Home
AFTER 10 days of almost daily reports of racially motivated attacks on children throughout the city by other young people, Mayor David N. Dinkins had nearly exhausted his supply of adjectives to describe the disgust and anger he felt.
Finally on Wednesday, on the occasion of Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday, the Mayor asked an audience at the Waldorf-Astoria, "Who taught our children to hate so thoroughly and so mercilessly?"


When Auto Renting Companies Prefer Not to
BACK in the days of "Let Hertz put you in the driver's seat," the "you" who floated into the convertible was usually a man in business clothes, necktie flying.
But a lot has happened since that ad campaign ended 31 years ago.
These days all kinds of people rent, but the car rental companies say democracy has not necessarily been a boon for business.
Hertz, the market leader in this country as well as the world, recently started applying big surcharges to rentals by residents of Brooklyn, the Bronx, Queens and Manhattan.
For Bronx residents the charge is $56 a day, added to an average rental cost of $53 a day.


Cragin Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ballard Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Greene Out of Running
Count MEAN JOE GREENE out of the running to succeed CHUCK NOLL as coach of the Pittsburgh Steelers.
The former tackle, who has been the team's defensive line coach and who was one of four finalists for the job, was told on Friday by the team president, DAN ROONEY, that he had been eliminated from the competition.
That leaves DAVE WANNSTEDT, the defensive coordinator of the Dallas Cowboys, and BILL COWHER, the defensive coordinator of the Kansas City Chiefs, as the front runners, with KEVIN GILBRIDE, the offensive coordinator of the Houston Oilers, as the third finalist.
Greene had no comment after his meeting with Rooney.
He was the only one of the four finalists who had not worked as a coordinator.


Connecticut Killer Seized Outside a New Jersey Mall
The strange prison-escape saga of the stockbroker murderer who frightened Connecticut and New York residents and set off a massive manhunt ended this afternoon in New Jersey, when the police captured the escaped convict, Frank Vandever, at a mall in Paramus.
After searching for him in Rockland County just north of the New Jersey border, Mr.
Vandever, a transvestite who was convicted of murdering a client, was arrested as he walked toward a car that was stolen this morning from the very motel here where he had slipped away from F.B.I. agents two days earlier.


Margaret Beam To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce A. Beam of McLean, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Margaret May Beam to David Gilmer Grattan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Gilmer Grattan 4th of Earlysville, Va.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Beam, 25 years old, graduated from Vanderbilt University and is a public-affairs associate at the Nonprescription Drug Manufacturers Association in Washington.
Her father is the vice president of government relations at the American Electric Power Corporation in Washington.


Deals and Discounts
LONDON FARES Virgin Atlantic has announced a Latesaver fare from New York to London of $179 one way and $339 round trip (from Boston, $159 and $299 respectively).
The fare must be booked within three days of departure.
Travel must begin by March 15 and be completed by March 31.
In a separate program (not to be combined with the Latesaver fare), the airline is offering to refund the passport application fee ($55 for adults, $35 for children) to economy class passengers traveling with a new or renewed passport before May 31.
Travelers whose passports were issued after Dec. 1 and have not been previously stamped are eligible.
More information: Virgin at (212) 242-1330 or (800) 862-8621.


A Worthy War
The historical revisionists are already at work.
Last year's triumph in the war against Iraq, they claim, has turned to ashes.
We won the war only to lose the peace.
But the naysayers who make this argument too cavalierly dismiss the strategic and diplomatic benefits produced by Operation Desert Storm.
To be sure, the fact that Saddam Hussein remains in power is deeply disturbing.
But this hardly constitutes an argument against the war, particularly since he would still be comfortably ensconced in Iraq and Kuwait if we had not moved against him.


Bach Cello Suites
The cellist Anner Bylsma is to perform three Bach Suites for Unaccompanied Cello today at 4 P.M. at Corpus Christi Church, 529 West 121st Street in Manhattan.
In Suites Nos. 2 and 4 he will play a four-stringed Baroque cello; for No. 6 he will use a five-stringed violoncello piccolo, the instrument for which Bach originally wrote the music.
Tickets are $12.
Information: (212) 666-0675.


Seagate Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sunward Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


First Charter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Comerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


What Is Human About Furs?
Listening to animal-rights activists is less important than listening to one's conscience.
If one has no qualms about buying a coat made from beavers caught in underwater traps who took 20 minutes to drown or from ranch-raised minks who were anally electrocuted, the arguments of animal rights advocates probably won't make any difference.
However, if one feels the slightest bit uneasy about paying someone to take another's life just to make a fashion statement, then an ear to one's conscience must supersede both an animal defender's debate and the pretty recitations of struggling furriers.
CHRISTINE JACKSON Washington The writer is senior staff writer at People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals.


Miss Conklin Wed in Atlanta
Sarajane Conklin, a daughter of Lois Conklin-Touhey of Albany and the late Dr.
William H. Conklin, was married yesterday to Dr.
James Edward Fletcher, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
E.
Dennis Fletcher of Reigate, Surrey, England.
The Rev.
Martha Sterne officiated at All Saints Episcopal Church in Atlanta.
Mrs.
Fletcher, 29 years old, graduated from Emory University and the physician associate program at the Yale University Medical School.
She is a physician associate at Piedmont Hospital in Atlanta.
Her father was an internist in Albany.


Creative Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Lexicon reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Susan Weinberg and Joshua Levy Are Engaged
Alan and Rita Weinberg of Cherry Hill, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Alayne Weinberg to Joshua Louis Levy, a son of Morton and Lorraine Levy of Great Neck, L.I.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
GORDON PARKS SHOW
"Moments Without Proper Names" is the title of a photography exhibition by one of the most respected names in the field -- Gordon Parks.
It may be seen in the Museum Gallery of the White Plains Public Library through March 31.


Biotechnology Companies Find a Home In the State
THE biotechnology industry has found New Jersey.
From bags of bugs to designer drugs, from cloned chrysanthemums to a substitute for human blood, an increasing number of New Jersey companies are creating and developing innovative products, using the sophisticated technology born of the biotechnology revolution.
State officials and industry experts say that after a somewhat slow start, New Jersey is now emerging as a major site for biotechnology businesses -- a multibillion-dollar industry that holds out the promise of solving some of mankind's most pressing environmental and medical problems.
In addition, they say, the state's enhanced presence in the biotechnology market will aid the state's economy by creating new industry and jobs.
"We feel that New Jersey is becoming a leader in the biotech industry," said Brooke Hern, a spokesman for the State Department of Commerce and Economic Development.
Mr.
Hern said an informal survey of listings of biotechnology companies nationwide by the department had shown New Jersey to have 193 biotechnology companies -- second only to California with 365, and just ahead of Massachusetts with 183.


Texas Governor Proves Adept in Her First Year
The day after Ann W. Richards was elected Governor of Texas in November 1990, she described politics in Texas as "a contact sport" and "not for the weak or the lily-livered."
While no one would accuse her of being docile in her year in office, Governor Richards has behaved more like a chess player than a linebacker.


Boston Acoustics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Digital Equipment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


The Pros and Cons Of TV as a Teacher
Your article entitled "TV Replacing Teachers in Classrooms" (Dec. 15) was especially interesting to me, since I am a French 4 student in Mrs.  [ Adrienne F. ]  Montillet's class.
Not everything was included, however, as there are quite a few pros, and there are also quite a few cons.


International Systems &amp; Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dawn Morgenthal to Wed in March
Carole and Marvin Morgenthal of Little Neck, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dawn Holly Morgenthal, to Barry J. Bonder, the son of Eleanor and Gerald Bonder of Montreal.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Morgenthal, 27 years old, is an assistant counsel to Euram Management Inc. in Uniondale, L.I., a subsidiary of ABN AMRO She graduated summa cum laude from Boston University and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father is a court reporter for the State Supreme Court in Mineola, L.I.
Her mother is an administrative assistant for Hercules Chemical Corporation in New York.


Business Diary/January 12-17
ECONOMY The Irrepressible Bull Market Keeps Roaring Along


Small, Lighthearted Works
THE 46 small works making up the "Annual Metro Show" at City Without Walls here are
small
.
A few images measure as little as 2 inches by 3 inches, and none exceed 12 inches in any dimension.
As a result, the show, the 10th of its kind, studs the gallery rather than fills it.
This year's jurors were two critics, Gary Azon and Patty Harris, together with one dealer, Penny Pilkington, and what they have culled from 366 entries is on the whole lighthearted and good.


Tenore Reorganizes County Board
A FRESHLY minted Board of Legislators began work last week under a new chairman, with an agenda and revamped committee system that some members predicted would be more responsive to an increasingly impatient electorate.
There also seemed to be a new interest in focusing on the county's urban problems.
The chairman, Stephen P. Tenore, a Republican, moved quickly to soothe at least some of the political injuries suffered by the Democrats, who felt they had been robbed of a majority gained at the polls through the defection of one member, Suzanne R. Swanson, a Conservative elected as a Democrat.


Lennar reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Algerians, Angry With the Past, Divide Over Their Future
THERE was considerable relief in the salons of the middle classes last weekend when the Algerian Army, hiding behind a civilian administration, put an end to a democratic process that was leading militant Islamic fundamentalists straight to power here.
But the battle for Algeria is not over and this country may yet become the Middle East's third Islamic republic, joining Iran and the Sudan.
Having won big in the first free elections in the Arab world last month, Algeria's Muslim fundamentalists have kept to the high moral ground, eschewing violence for the moment as the old guard flails about in desperation, trying to justify reneging on its promise to abide by the verdict of the ballot box.
It was the Army and Government officials, after all -- not the fundamentalists -- who a week ago forced President Chadli Benjedid out of power and cut short the democratic process Mr.
Benjedid launched in 1988.


Making a Difference; Moving Up at Citicorp
When Pei-yuan Chia came to Citicorp in 1974, the consumer banking business was widely regarded as a resting place for second-rate bankers whose primary job was to raise deposits so that the first-rate bankers could make loans to corporations.
Things are different now.
The corporate lending side of the bank has been hurt in recent years by intense competition and heavy loan losses.
Meanwhile, the consumer bank, where Mr.
Chia has spent all of his time at Citicorp, has emerged as the most profitable and rapidly growing part of the company.
And within the consumer bank, Citicorp's operations in three dozen foreign countries, headed by Mr.
Chia the last four years, have emerged as stellar performers, with profits rising 25 percent annually to more than $300 million last year.


Results Plus; Heinzer Repeats Franz Heinzer of Switzerland won his second downhill in two days yesterday at Kitzbuhel, Austria, establishing himself as king of the most fearsome hill on the World Cup circuit. The defending downhill champion raced down the twisting, 3,200-meter-long Streif course in a record 1 minute 56.04 seconds, bettering his time on the same track Friday by 64 one-hundredths of a second. A. J. Kitt of Rochester was second in 1:56.39. Patrick Ortlieb of Austria delighted the partisan crowd of 30,000 by finishing third in 1:56.63. Heinzer's victory solidified his grip atop the overall downhill World Cup standing. He has 411 points, followed by Kitt with 297 and Ortlieb with 272. (AP)
SKIING


West One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Brain Drain Continues And 49ers Feel Pain
With Bill Walsh, a former 49ers head coach, just a few miles to the south as the new coach at Stanford; Mike Holmgren, the former 49ers offensive coordinator, now head coach at Green Bay, and Sam Wyche, a former 49ers assistant, the new head coach at Tampa Bay -- and all of them on the prowl for assistant coaches -- San Francisco could be in for a big brain drain.
"It's a compliment to the 49ers organization and a testament to Coach Bill Walsh and George Seifert that we have several former assistants who have moved on to become head coaches or who are attractive to other teams," said Carmen A. Policy, president of the 49ers.
"But it does make it more difficult for us. Two key members of our staff have been offered positions with Mike Holmgren. It doesn't allow us to settle down after the season and begin the work of preparing for the next season."


Corrections
An article on Dec. 29 about a manufacturer of computer terminals that moved to Long Island from the Far East misidentified the company.
It is Applied Digital Data Systems Inc.


Hospitals Selection: Different Lessons
As "Meeting the New Head of County Hospitals" (Dec. 29) made clear, the County Medical Center's recent history taught different lessons to different players.
County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, the Board of Legislators, Mack L. Carter Jr., Carol Farkas (then chairwoman of the Hospital Advisory Board) and the physicians represented by Dr.
George E. Reed have offered diverse and interesting interpretations of what occurred before the proceedings to confirm Mr.
Carter as Commissioner of Hospitals.
The disparities are so great as to suggest that either the players live in different worlds from each other or that none of their statements can be believed without reservation.


P. D. Q. Bach: The Big Joke May Be on Us
Invitations to laughter in music should be accepted graciously and without second thoughts.
But lately it has been getting harder to tell jokes from jeremiads; parody has begun to seem like the real thing.
So one often doesn't know whether to laugh or -- write a column.
An innocent pioneer of contemporary musical humor isPeter Schickele, who recently performed P. D. Q. Bach's "Fantasieshtick" for piano and orchestra at Carnegie Hall.
In this composition from the "Sturm und Dreck" period of the late but unmourned composer, there was Olympic virtuosity (a somersault landing Mr. Schickele at the keyboard was instantly followed by numerical ratings from the orchestra); there was an improvised cadenza (taking off from "Heart and Soul"); there was even a part for continuo (rap rhythms piped through a speaker).


Far From Verdi And Puccini
To the Editor:
After 12 years of torrential blather and hoopla over "The Ghosts of Versailles," most critics were weighted in its favor because it was a good cause: a native American opera at the Met!
But it was stillborn from the start.
To begin with, the subject matter is hardly timely or consequential.
There is no spontaneous outburst that compels one to sing -- it's all sterile, manufactured, ground out like so much sausage.
Skill, but no operatic feel; craft, but no inspiration.


SUNY Purchase Gala Will Honor Dr. King
THE official observance of Martin Luther King Day is tomorrow, five days past the birth date of the civil rights leader.
On Friday comes a major county celebration of the Rev.
Dr.
King and his ideals of nonviolent progress toward freedom and equality.
Dubbed "Music America" by its organizers, the New Orchestra of Westchester and Pepsico, the gala on Friday at 8 P.M. at the State University of New York at Purchase is a benefit for 20 community organizations.
The program will be repeated and expanded somewhat as part of the orchestra's regular subscription series at SUNY Purchase on Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 3 P.M.


Exabyte Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


FirstFed Northen Ky.  Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Balancing Nature's Claims and International Free Trade
AS a filling for sandwiches, tuna long ago gained a hallowed spot among the nation's favorite lunchtime staples.
But as the focus of a dispute between the United States and 30 other nations, the simple tuna sandwich is proving to be a far more complex emblem of an enormously risky change in the world's commerce, the linking of ecological concerns to international trade.


Talking: Taxes; New Rules To Figure Deductions
AS homeowners begin to prepare their 1991 tax returns they should take special note of new rules and forms if they have a home office, if they have an annual income of more than $100,000 or if they refinanced a mortgage last year.
Those who operate a home-based business or profession, for instance, will have to disclose far more when calculating allowable office expenses on a new form being tied to Schedule C.


SAUDIS PRESS U.S. FOR HELP IN OUSTER OF IRAQ'S LEADER
Saudi Arabia is pressing the Bush Administration to organize a large covert action campaign in Iraq aimed at dividing Iraq's army and toppling Saddam Hussein, United States and allied officials say.
The Saudi initiative seeks an allied effort to supply arms and intelligence to Kurdish rebels in northern Iraq, Shiite Muslim fighters in the south and Sunni Muslim opposition forces in central Iraq.
The aim is to draw out and divide Mr.
Hussein's last Republican Guard divisions protecting his strongholds around Baghdad and subject them to allied air assaults.


American Franchise Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


First National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Man Who Dreamed of Faeryland
How fine it would be if one were able to wander the Irish countryside accompanied by an erudite friend capable of spouting precisely appropriate lines by William Butler Yeats at the proper moments.
In Sligo, in the shadows of Ben Bulben, or in Galway, at Coole Park, the words of the man who dreamed of Faeryland still echo.
W.
B.
YEATS: Images of Ireland (Macmillan, $35) captures well the Ireland that Yeats knew and loved and wrote about, "where all outward things were the image of an inward life." Alain Le Garsmeur's reserved yet knowing photographs, in both color and black and white, are untainted by any nostalgic glow.
They are accompanied by the scholar Bernard McCabe's useful and informative chronology and introductory essay, and paired with exceedingly well-chosen extracts from Yeats's poetry, memoirs, essays and plays.
The photographs illuminate the text, while the text adds depth and meaning to the pictures.
This elegant volume makes accessible the subtle passions and simplicities of the mental and physical Irish landscapes.


Q and A
Help for Home Buyers  Question: I am trying to buy a house in the city.
I understand that there are programs to help first-time home buyers with mortgages.
Is there a source for information on this kind of assistance? . . .
Gurunath Pasumarty, Rego Park, Queens


PAST DUE
Thanks to Erik Larson for his very personal treatment of a situation no doubt familiar to many, many people -- the agonizing, aggravating business of settling a deceased parent's estate (About Men: "Past Due," Dec. 22).
The impersonal society in which we live -- a society we deal with daily without thought -- comes into sharp focus at the time of a loved one's death.
STEPHEN H. BUSCH Norwalk, Conn.


Camera
Amateur photographers will soon be able to see their pictures displayed on their television screens, thanks to a compact disk system developed jointly by the Eastman Kodak Company and Philips N.V.
The system, which is called Photo CD, will go on sale this summer.
The two major parts are a compact disk that looks just like the ones that play music, and a disk player that resembles a videocassette recorder.


Salvador Warily Prepares for War's Aftermath
AS though the civil war in El Salvador were dying a human death, faces from the whole course of the conflict seemed to flash before Government and rebel leaders as they made their ceremonious peace here last week.
A Catholic Church human rights advocate sat at the treaty signing not far from a conservative businessman whose family was reputed to have financed paramilitary death squads.
A few feet away, a retired Army colonel who has become one of the country's more garrulous right-wing politicians could look over at one of the guerrilla commanders whom he had once fought.
Across the ideological spectrum, no one save a few bewildered young guerrillas and a few more military officers acted as though there might have been anything they had lost.
Dr.
Charles Clements, an American physician who spent a year tending to rebel wounded on a strategic Salvadoran volcano, had a pleasant chat with one Salvadoran Army general; Jennifer Jean Casolo, an American religious worker who was once jailed by the Salvadoran security forces on charges of stockpiling weapons for the guerrillas, shook hands with another.
The United States Ambassador to El Salvador, William G. Walker, wrapped an arm around Joaquin Villalobos, the guerrilla commander whom American officials had most despised, and talked about having lunch back in San Salvador one day soon.


Ms. Mackenzie Has Wedding
Wendy Mackenzie and Alexander Cochrane Cortesi were married yesterday at the bride's apartment in Manhattan.
Judge Pierre N. Leval of Federal District Court in Manhattan officiated.
Ms.
Mackenzie is the executive director of Citizens for Family Planning in New York and a chairwoman of the Women's Campaign Research Fund, a foundation that assists women running for public office.
She graduated from Radcliffe College.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
Henry J. Heinz 2d of New York and London and the late John Mackenzie Robertson.


Brooklyn Man Stabbed During Subway Fight
A 39-year-old Brooklyn man was stabbed and critically injured early yesterday morning during a fight on a Manhattan subway train that apparently began when he made remarks to three teen-age girls, the police said.
The man, Nathan Schelnis, was riding a southbound No. 6 train just after midnight when the teen-agers passed him and he said something to them, said Albert W. O'Leary, a Transit Police spokesman.


First Bancorp of Ohio reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Another Blow To a Downtown Already Faltering
THIS city is 351 years old, and downtown is beginning to look its age.
The area, once a lively entertainment and shopping center, has been declining for years, with more and more vacant storefronts.
A dramatic change occurred on Dec. 30: a fire that destroyed a building at Main Street and North Avenue housing a dozen businesses.
It was a shot from the blue, like a patient with a chronic heart condition who suddenly falls and breaks a leg.


Genentech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mutual Funds; What the Readers Are Asking
Here are answers to some recent questions from readers of this column.
Question: Not long ago you wrote about funds that invest in the 10 highest-yielding stocks in the Dow Jones industrial average.
The funds mentioned are all sold with sales charges.
I have received a mail solicitation for an investment newsletter that, as a bonus for subscribing, promises to tell me the name of a no-load fund that follows the same strategy.
Could you tell me which fund this is?
Answer: Sorry, no luck.
Analysts at Morningstar Inc., a mutual-funds research group in Chicago, screened 1,080 stock funds for funds holding 12 or fewer stocks.
Of the 29 that came up, "none fit the bill," said John Rekenthaler, editor of Morningstar Mutual Funds.
The data base excludes funds less than six months old, very small funds with less than $25,000 in assets and fewer than 1,000 shareholders and funds from which Morningstar could not obtain information, a rarity.
While it is not a perfect match, Mr.
Rekenthaler suggests the T. Rowe Price Equity-Income Fund, a no-load fund that buys large high-yielding stocks, mostly in the industrial sector.
Q: I am puzzled by your recent discussion of Individual Retirement Account rollovers.
Dreyfus prepared an example showing that an account worth $245,285 would yield monthly annuity checks of $529, or a 2.59 percent "dividend" rate on the value of the account, whereas an account worth $334,348 would yield monthly annuity checks of $2,075, a 7.44 percent "dividend" rate.
Why the huge difference?
And since good stock mutual funds earn 10 percent or more annually, why not simply reinvest I.R.A. money in a fund instead of taking annuity payments?
A: Trying to calculate a "dividend" rate is a natural urge but difficult to accomplish.
The computer model used by Dreyfus includes many variables, including an inflation factor.
As a result, future I.R.A. distributions are stated in terms of today's dollars.
In the Dreyfus example, the $2,075 payment was figured for a 55-year-old worker scheduled to begin receiving payments in seven years, so inflation played a much smaller role than it did with the second worker, a 35-year-old whose payments would not begin for 25 years.
The second person's payments might be thousands of dollars a month in 2017, but worth only $529 in 1991 dollars.
As for your second question, you are correct in stating that stock funds return about 10 percent annually.
But this is true only over the long term; funds may lose money in some periods.
Retirees who rely on investment income to cover living expenses cannot afford to keep the bulk of their portfolios in stocks.
Furthermore, many stock funds do not provide regular income because their goal is capital appreciation.
Q: A recent column discussing fees omitted the commission expenses incurred when fund managers buy and sell stocks.
The higher a fund's turnover, the higher its expenses.
Why aren't commission costs, which can be significant, disclosed in a fund's prospectus?
A: Although commission costs are not disclosed in a fund's prospectus, they are covered in its Statement of Additional Information, or S.A.I.
This report was developed to let funds pare the information required in prospectuses, which were becoming unwieldy.
Starting in 1983, the Securities and Exchange Commission let funds disclose some information in S.A.I.'s.
These data include detailed investment policies and restrictions, portfolio transaction costs (including commissions) and information about trustees and management contracts.
Unlike prospectuses, S.A.I.'s are not sent routinely to investors, but they are available upon request.
One last point: Commission costs are subtracted in figuring a fund's total return.
Q: In a column about figuring a fund's return, you said the price of the Fidelity Magellan Fund was $44.29 on Dec. 31, 1985, and $53.93 on Dec. 31, 1990, and then concluded that the five-year return equaled 99 percent.
But I get 121.7 percent when I divide the beginning and ending share prices.
Please explain.
A: For starters, you calculated the rate of increase incorrectly.
To get a fund's return on principal, you should divide the difference between the beginning and ending share prices by the beginning price.
Here, the principal-only return is 21.7 percent (your result minus 100 percent, the initial investment), substantially lower than the fund's 99 percent "total return." As the chart shows, total return can be much higher than principal-only return because it includes dividends and capital distributions paid by the fund in addition to the changes in principal value.
Note: Many readers have asked how to contact three funds mentioned on Jan. 5.
Harbor International can be reached at (419) 247-2477; Financial Strategic Health Sciences, (800) 525-8085, and Pimit Total Return, (800) 443-6915.
Comprehensive fund information, including telephone numbers, can be found in the Morningstar Mutual Fund Sourcebook, available in some libraries ($225 for the two-volume set).


Crime Visits New York's Children, And Dread Haunts Many Parents
Dominick Masullo allows his 13-year-old son to go by himself to the store, about a block from their home in the northeast Bronx -- but not without specific instructions about what to do if a stranger approaches or he senses some other danger.
"He knows how to look around and how to run," Mr.
Masullo said.
"If there's a big problem, you run into a store and call a parent. If the storekeeper tells you to leave, you hug the cash register. What's the thing the storekeeper cares most about? His money. You don't touch the money. But he's going to call the police, and they're going to come, which is what you want."


Rail Europe
To the Editor: You have carried letters twice recently (July 21 and Oct. 13) concerning problems with the new Rail Europe operations in White Plains.
My experience has found them incompetent and uncooperative.
It should have been a warning when they sent timetables expiring in September after I wrote asking about travel in October.
My wife and I did buy second-class French rail-and-drive passes from them, along with reservations for a trip shortly after our arrival in Paris.
These cost a $10 surcharge in addition to the $16 reservation fee.
Later it turned out that Rail Europe had made reservations in first class, useless with our passes.
JOHN T. YOKE Corvallis, Ore.
Dagobert M. Scher, executive vice president of Rail Europe, responds:
The material we send out is from the railroads.
Since schedules change at the end of September and we receive the new timetables from Europe in mid-November, we continue to distribute what we have until the new ones arrive so travelers may at least get an idea of the time a trip trakes.
While we regret the inconvenience on the reservations, we include a notice with every order that documents should be examined immediately.
We would gladly have rectified the error if they had notified us before they left.


Baseball Plans A Fall League
Major league baseball announced on Friday that it would form a six-team fall league to start play in Arizona later this year.
The league will be made up of six top Class AA and Class AAA prospects from each major league team.
Plans call for a 54-game season to run from Oct. 5 through Dec. 6, with a playoff series at the end.


CAMPUS LIFE: Cornell; Trustee Comes To the Defense Of His Fraternity
Angry about the way disciplinary proceedings against his fraternity have been handled, John S. Dyson, a Cornell University trustee, said last week that he would take the unusual step of bringing the fraternity's case to the board of trustees at a meeting on Friday in New York City.
Mr.
Dyson, who ran for the United States Senate in New York in 1986 and has held several prominent positions in state government, graduated from Cornell in 1965 and was a member of Alpha Delta Phi.
In a telephone interview from his home in Millbrook, N.Y., Mr.
Dyson said that he was concerned that "Greek organizations are singled out as compared to other similar organizations, like the chess club and the football team or anyone else who decides to have a party with alcohol."


Breaking Up Yugoslavia; Two Countries Emerge as Another Dies


India Alters Fees For Visas Again
The Indian Government, under a storm of protest from its own travel industry and tour operators abroad, has revised its tourist visa fees for a second time in as many months, reducing some of them substantially.
According to the Indian Embassy in Washington, visitors will pay $5 instead of $25 for a transit visa, which is necessary for even a brief stopover in India.


The Nation; The Nation's Schools Learn A 4th R: Resegregation
THIRTY-EIGHT years after Chief Justice Earl Warren warned that the South's system of dividing schools by race gave black children "a feeling of inferiority," segregated schools are on the rise again in many parts of the country.
The notable exception is the South, where the vigilance of court-mandated desegregation was centered.
Now, according to a study sponsored by the National School Boards Association and released this month, it is in the North's urban centers and suburbs and in the West that minority youngsters find themselves increasingly in separate and unequal schools.
Indeed, a black family that moves to Georgia or Tennessee is more likely to see its child grow up in integrated schools than if it remains in Michigan or New Jersey.
New York, Illinois, Texas, New Jersey and California are among the top five states in which minority youngsters are most likely to go to schools that are 50 to 100 percent minority students.


Jimbo's Jumbos reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Indiana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Jan. 4  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 135,000
161 West 16th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 850-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 3 exposures; maintenance $827, 50% tax-deductible (Brokers: Eychner Associates - Delson/Ginsberg)  Fort Washington 122,000
730 Fort Washington Ave.  (Tryon Towers)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; dining area, sunken living room, 3 exposures, Fort Tryon Park view; maintenance $631, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Stein/Perry Real Estate)  SoHo 325,000
96 Grand Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. co-op; elevator, 12-ft. tin ceilings, south exposure; maintenance $700, 50% tax-deductible (Brokers: Halstead Property Co.-Bascom &amp; Sears)  Upper East Side 330,000
435 East 65th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining el, terrace, remodeled kitchen and bath; maintenance $1,262, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: David Day Realty)  Upper East Side 900,000
31 East 79th Street  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, private elevator lobby, entry gallery, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, fireplace; maintenance $2,230, 28% tax-deductible (Broker: William B. May)  United Nations Area 280,000
100 U.N.
Plaza  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 770-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, terrace; common charge $523, taxes $1,464 (Broker: Kingdom Realty)  BRONX  Allerton Avenue Area 165,000
27-21 Paulding Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: New Day Realty)  Baychester 190,000
831 Cranford Avenue  2-family, detached, wood-frame house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each unit; finished basement, 2-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Kensington 185,000
502 East 5th Street  3-family, detached, wood-frame house; dining rooms in two upper floor units; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in each; finished basement, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Homes 'R' Beautiful)  Park Slope 203,500
390 10th Street  2-family, 3-story, Federal-Styled, brick house; 3 bedrooms 1 1/2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; finished basement, 18.8- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $905 (Broker: Joseph Berman Realty)  QUEENS  Corona 180,000
37-58 100th Street  2-family, detached, wood-frame house; 4 bedrooms in primary unit; 3 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room in each; 25- by 107-ft. lot; taxes $950 (Broker: Century 21/Elms Real Estate)  Flushing 152,500
146-44 32d Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, sun porch, 33- 100-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: Agranoff Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Brighton Heights 140,000
160 Brighton Avenue  2-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in both; hospitality suite on 1st floor, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $800 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)  Travis 138,000
3892 Victory Boulevard  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished loft in attic, 60- by 150-ft. lot; taxes $775 (Broker: George K. Wonica)


NBD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Civility Breaks Out in Hockey
THE strangest sight of the National Hockey League All-Star Game weekend was Ed Hospodar scoring a goal to win the old-timers' game Friday night.
This is a man who generally used his hands for other purposes, such as pushing in the noses and crumpling the ears of his enemies, of whom there were legions.
But that's what happens when they temporarily suspend the pugnacious ethos of hockey and allow skating and shooting to take a weekend gambol.
Even the Ed Hospodars of the world become goal-scoring heroes.


Amy Franz to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry A. Franz of Upper Montclair, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Katherine Franz to Christopher John Masalsky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Masalsky Jr. of Stoughton, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.


Sarah Sasson, A Buyer, Weds
Sarah Lynne Sasson, a buyer for her father's clothing business, Sasson's Youthworld in Irvington, N.J., was married last evening to Bruce Kayle, a partner in the New York law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy.
Rabbi Nathan Goldberg officiated at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Kayle, 26 years old, is the daughter of Maurice Sasson, chairman and chief executive of Youthworld, and Sonia Sasson-Forzano, a social worker, both of New York.
The bride graduated from the University of Michigan.


First Federal Savings Bank- Utah reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Commercial Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BSD Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Edison 90,000
1028 New Durham Road
2-bedroom. 1-bath, over 100 year-old colonial; handyman special, full basement, eat-in kitchen; taxes $2,789.
Freehold 195,000
15 Cornwall Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, h/w floors, family room, c/a; taxes $3,709.
Howell 160,500
13 Cherry Tree Circle
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; 1-car garage, c/a, family room, deck; taxes $3,272.
Jackson 112,000
6 Tulip Court
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 27-year-old contemporary; family room, 1-car garage, w/w carpeting; taxes $2,611.
Lakewood 46,000
68A Sage Court
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old, ranch-style condominium; 1-car garage, c/a, monthly maintenance $90; taxes $2,071.
Raritan Township 185,000
28 Bristol Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; deck, finished basement; taxes $2,300.
OTHER AREAS Fairfield, Conn. 300,000
1563 Round Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; exceptional landscaping, 0.33 acre; taxes $4,028.
Bronxville, N.Y. 240,000
20 Chatfield Road
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 77-year-old English stucco; den, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $3,499.
Holbrook, L.I. 143,500
880 Green Belt Parkway  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 14-year-old ranch; finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.


IN SHORT: FICTION
CRIMSON By Shirley Conran. Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.


POSTINGS: No Condos on the Cove; Wave of the Future Recedes
It was the ideal note on which to end the Roaring 80's: condominium yacht berths off the World Financial Center in Battery Park City.
Watermark Associates, headed by George Nicholson, a British yacht builder, and Emilio Azcarraga, a Mexican media executive, said in 1989 that 26 units would be offered for up to $2.25 million, depending on vessel length.
Not one berth was sold.


Crested Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


All About/Packaging; Learning to Wrap Products in Less -- or Nothing at All
Packaging, that ubiquitous staple of modern life, is big business, adding as much as $70 billion a year to the nation's economy.
It protects goods from being tampered with and from being battered during the journey from factory to store.
It preserves food and helps sell the products within.
It also represents a new way for financially strapped local governments, which bear the cost of disposing of garbage, to cut their costs.
A variety of state legislative initiatives would force manufacturers to be accountable for a package after it was sold and thereby cut down on what is the fastest-growing component of the garbage crisis, accounting for more than 30 percent of the nation's municipal solid waste.


Beauty: Fitness; Revival of the Fittest
Day 1: Liberation!
I've finally broken off my relationship with the Stairmaster and landed in paradise.
Goodbye to stuffy gyms and chlorinated pools.
It's time to test myself against nature instead of the Nautilus. (Looks like the gods have built the ultimate spa right here on the island of Kauai.) Talk about connecting with nature: Today I climbed a tree!
Later showered under a waterfall -- the water pressure beats the trickle in my 10th-floor apartment back home.
Day 2: Postcard from the edge (of a volcano).
Explored the crater on Mount Waialeale.
Expected to see something like a giant lava lamp, but the bottom of the caldera is a primeval swamp!
With 450 inches of rain a year, the fires went out a long time ago.
Low-cal lunch: Cut open a pineapple with my Swiss Army knife.


Some Films Need A Hand, a Hip . . .
The casting notice reads: "5 feet 7 inches, 114 lbs., 32B-25-35, long blond hair, olive skin." Irena Kamal, who used to oversee a modeling service for Playboy Enterprises and now runs her own Beverly Hills modeling agency, studies the specifications for only a moment.
Then she steps to a wall covered with her clients' photos and measurements.
"This girl," she says, "this girl and this girl."


Bell Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mellon Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


'On the Altar of Freedom'
To the Editor:
In the Dec. 22 Letters column, two readers took me to task for writing that "On the Altar of Freedom," a collection of Civil War letters by Cpl.
James Henry Gooding, was "the only sustained contemporaneous account of life in a black regiment I've ever seen." In the overall context of the review, I meant Gooding's was the only account of regimental life
by a black soldier
of which I was aware.
There may well be another such volume, but neither of the books your correspondents suggest fills that bill.
Thomas Wentworth Higginson's "Army Life in a Black Regiment" is a classic of Civil War literature, but its author was a white officer, not a black soldier, while the author of "Thomas Morris Chester, Black Civil War Correspondent" was a civilian.
GEOFFREY C. WARD New York


Jennifer Baum To Wed in April
April wedding plans for Jennifer Beth Baum and Dr.
David Richard Gruen have been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard S. Baum of Merrick, L.I.
Dr.
Gruen is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Gruen of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Ms.
Baum, 25 years old, is a magna cum laude graduate of Brown University.
She is to graduate in May from the Cornell University Medical College, where her fiance, a graduate of Cornell, received an M.D. degree.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Haythe &amp; Curley.


He's a 'Very Low-Key' Nassau Deputy
WHO is Bob Olden?
An informal poll of reporters who cover Nassau County scene found that none had ever heard of him.
"I guess I'm very low key," said Robert L. Olden Sr., a Deputy County Executive for three years.
He holds the highest office of any of the scant number of blacks in the county government.


Topics of The Times; Frankly, It's an Abuse
Challenging an incumbent in 1990, freshman Representative Wayne Gilchrest, Republican of Maryland, assailed widespread abuse of the Congressional free mailing privilege, known as franking.
This year, he is among the abusers.
Mr.
Gilchrest, running for re-election in a district reshaped by reapportionment, is one of many House members who are blanketing areas picked up in redistricting with taxpayer-financed mail.
Members who send unsolicited mass mailings outside their present districts are not breaking the law.
But by exploiting every last advantage of incumbency, they are cheating democracy.
Fortunately, a bill before the House gives members a chance to remedy the abuse when they return to work this week.


A Star Is Reborn In Broadway Hit
The little boy is very naughty, so he does not get a Popsicle.
He can have one, with his friends, if he says he is sorry.
"The Popsicle sat in the freezer for six months," said the mother, Mary-Jean Messier.
"Then we threw it out."


Charlie Ventura, 75, Big-Band Saxophonist
Charlie Ventura, a tenor saxophone star of the big-band era, died on Friday at Greenwood Health Care Center in Pleasantville, N.J.
He was 75 years old and lived in Atlantic City.
He died of cancer of the lung, a family member said.


Insurgency's End Seems Distant at Colombia Talks
An end seems distant in Colombia's guerrilla insurgency, the longest running in Latin America.
On Feb. 1, for the fourth time in eight months, representatives of the Government and the guerrillas are to meet in Caracas, Venezuela, in an attempt to negotiate a cease-fire.


Feasting on Focaccia, Crisp and Unadorned
TWENTY-SOME years of searching for anything approximating the flour tortillas I grew up eating in a Mexican neighborhood in Arizona should have taught me how rarely good breads travel.
But I was still surprised to find that the focaccia baked everywhere in northern Italy was not even a distant cousin of the stuff turning up on the trendiest tables around New York these days.
Just as commercial tortillas are inevitably dry and brittle and lacking in the lard my old neighbors loved, emigrant focaccia is too often airy and oily and overdressed with peppers and olives compared with the real thing.
For 10 days in and around the northwestern province of Liguria last spring I ate the traditional flat bread every chance I got, from a truck stop to fancy restaurants, before realizing just what made it so much better than any I had had back home: Like tortillas, great focaccia is baked fresh every day.
It was never intended to have the shelf life of a Twinkie.


3 Officers Injured in Scuffle With Robbery Suspect
A Brooklyn man shot at an off-duty New York City police officer during an apparent robbery attempt yesterday and then scuffled with officers while being held at a precinct station house.
The off-duty officer and two other officers were slightly injured in the station house fracas.
The suspect, Michael Robinson, 24 years old, of 1002 Hancock Street in Bushwick, was charged with one count of attempted murder, one count of reckless endangerment, one count of criminal possession of a weapon, and three counts of assault.


A Worthy War
The historical revisionists are already at work.
Last year's triumph in the war against Iraq, they claim, has turned to ashes.
We won the war only to lose the peace.
But the naysayers who make this argument too cavalierly dismiss the strategic and diplomatic benefits produced by Operation Desert Storm.
To be sure, the fact that Saddam Hussein remains in power is deeply disturbing.
But this hardly constitutes an argument against the war, particularly since he would still be comfortably ensconced in Iraq and Kuwait if we had not moved against him.


The Dominoes That Didn't Fall
THE FOUR LITTLE DRAGONS
The Spread of Industrialization in East Asia.
By Ezra F. Vogel. 138 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $16.95.


CK Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Matlack Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Streetscapes: 'Scalped' Buildings; For Utility Alone, a Restored Cornice
THE stripping of cornices from older buildings was done routinely during facade renovations carried out from about 1950 to 1980.
But now the preservation ethic is so institutionalized that such alterations are becoming rare.
Nevertheless, there still are hundreds of "scalped" buildings left in the older parts of New York City -- a painful display of architectural mutilation.


Westinghouse Credit Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Butch and Sundance, Maybe. But Etta?
IN the movies, outnumbered and besieged, they went to glory in a hail of gunfire.
That was Paul Newman and Robert Redford in "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" in 1969.


How to End the Abortion War
THE VEINS IN HIS forehead bulged so prominently they might have been blue worms that had worked their way under the surface of his skin.
His eyes bulged, too, capillaries zigzagging from the pupils in all directions.
His face was pulled tight about the jaw, which thrust forward like a snowplow attachment on the grille of a truck.
From the flattened O of his mouth, the word "murderer" erupted in a regular rhythm, the repetition of the r's giving the word the sound of an outboard motor that failed to catch.
She, for her part, paced up and down directly in front of him, saying nothing.
Instead, she held high a large cardboard sign on a stick, showing the cartoonish drawing of a bloody coat hanger over the caption, "Never again." Like his, her face was taut with fury, her lips pressed together so tightly they folded under and vanished.
Whenever she drew close to him, she would deliberately lower the sign and turn it toward him, so that he would be yelling his "murderer" at the picture of the coat hanger.


Cara Operations reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 8


Corrections
A chart last Sunday with an article about short-sellers carried incorrect prices for the Varity Corporation.
Varity, one of the issues with the largest short positions a year ago, sold for $17.50 a share on Jan. 15, 1991; on Jan. 10, 1991, it sold for $12.50.


Miami Subs Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Is It Time To Haul Out The Shears?
There are movies that need to be long: "Greed," "The Godfather," "Gandhi" and "Gone With the Wind," just to name some G's.
Frankly, I could do with a little less of Bonnie Blue Butler, Scarlett and Rhett's whiny child.
But I don't have an unusually short attention span.
So when I started re-editing movies in my head this holiday season -- cutting out an extra scene here, snipping at a long speech there, wondering why Tom Berenger seemed to say everything three times during the three hours of "At Play in the Fields of the Lord" -- it didn't come from some frustrated urge to be a film editor or a barber or to be watching MTV.
Right now there are a dozen major movies that run more than two hours each, and most feel like it.


Miss Vickery to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Vickery of Summit, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Phyllis Eileen Vickery to George Paul Attisano, a son of Concetta Attisano of Hoboken, N.J., and Antonio Attisano of Botricello, Italy.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Vickery, 35 years old, graduated from Wittenberg University and is an associate in the financial institutions group at Paine Webber in New York.
Mr.
Attisano, 36, graduated from Rutgers University and is a foreign securities broker for the Mabon Securities Corporation in New York.


Lunar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ms. Hamilton To Wed in May
Comdr.
Arthur W. Hamilton, U.S.N. retired, and Mrs.
Hamilton of Greencastle, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Michaela Ann Hamilton, to Barry Readinger Buchter, a son of Harold S. Buchter and the late Sarah Buchter of Camp Hill, Pa.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hamilton, 43 years old, is the editorial director of Signet and Onyx books, a division of Penguin USA in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and has an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her father is a management consultant in Greencastle.


International Business Machines Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Style Makers; Gioconda Crivelli, Jewelry Designer
Gioconda Crivelli does not care much for what she terms "big rocks," and that bias shows in the jewelry she designs.
Wrought from 18- or 24-karat gold, her elves, birds, fish and flowers -- some with enamel, some with discreet stones -- have an Italian flair.
As her own best model, Ms.
Crivelli often wears a jade pendant with a necklace of gold oak leaves, each leaf set with an emerald at the base.
Another favorite piece is a gold elephant pin with blue enameled ears and emerald eyes, a tribute to her great-uncle, President William Howard Taft.


No Cinderella Story for Russian Economy; Bureaucratic Hangover
To the Editor:
Neither opening the Soviet marketplace to the law of supply and demand nor ending state subsidies will be able to remove "the corrupt bureaucracy from the marketplace" as William Safire suggests ("No 'Horror Show,' " column, Jan. 2).


Bear Stearns Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Knicks Short on Knack on the Perimeter
Wherever the Knicks have misplaced their offense, they need to find it quickly.
Heading into tonight's game against the Cleveland Cavaliers, New York had averaged 88 points in its previous two games.
And in Friday's disjointed 90-85 loss to the Milwaukee Bucks, the Knicks committed 20 turnovers and shot a frigid 40.7 percent from the field.


Concert Opera Company Makes Debut
THIS doesn't seem like the most propitious time to launch a new opera company, given the state of the economy, but Connecticut Concert Opera is about to do precisely that, introducing a four-event premiere season at the Centennial Theater in Simsbury.
"The economy is certainly a concern," said the president of the ensemble, John Wadhams, "but our fund-raising results to date have been most encouraging, and I believe we'll achieve our objective after the first performances.


Greater N.Y. Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the engagement of Lisa Ann Levitz to Jeffrey Wade Newman referred incorrectly to the Harry Levitz Company in Rockville Centre, L.I., which is headed by the bride's father.
It is a national sales representative for furniture manufacturers.


Singer to Singer


Apertus Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


First Western Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Acts of Kindness And Generosity
The article "Charities Say Tough Times Soften Hearts of Donors" (Dec. 15) describes a previous non-contributor who made a $1,000 donation to the Salvation Army.
The gentleman's charity was motivated because, on the checkout line in a supermarket, he had just witnessed a woman returning her Christmas turkey to the freezer; she said she did not have enough money to pay for all of her groceries.
I applaud this gentleman for his act of kindness and generosity, but there is one question I wish I could ask of him: why didn't you give money directly to the woman, so she could have the turkey?
Too many of us use anonymity as a vehicle for our kindness and contributions when personal contact and direct involvement, in appropriate circumstances, may have a more lasting result.
Whether this is through volunteer work at a hospital, school or homeless shelter, or just helping one family that needs the support of another member of the community, each of us, individually, is able to make a contribution to make this world better for everyone.
We need only choose to do so.


EA Engineering, Science, Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Milton Blutnick, 69, Survivor of Holocaust
Milton Blutnick, who survived two Nazi camps and became a leader in organizations dedicated to commemorating the Holocaust and helping its survivors, died on Wednesday at his home in Forest Hills, Queens.
He was 69 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Review/Film; Irish Tenor Is Focus Of Intrigue and Blarney
The luck of the Irish is readily apparent in "Hear My Song," both in front of the camera and behind the scenes.
This winning first feature by the Irish writer and director Peter Chelsom has the kind of blithe, fanciful magic that can't be achieved through skill alone.
Adrian Dunbar, Mr.
Chelsom's co-screenwriter, stars in "Hear My Song" as the charming rascal Micky O'Neill, who is just barely running a nightclub in an unnamed English city.
The place is on the brink of bankruptcy, and Micky's efforts to sweet-talk his landlords aren't coming to much.
"There are those who find a kind of giving in their taking; that's me," he says hopefully, causing the kindly looking old ladies who own the place to curse him.
Desperate measures are called for, but in this film's scheme of things, desperation and enchantment go hand in hand.


Whose Welfare?; The Poor, They Are Different, and in '92, Ever More Invisible
THE Democratic candidates for President, anxious to woo back the disaffected middle class, have all but abandoned their traditional role as champions of the disenfranchised.
It is almost an oversight, this eerie silence on the campaign trail about issues that affect the poor.
But it is a telling omission for the party that had traditionally spoken for the disadvantaged, especially during a battle over whether states should cut entitlement programs to balance strained budgets.


First Security reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Spring Training Tours in Florida
Baseball fans can take their own road trip to watch big league teams in spring training with Florida Sports Tours, a specialist in baseball packages.
The Massachusetts company has four programs of either six or nine days that include accommodations in Courtyard by Marriott hotels, tickets to games, tour leaders, transfer to Orlando airport and bus transportation to the ballparks.


Centura Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shade Tree Commissions Now Have Teeth Like Chainsaws
BY just about everybody's account, the 150-year-old birch that once stood in a quiet neighborhood of Summit, N.J., had the girth, the height and the expanse of limbs to be justifiably called stately.
"It was one of the oldest trees in Summit," said Alfred Mickens, foreman of the city's parks and trees unit.
"It was really rare and one of the most important species."


Susan F. Tischman Is to Wed G. A. Long
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael B. Tischman of Scotch Plains, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Frances Tischman, to Gregory Alan Long, a son of Grace Long of Folcroft, Pa., and the late Ralph Long.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Tischman, 23 years old, graduated from Marshall College and is a paralegal at the Bethesda, Md., law firm of Bastian, Clague &amp; Clancy.
Mr.
Long, also 23, a graduate of Millersville University, is a special-education teacher at the Edgewood (Md.) Middle School


Silence of the Father
KEEPER OF THE MOON
By Tim McLaurin. 316 pp. New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


Germantown Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Northstar Computer Forms Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Tech Notes; Dish With a Difference
Is that a dish or a daisy?
A radio antenna designed at the Georgia Institute of Technology has characteristics of both.
The satellite dish's edges are serrated to look like flower petals.
Radar, telecommunications and satellite dishes operate best when sidelobe radiation -- energy scattered from the edge of the dishes -- is diminished.
This reduces the chance that signals will be sent in undesired directions or interfere with one another.
In recent years, scientists have attempted to reduce sidelobe radiation by placing absorbing materials on the edges of dishes.


U.S. Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Looking for Mr. Locke


United Missouri Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31





Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Making a Difference; Hertz to New York: Pay More
When he founded the first rent-a-car company in 1927, John Hertz thought he could control the business from top to bottom by building the cars himself, and came up with a model called the "Drive-Ur-Self," complete with running boards and a windshield that opened for ventilation.
But he eventually decided that buying the standard models built by other manufacturers was more practical.
Now, 65 years later, the current chairman of the Hertz Corporation, Frank A. Olson, is also trying to keep control, in his case over the company's losses in New York City.
Mr.
Olson's solution -- imposing charges that would shoo away Hertz's riskiest customers -- may last longer than the Drive-Ur-Self, but it is already taking him down a rough road.


Palaces More Real Than Royal
IT wasn't very long ago that staying in a palace hotel in Rajasthan was supposed to make you feel like Hollywood's version of royalty, surrounded by luxury in a romantic desert world of maharajahs and maharanis.
Truth was, the real Rajasthani princes now tell you over a cup of tea on the porch, a lot of what passed for the royal life and Rajasthani culture was fantasy created by hotel chains and travel agents.
In the last few years, the scions of warrior Rajput families, long stripped of their titles and princely purses by democratic India, have begun a kind of palace revolution to reclaim their heritage.
They are opening many smaller family homes and spectacular hilltop forts to draw visitors into the real daily life of India's most dramatic state.
In different cases, near-ruins are being bought by urban Indians, expertly restored and filled with antiques.
Either way, palaces with worn rugs and mended chairs are still palaces, rooted in the hamlets and towns they tower above.





Fees, Not Fines
To the Editor:
In the article on Dec. 22 concerning "The Rules Governing In-House Behavior," there is a discussion of "fines" imposed by boards of directors.


Stryker Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


HONG KONG WANTS VOICE ON GOVERNOR
Legislators will vote next week on a motion calling for the colonial Government here to convey to London the views of Hong Kong people on who should be appointed the next Governor.
While the motion seems polite, reasonable and even innocuous, having Hong Kong people ask for a say in the appointment of their Governor is an audacious proposal, one never made before in the 150-year history of the British colony.


Automobile Protection reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


The Esthetic Pleasure of Trees in Winter
WINTER walks are wonderful to take.
Just being outdoors is a pleasure, and walking is one sure way to see the architecture of trees.
The leaves are gone, and their barks are exposed.
One of the trees that really stands out at this time of year is the sycamore.
It can be seen for quite some distance, because the glorious bark is never as clearly visible as it is now.
Without leaves the outline is truly spectacular.
The massive tree has exfoliating bark.
That is a fancy botanist's term to describe bark that flakes off in irregular patterns to reveal what is underneath.
This pattern is what makes the sycamore worth a second look.
Some may want to describe the massive trunk as having a jigsawlike pattern.
Others may say the tree's bark appears mottled.


Skipping Bail: Another View
As a social scientist who has studied bail on a national scale and the New Jersey criminal courts for the last 10 years, I was greatly surprised by the shocking findings in the article "Defendants Increasingly Skip Bail" (Dec. 22).
The conclusion that approximately half the pending cases in the state's county courts involve fugitives and an explanation that this unprecedented statistic is most likely caused by overreliance on the 10 percent bail option fly in the face of both common sense and national trends.
The article generally reads more like a propaganda piece for the bail bonding industry, which has had its business significantly reduced as a result of the 10 percent bail option alternative.


Walking Sticks
To the Editor: The lovely picture of climbers on Fox Glacier in New Zealand ("New Zealand Wilderness," Oct. 27) showed all seven followers using improper technique by holding their walking sticks on the downhill side of the slope they were traversing.
Having climbed Mount Washington in winter, I have learned that anyone putting weight on a downhill stick that happens to sink in unexpectedly is in danger of falling downhill.
Hikers using sticks or alpenstocks must take care to switch them from hand to hand in order to keep them on the uphill side.


Stacy Emerick To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
John Durston Emerick of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Stacy Therese Emerick, to Peter Thomas Heller, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter G. Heller of Waterbury, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Emerick, 21 years old, is an assistant manager at the Doubleday Book Shop in Princeton.
Her father owns the Millstone Group, an advertising and printing company in Princeton.


ULSTER'S WARFARE TAKES VARIED TOLL
Down the block from Bedford Street, where 800 pounds of explosives blew a three-foot crater in the middle of the downtown area this month, a white-tie dinner and dance was held this week beneath the copper-covered dome of City Hall.
The Queen and the Princess of Romania were invited, along with the Lord Mayor of Belfast and a number of American businessmen.
Caspar W. Weinberger, Secretary of Defense in the Reagan Administration and now publisher of Forbes magazine, was the guest of honor.
And after a dinner of poached Irish salmon and roast beef, Eddie Haughey, a businessman who organized the affair, rose to say he had gathered them all together to "foster the good name of Northern Ireland."


Guess We Just Don't Figure in U.S. Car Makers' Marketing Plan
To the Editor:
While experts decide who to blame for the American auto industry's problems, I'd like to tell my story of trying to buy an American car.


Coins
For some people, coin collecting is a love, and for others it is a legacy.
Often, a coin collection cherished by the original owner is passed on to heirs who have neither the interest nor the expertise to know what to do with all those old nickels and quarters.
The first thing to do is to figure out which of three different types of collections you've inherited.
There's the true collection, one for which the collector spent hours poring through catalogues and browsing in coin shops, carefully selecting the best pieces he could afford.
Such a collection can take years to build and is usually handsomely packaged and meticulously catalogued.
It probably includes sales records for coins bought and sold and a list of each coin in the collection.


Curtain to Rise on a Revival, the John Gotti Trial
On the evening of Dec. 16, 1985, a team of gunmen shot and killed Paul Castellano, the reputed boss of the Gambino crime family, as he stepped from his black Cadillac in front of Sparks Steak House in midtown Manhattan.
In a Brooklyn courtroom on Tuesday morning, John Gotti goes on trial in a Federal racketeering case that includes charges that he murdered Mr.
Castellano to become the boss of the Gambinos, the most powerful Mafia group in the country.


Summer of '92: Simplicity Is All
The key to the summer collections that designers began unveiling on Seventh Avenue last week is simplicity.
The clothes are pared down, functional, easy.
Black, white and gray are dominant; sometimes there's a touch of red, but infrequently.
Despite this minimalist approach, or perhaps because of it, the clothes have style.
They are not the kind that make a woman fret about how the panel falls or how the bow is tied, because there aren't many panels or bows.


Detroit Goes Distance
To the Editor:
"Don't Brake for Detroit" (Op-Ed, Jan. 7) by James Bovard tells us that United States cars are "of relatively low quality." We hear this Detroit-bashing rather constantly.
Yet on the front page of the same paper  [ some editions ]  a news article mentions a woman in California who has 300,000 miles on her Jeep.
Meanwhile, in Mexico we see American autos still going 20 to 30 years later.
Poorer quality?
WARREN LEE SMITH Santa Barbara, Calif., Jan. 7, 1992


Luster Eludes the Post-Johnson Lakers
Things just aren't the same anymore.
Oh, Jack Nicholson still sits courtside every night, but 10 weeks after the bad news, the joy is still missing from the Los Angeles Lakers.
The recovery period has been long and the transition sometimes uneven, but more than anything else, the Lakers simply don't seem to be unbeatable anymore.


Library Bureau Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


POSTINGS: Landlords' Forum; Face-to-Face With Policy Makers
Landlords.
Tenants see them as personifications of power.
But landlords see themselves as pawns of public officials, and many of them have been longing for an opportunity to take their problems directly to the state and city officials who make policy for rental housing.
On Tuesday they will get their chance at an all-day forum sponsored by the Rent Stabilization Association, the trade association representing residential building owners.
Among the officials expected to attend and respond to questions are Felice Michetti, Commissioner of the city's Department of Housing, Preservation and Development; Carol O'Cleireacain, Commissioner of the Department of Finance, and Angelo Aponte, Commissioner of the State Division of Housing and Community Renewal.


What the Architect Said
To the Editor:
In my review of recent books on Louis I. Kahn (Dec. 29), the omission of two "becauses" during telephonic revision spoiled one of his most revealing remarks.
It should have read: "Paestum is beautiful to me because it is less beautiful than the Parthenon . . . because from it the Parthenon came." Also, in mentioning others who worked in a curatorial capacity on the exhibition that called David B. Brownlee and David G. De Long's "Louis I. Kahn" into being, I neglected to include Sherri Geldin and Elizabeth A. T. Smith of the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles.
WILLIAM H. JORDY Providence, R.I.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bay Shore 450,814.91
32 Lawrence Lane  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; dining room, new eat-in kitchen, den, sun room, 3 fireplaces, docking rights; taxes $8,100.
Farmingville 135,000
14 Eva Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 12-year-old ranch; dining room, den, basement; taxes $3,600.
Holbrook 143,500
880 Green Belt Parkway  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 14-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.
Islip 465,000
60 East Bayberry Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 50-year-old ranch; dining room, Florida room, fireplace, 2-car garage, 1-acre waterfront; taxes $11,200.
Nissequogue 380,000
6A Smith Lane  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 25-year-old farm ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, pool, 2.1 acres; taxes $6,400.
Smithtown 215,000
23 Aberdeen Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 28-year-old ranch; dining room, den, finished basement, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $4,200.
OTHER AREAS Fairfield, Conn. 300,000
1563 Round Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; many built-in wall units, exceptional landscaping, 0.33 acre; taxes $4,028.
Bronxville, N.Y. 240,000
20 Chatfield Road
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 77-year-old English stucco; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, den, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $3,499.
Raritan Township, N.J. 185,000
28 Bristol Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; deck, finished basement; taxes $2,300.


New Yugoslav Clashes Threaten to Keep U.N. Out
New clashes between Croatian and Serbian military units today signaled a possibly dangerous erosion of the most successful cease-fire to date in the seven-month Yugoslav war.
Though apparently limited to local outbursts, the upturn in fighting could lessen the prospect for a deployment of United Nations peacekeeping forces.


Judith Berman Has Wedding
The Greentree Country Club in New Rochelle, N.Y., was the setting last evening for the wedding of Judith Lynn Berman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward M. Berman of Bedford, N.Y., to Howard Jay Kaplan, a son of Louis Kaplan of St.
Cloud, Fla., and the late Rebecca Kaplan.
Rabbi Norton D. Shargel officiated.
Mrs.
Kaplan, 31 years old, graduated from American University and is the office manager for the New York law firm of Johnston &amp; McShane.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Singer Netter &amp; Dowd and her mother, Barbara Berman, is a sales manager for American Telephone and Telephone in White Plains.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


CAMPUS LIFE: Washington and Lee; New Fraternity Houses Bring New Rules, Too
A $13 million renovation of the fraternities at Washington and Lee University is changing not only the physical structures of the houses, but also their rules of conduct.
The university is halfway through its Fraternity Renaissance program, which began in 1990 and which requires that the 16 fraternities adopt the school's behavior codes when their houses are rebuilt.
The rules, called the Standards for Fraternities, require the houses to have adult live-in resident managers or house mothers.


Court Strikes Down New York City Garbage Rates
In a ruling that could cost New York City businesses thousands of dollars, a state appeals court last week struck down the city's decision to lower the maximum rate private garbage haulers may charge commercial customers.
The city's Department of Consumer Affairs, which regulates the hauling industry, reduced the rate by 7.5 percent on Aug. 1, announcing with fanfare that the reduction would ease steep garbage collection bills.


Carriage Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


A la Carte: New Guides List and Rate Restaurants
THE 1992 edition of "Donovan's Guide to Long Island Restaurants" came out last month.
The book, which sells for $9.95, is the most-comprehensive listing of Long Island restaurants available.
It is especially useful for people who dine out frequently.
"Donovan's" lists 3,000 restaurants on the Island.
The better-known "Zagat Suburban New York City Restaurant Survey" contains 165, and the less-known "Long Island Guide to Dining and Wining" rates more than 250.


Kerkhoff Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


POSTINGS: Doing Business in Budapest; Roth Returns To His Roots
In New York, it would probably not even make the papers.
But in 1994, when Budapest's Danube Financial Centre is scheduled to open for business, eyebrows are likely to rise all over town.
Emery Roth &amp; Sons, which designed the center, calls it the largest -- and smartest -- office complex contemplated in Central Europe.
Computers will control the air-conditioning, security and lighting.
It is wired for tenants' computers and microwave communications, too -- a particularly vital capability in a country where telephone service cannot always be taken for granted.


Flights Added To the Caribbean
Carnival Air Lines begins scheduled service between Miami and the Turks and Caicos Islands tomorrow.
The Fort Lauderdale-based airline's new service follows the demise of Pan American, which, according to Carnival, carried about 60 percent of the air traffic from the United States to the Turks and Caicos, which lie between Florida and Puerto Rico.
Carnival is flying to the islands on Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, leaving Miami International Airport at 1:30 P.M.
The flight is to Providenciales and then on to Grand Turk.
On the return flight the plane leaves Grand Turk at 4:45 P.M., calls at Providenciales and arrives in Miami at 6:30 P.M..


Impact Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Commercial Property: 1585 Broadway; Tracing the Path From Leasing Coup to Bankruptcy
EVEN before 1585 Broadway began to rise over Duffy Square, its developer, David S. Solomon, had signed a major Park Avenue law firm to a 20-year lease for 365,000 square feet.
A notable achievement at any time, the deal was a milestone in a market where a growing number of new buildings were competing heavily for a shrinking number of tenants.
The first triumph, however, was the last.


Russians Take a Flier on Oil In Capitalism for the Masses
The line to buy a piece of the action in the People's Oil Industrial Investment Euro-Asian Corporation, with its unlikely sales office in an empty hall of the Museum of the History of Moscow, is a good measure of Russians' growing panic about the vanishing value of the ruble.
"Here we are taking a risk, of course," said Nikolai Khanchenkov, a 41-year-old scientific researcher, as he stood on the museum's drafty stairwell recently.
He was waiting his turn to plunk down 1,000 rubles, roughly $10 at the current exchange rate, for a share in the brand-new company.
"On the other hand, if we hold on to our money, we will certainly lose it," he said.
"It is that simple." Snow Stays, Money Goes
With inflation running at an estimated annual rate of 300 percent, Russians are at a loss to know what to do with their savings.
Some money is being siphoned off to pay for the recent big jump in food prices, but with faith in the future at a low point, many people now prefer to eat less and put their rubles into something more durable.


Seafirst Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace in Yorba Linda, Calif., misidentified the statue at the right.
It portrayed Konrad Adenauer, the former West German Chancellor, not Mr.
Nixon.


Anna DeLuca Has Wedding
Anna DeLuca, a daughter of Frank DeLuca of the Bronx and the late Henrietta DeLuca, was married in New York yesterday to Andrew Steven Roffe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hyman Roffe of White Plains.
Judge Arthur J. Cooperman of the State Supreme Court in Queens performed the ceremony at the Stanhope Hotel.
Mrs.
Roffe, 29 years old, is the design director of women's clothing at Michael Kors Inc., a New York fashion design firm.
She is a graduate of the Parsons School of Design.
Her father is a salesman for Bronx Chrysler-Plymouth.
Her mother was the owner of Canadian Pizza Crust Ltd.


Integrated Device Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Che, Castro and the Heroic Lawyer
To the Editor:
Alan M. Dershowitz, in concluding his review of "The Man to See," a biography of Edward Bennett Williams by Evan Thomas (Dec. 15), calls for a heroic portrait that would include more of the better side of Williams's character.
Here, for that future biography and for the record, is one example that has not yet seen print.


HOSPITALS MAY GET ADDITIONAL BURDEN ON MEDICARE BILLS
In an effort to discourage unnecessary health services and control costs, the Bush Administration plans to require hospitals to play a central role in arranging and billing for Medicare services, even when the services are performed outside a hospital.
A confidential memorandum summarizing new rules to be issued soon by the Government has been circulated at the Department of Health and Human Services.
It says the rules will require hospitals to "assume financial responsibility" for many of the medical goods and services that elderly people receive as outpatients after leaving the hospital.
The new requirement applies to laboratory work, X-rays, CAT scans, magnetic resonance imaging, scores of tests and the rental and purchase of medical equipment like wheelchairs.


BULGARIA STUDIES BOGUS COMPANIES
The Bulgarian Government will investigate companies that it believes siphoned millions of dollars from state funds and spirited them abroad, a high-ranking Bulgarian official says.
A committee under presidential control will be created, probably after a runoff on Sunday in which President Zhelyu Zhelev faces Velko Valkanov, the candidate of the former Communist Party, now called the Socialist Party.
Mr.
Zhelev is expected to win.


Miss Gemmel Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Gemmel Jr. of Middletown, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Patricia Anne Gemmel to Stuart George Tait, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Tait of Heworth, York, England.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Gemmel, 26 years old, is an interior designer for Ronald Adrianse &amp; Associates, an architecture and design company in Hong Kong.
She graduated from Beaver College.
Her father is the president of the Fidelity International Bank in Newark.


TECO Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


DS Bancor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Odyssey Ends for 'Raft of the Medusa'
IN the summers of 1988 and 1989 Peggy Hill Rosenkranz halted her career in entertainment law and dabbled in producing theater in Southampton.
By 1990, theatergoers wondered what Mrs.
Rosenkranz would come up with next.
She had already put on a Pulitzer Prize-winning play near a pond in Agawam Park and a musical tryout at the Southampton Cultural Center.


Peter La Crosse to Wed Miss Rusk
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard A. Rusk Jr. of Armonk, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Heather McNeely Rusk to Peter William La Crosse, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. La Crosse of West Granville, Mass.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Rusk, 32 years old, is a chef at Oscar's Restaurant at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York.
She graduated from the California Culinary Academy.
Her father is president of the World Rehabilitation Fund in New York.
Her mother, Elizabeth Rusk, is a registered nurse at the Scarsdale (N.Y.) Medical Group.
The prospective bride is a granddaughter of the late Dr.
Howard A. Rusk, the founder of the Rusk Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine at New York University and a columnist and contributing editor of The New York Times.


PAST DUE
My parents were fortunate to live well into their 80's, and though they were what one must consider lower middle class, and at times even poor, they took enormous pride in paying their bills promptly.
Every time I wrote a check for their bills following their death, I felt a sense of pride, in that I was perpetuating their good name, as they would have wanted me to do.
Larson seems to feel cheated that he should have to pay for his mother's care because she could not be cured of the metastatic cancer from which she appears to have suffered.
I am sorry that he finds the bills "dispassionate," but insurance carriers do insist on codes.
Dr.
S. may have spent a scant 10 minutes with Larson's mother, for which the author states she was charged $90, but I am sure he spent a good deal more time outside of her room, reviewing X-rays and laboratory reports, conferring with the other treating physicians and writing charts.
MILTON PARKER, M.D.
Roslyn, L.I.


Advanced Magnetics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New American Cooking in a Colonial Setting
EIGHT years ago Standish House in Wethersfield first opened as a restaurant.
The town-owned house was sublet to the proprietors, Gian and Valerie Marchesan, by the Wethersfield Historical Society.
The town is a real tourist magnet, full of vintage historic houses to visit, and visitors need an attractive place to dine after sightseeing forays.
Until Standish House opened, the town had no such place.
Fortunately, Standish House fills the bill beautifully.
The center-hall, double-chimney clapboard house in Georgian and Federal style dates to 1787.
The two dining rooms, to the left and right of the center hall, look much as they may have in their 18th-century prime, each with a fireplace, graceful chandelier, Chippendale and Queen Anne chairs and inside shutters.


Franklin Electronic Publishers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bonnie Spiro, A Lawyer, Wed
Bonnie Wynn Spiro, a daughter of Miriam Spiro of Roslyn Heights, L.I., and the late Arthur Spiro, was married yesterday evening in Muttontown, L.I., to Joseph Jay Schinagle, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Schinagle of Beachwood, Ohio.
Rabbi Marion Shulevitz performed the ceremony at the Muttontown Country Club.
Mrs.
Schinagle is a lawyer with Rivkin, Radler &amp; Kremer in Uniondale, L.I.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father was a lawyer.


Eberly Pitts Is Affianced
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward P. Pitts of Fair Haven, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Eberly Virginia Pitts to Robert Arthur Goldman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brooks C. Goldman of Bethesda, Md.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Pitts, 25 years old, teaches mathematics at the Madeira School in McLean, Va.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is a vice president of K. G. Pollock &amp; Associates, a technical sales company in Arnold, Md.
Her mother, Eugenia Pitts, is the executive director of the Monmouth-Ocean Development Council in Manasquan, N.J.


Missing Baby Is Back Home
An 18-month-old Brooklyn girl was returned home safely by her baby sitter yesterday afternoon, more than nine hours after she was reported missing by her mother, the police said.
Officers said the sitter, Tianya Varra, 17 years old, and the child's mother, Kim McIver, had misunderstood each other on arrangements for the child.


IN FROM THE COLD
As Stephen Budiansky explains in his article "Out of the Cold" (Dec. 22), domestication can be a two-way bargain of mutual advantage and not just a one-way exercise in exploitation.
Blair Drawson's superb illustration, with the tiny cave man leading an enormous bull by a slender rope, displays this bargain with great art.
I am reminded of the relationship between man and animal every time I go out into an open field to bring in a trained horse to be saddled and bridled.
That's often a tricky ritual.
The cup of grain the rider holds in one hand, while he holds the rope behind his back with the other, is more a token than a bribe, when both horse and rider are standing knee-deep in sweet grass.
Last summer, a princely thoroughbred kept me dancing after him for almost an hour in a 10-acre field -- then ran past me into the barnyard and stood like a statue while I fitted him out with bit, belts and buckles for a splendid day in the forest.


The Minibus From Loneliness
"What would I do in Florida?" The answer Julia has in mind is plain: nothing.
Since her parents emigrated from Poland in 1910, she has lived in Brooklyn.
It is where she went to school, got her first job sewing ($3 a week), where she married, raised a family and bought her daughter a home.
Julia, 90 years old and widowed, is mentally sharp and too vigorous to sit home all day, but she can no longer go out walking in the winter or at night.
Julia hates to ask her grandchildren on Long Island for favors, and her daughter is now 70 and blind.
So every weekday, a minibus operated by the Jewish Association for Services for the Aged provides her with round-trip transportation to the Williamsburg Senior Center, where she enjoys a hot lunch, planned activities and the company of friends.
The minibus, which serves senior citizens of all races and creeds, is just one of many programs for the elderly supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


A Family Gets Back on Track With Help From the Neediest
Time was, the Rosas had enough -- not a lot, but enough.
Maria Rosa, 26 years old, remembers when she and her family could afford fresh vegetables and meat.
That was more than a year ago.
"My son is anemic. He is used to fresh food and we eat out of cans now." she said, glancing sadly at her husband.
Until early last year, her husband, Richard, worked regularly for various delivery companies, providing him with enough income to support his family.
But he was laid off last February and was unable to find another job.
Even though both had gone to night school and were certified building superintendents, they still had trouble finding steady work.


Consolidated Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 18


Banned in Jakarta
THIS EARTH OF MANKIND
By Pramoedya Ananta Toer.
Translated by Max Lane. 367 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $20.


All-Stars Shoot, Score and Shoot More
The National Hockey League All-Star Game is the one hockey game of the year after which the losing players don't grouse and mutter and answer questions, heads down, with one or two words and cliches.
And this afternoon, it didn't matter that the Campbell Conference had defeated the Wales Conference here at the Spectrum by 10-6: Bryan Trottier was happy to have been a part of it and to have scored a goal.
"I played my first All-Star Game here in Philadelphia," said Trottier, a former Islander and current Pittsburgh Penguin who played in his first All-Star Game in 1976 and was added to this season's game under the senior category established last season.
"I played my 1,000th game here, too, and the fans gave me a standing ovation. I have a few special memories here."


Schwab (Charles) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nicolet Instrument Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Miss McCaffrey Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. McCaffrey of Boston have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kathleen Mary McCaffrey, to James Reynolds McKinley, a son of Mrs.
David M. Wright of Shrewsbury, Mass., and Jack McKinley of Vershire, Vt.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss McCaffrey, 23 years old, is the research coordinator for the Marketing Science Institute, a nonprofit group in Cambridge, Mass., that publishes academic marketing research.
She graduated from Mount Saint Mary's College in Emmitsburg, Md.
Her father, who is retired, was the chairman and chief executive of C. R. Bard Inc., a medical products maker in Murray Hill, N.J.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Kips Bay
NEITHER uptown, nor downtown, and too far south to be midtown, the Kips Bay area stretches like a street bazaar, with no clearcut identity, from the East River to Lexington Avenue, between 23d and 34th Streets.
A hodgepodge of town houses, tenements, luxury high-rises, subsidized housing, shelters for the homeless, hospitals, Chinese take-outs and expensive restaurants, it never developed the neighborhood feel of, say, nearby Gramercy Park or Murray Hill.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Obscenity Laws Exist, But What Breaks Them?
WHEN the Police Chief of Guilderland, N.Y., warned three local record stores this month that they could face obscenity charges for selling recordings with explicit lyrics, the furor he provoked reflected a telling fact: the state's obscenity laws have become virtually unenforceable.
"At one time -- and this is going back at least 10 years -- there were prosecutions and convictions on all kinds of obscene material, obscene movies, obscene books," said Howard R. Relin, the District Attorney of Monroe County.
"There are much fewer now."


Ms. Gordon Engaged
Barbara Elizabeth Gordon, a financial analyst with Prudential Securities in New York, is engaged to be married to Jonathan Roy Cohen, a technical management trainee at ICI Americas, a British chemical company, in Wilmington, Del.


Chattem Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Allied Bankshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Unapologetic Man About Town
To the Editor:
Judging from the manner in which Evelyn Toynton chose to quote Peter Schjeldahl against himself in her review of "The Hydrogen Jukebox" (In Short, Dec. 8), she has neither an ear for irony nor a basic sense of humor.
These lacks pretty well disqualify her from assessing a writer whose work depends on both.
Poet, freelancer and streetwise
flaneur,
Mr.
Schjeldahl has affinities with his near contemporaries James Schuyler and John Ashbery as well as notable antecedents in Frank O'Hara, Apollinaire and, of course, the master-source, Baudelaire.


First American Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hokusai: From High Drama to the Human Comedy
Installed to maximum advantage in new galleries designed by the British architect Norman Foster, the exhibition of prints and drawings by Hokusai (1760-1849) at the Royal Academy in London is a glorious experience. (It is a sign of the times that four major American museums from coast to coast coveted the show but had to withdraw for lack of money.)
Hokusai was not "a printmaker" in the present-day sense of someone who oversees every phase of the production.
He was a print designer whose sketches were worked over, cut into wood blocks and finally printed, with each step performed by three successive groups of master craftsmen.


CAMPUS LIFE: Purdue; Condom Machines Are Installed In 3 Dormitories
A group of Purdue University students has devised a few simple measures to help prevent AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases and moved them to where classmates live -- the university's residence halls.
The first step was completed before the start of this semester when condom-vending machines were installed on a one-year trial basis in the restrooms of three residence halls.
At year's end, the university along with the management of the participating halls, counselors and student organizations will decide whether the vending machines should be installed in all 16 residences.


U.S. Surgical Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Meridian Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bush to Propose $500 Million Rise In Budget for Head Start Program
President Bush will propose an increase of more than 23 percent in Federal spending for preschool children in the Head Start program, and he will expand it to combat illiteracy and unemployment among parents of children enrolled in the program, Administration officials said today.
In his new budget request, to be submitted to Congress in 10 days, Mr.
Bush will seek an increase of more than $500 million for the popular program, which now serves 621,000 children at a cost of $2.2 billion this year, the officials said.


Universal Foods Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Worthy War
The historical revisionists are already at work.
Last year's triumph in the war against Iraq, they claim, has turned to ashes.
We won the war only to lose the peace.
But the naysayers who make this argument too cavalierly dismiss the strategic and diplomatic benefits produced by Operation Desert Storm.
To be sure, the fact that Saddam Hussein remains in power is deeply disturbing.
But this hardly constitutes an argument against the war, particularly since he would still be comfortably ensconced in Iraq
and
Kuwait if we had not moved against him.


Rollins Truck Leasing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-14  SAUDI PRESSURE TO OUST HUSSEIN


Ralston Purina Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pressure Mounts to Develop Old Toxic Mill Site in Syosset
A FIGHT over an industrial site long coveted by developers but carrying a legacy of contamination is likely to heat up soon.
The 38-acre site, abutting the Syosset landfill, has been a battleground for conflicting environmental, economic and political interests in the Town of Oyster Bay for more than 10 years.
It was a rod mill for the Cerro Wire and Cable Corporation, which went out of business in the mid-80's.


Bangor Hydro-Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bryn Mawr Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Foreclosure Auction Maze
BUYING a co-op apartment at a foreclosure auction is a puzzling business that many may find daunting.
But the auctions offer opportunities that some may want to reach for.
Notices of foreclosed apartments are usually published in a newspaper's classified real estate ads once a week for three weeks before an auction.


Q and A
Six-Day Bike Races
Q.
My wife and I are planning a trip to Europe this winter and would like to see one for the six-day bicycle races.
How can we get schedule and information? -- William R. Bodiford, Iowa City, Iowa


First Midwest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kent Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Holiday Tomorrow
The birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK


Standex International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dinkins Adviser Resigns Over Bank Withdrawals
The finance chairman of Mayor David N. Dinkins's re-election campaign committee stepped down on Friday after it was discovered that he had made unauthorized withdrawals of about $158,000 from the campaign's bank account, the counsel to the campaign said yesterday.
The former campaign official, Arnold Biegen, a Manhattan lawyer who has been a longtime election adviser to the Mayor, wrote 29 checks to himself from the campaign account between August and December, said Harold Ickes, the counsel to the Committee for David Dinkins II.


The Esthetic Pleasure of Trees in Winter
WINTER walks are wonderful to take.
Just being outdoors is a pleasure, and walking is one sure way to see the architecture of trees.
The leaves are gone, and their barks are exposed.
One of the trees that really stands out at this time of year is the sycamore.
It can be seen for quite some distance, because the glorious bark is never as clearly visible as it is now.
Without leaves the outline is truly spectacular.
The massive tree has exfoliating bark.
That is a fancy botanist's term to describe bark that flakes off in irregular patterns to reveal what is underneath.
This pattern is what makes the sycamore worth a second look.
Some may want to describe the massive trunk as having a jigsawlike pattern.
Others may say the tree's bark appears mottled.


Diasonics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pioneer Savings Bank (Lynwood, Wash.) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Dr. Morris to Wed Anthony P. Betts
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas W. Morris of Shoreham, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Laurie Ann Morris, to Dr.
Anthony Paul Betts, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur D. Betts of Seaford, Del.
Dr.
Morris, 31 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and received her M.D. from the State University of New York at Stony Brook, L.I.
She is a resident at Abington (Pa.) Memorial Hospital.
Her father retired as a physicist at the Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island.
Her mother, Lynn Morris, retired as an assistant principal of the Coram (L.I.) Elementary School.


Catholic Education In a Quandary
Reading the Dec. 1 article "Catholic Schools Face Financial Strain" saddened me as a former teacher at Good Counsel High School about the quandary that Catholic education is in.
Through no real fault of their own, Good Counsel schools have now reached an impasse regarding their future.
I can sympathize with the teachers who are employed here since my teaching career also began under less than ideal circumstances during the latter part of the 60's, when the average salary was less than $4,000 a year with an average class of close to 40 students.
Through trying times then as well as now, one thing prevailed as brought out by the article: education and learning still endure.


Keeping the Burning Fireplace Smokeless
FIXING a smoky fireplace is usually not too difficult.
Arrangement of the logs and how they are tended are often responsible.
Always arrange the logs on andirons or on a raised grate set as far back into the fireplace as possible.
Raising the logs lets air to enter from underneath, enhancing combustion.
Raising the logs also raises the height of the flames, so that smoke is less likely to waft forward before being channeled upward by the fireplace's overhanging upper edge, the chimney breast.


Society Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Miss Gentry Is Wed
Catherine Madison Gentry, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh E. Gentry of Fisher Island, Fla., was married in Coconut Grove, Fla., yesterday to John Peecook Quartararo, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack M. Quartararo of Millbrook, N.Y.
The Rev.
Riley Short, performed the Methodist ceremony at Biscayne Bay Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Quartararo, 25 years old, graduated from the University of London.
Mr.
Quartararo, 31, graduated from the University of Richmond.
He is a senior vice president of Albert Frank Guenther Law, a New York advertising and public relations company.


New Yorkers, etc.
There are probably a few mothers somewhere in the world who don't dispense bromides, homilies and pithy nuggets of advice to their offspring.
Where these women are, goodness only knows, because there is scarcely an adult around today who doesn't remember a childhood of hearing favorite words of wisdom constantly repeated.
Very often, this advice was a truism of grand triteness, on the order of "a penny saved, a penny earned" or "a rolling stone gathers no moss." But many mothers chose platitudes not quite so mundane, and some even came up with strange and occasionally funny counseling of their own (fathers generally were, and are, also-rans in this area).
Still, no matter how the advice was phrased, reactions on the part of the young listener didn't vary to any great degree.


Anthem Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pacific Western Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Miss Lee to Marry Thomas Krause
Patricia Lee of New York and Roger Lee of Paris have announced the engagement of their daughter, Christine Madeleine Lee, to Thomas Walther Krause, a son of Prof. and Mrs.
Harry D. Krause of Urbana, Ill.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Lee, 24 years old, graduated from Oberlin College and received a law degree from Harvard University, where she was an editor of the law review.
She is a fellow in criminal justice at Georgetown University.
Her father is a senior systems engineer with I.B.M. in Paris.
Her mother is an associate budget analyst with the New York City Board of Education in Brooklyn.


Making a Difference; Mr. Hay's Staying Power
Senior creditors sorting through the rubble of companies in bankruptcy proceedings usually fire the chief executive who led them into the mess, but not at the Lomas Financial Corporation.
Jess Hay, who lost millions from his personal net worth as Lomas's share price tumbled to about $1 from a high of $39.25 in 1987, is getting a rare chance to rebuild.
The Dallas-based company is scheduled to emerge from Chapter 11 at the end of this month, with Mr.
Hay still at the helm.
Mr.
Hay, 60, has headed Lomas since 1965.


ATC Environmental Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


At Home Abroad; Bush's Crucial Decision
Nothing else President Bush does this year is likely to matter as much, in human terms, as how he answers Israel's request for $10 billion in loan guarantees.
He will be deciding on the chance for peace in the Middle East.
The critical question is whether the President ties any guarantees to an end of Israel's massive current settlement drive in the occupied West Bank and Gaza.
If he does not, Palestinians will see his decision as a signal that Israel can and will go on taking what they consider to be their land.


Is Sainthood Coming Too Quickly for Founder of Influential Catholic Group?
The ways by which the Vatican chooses the saintly and the blessed have always been seen, by outsiders at least, as arcane and wondrous, as woven with miracle and mystery as faith itself.
Now, as the influential Catholic group called Opus Dei, the Work of God, awaits the beatification of its Spanish founder, new elements have crept in, too: controversy, charge and countercharge.


Westfield Journal; Grumbling Over Law Requiring Helmets on Young Bicyclists
IN New Jersey, buckling up one's seat belt is the law, and in this safety-conscious community, where children on bicycles are a common sight along tree-lined streets, strapping up has also become an all-important idea.
The Township Council recently voted unanimously to approve a law requiring that youths 14 years of age and under wear safety helmets while riding.
It is believed to be the first municipal law of its kind in the state and has been hailed by many parents, law-enforcement officers and children here.


FB&amp;T Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Is This a Hero?
To the Editor:
Does the
content
of films count anymore -- or are we just concerned with how well made and well acted they are, as Caryn James seems to indicate in " 'Bugsy' Muscles In on Hollywood Glamour"  [ Dec. 22 ] ?


Managing; When a Steel Job Isn't Just Steel
The practice, common in the steel industry, of hiring nonunion workers to perform jobs considered not directly related to steelmaking has become the subject of contentious debate in recent years, particularly as companies have reduced their rolls of unionized steelworkers.
In fact, at Lukens Inc., a Pennsylvania steel producer, unionized steelworkers were so embittered that union members were being displaced by outsiders in jobs like lawn mowing, security and machinery repair that in October they went on strike hoping to ban the practice completely.


City National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Smiles of a Winter Night
FRIDAY -- A highlight of the social season, the 38th Winter Antiques Show, opened with two previews benefiting the East Side House Settlement.
A 4 P.M. tea for 300 guests at $500 a ticket was followed by a cocktail buffet at 6 for 2,000, who paid $250 each.
The show, held annually at the Seventh Regiment Armory, at Park Avenue and 67th Street, was under the direction this year of Betty Sherrill, the president of the New York interior design concern of McMillen Inc.
For the last 17 years, the designer Mario Buatta had been the chairman.


Apple Computer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Communities Told to Improve Water Purity
NEW Federal and state standards for water quality are forcing local officials in Westchester to step up plans for expensive filtration plants or to search for alternative supplies.
The mandates are also increasing demands for a regional approach to water management.
Westchester relies on the vast New York City reservoir system for 85 percent of its drinking water.
Earlier this month, 11 municipalities in the county learned from state health authorities that their current treatment programs are inadequate and that new proposals to meet strict new standards of water purity must be submitted by March 31.


Teams Pay the Price For Mediocre Results
Shawn Abner hits .194 and drives in 14 runs in 94 games; the California Angels guarantee him a raise from $180,000 to $250,000.
Jerome Walton hits .219 in 123 games; the Chicago Cubs guarantee him a salary increase from $240,000 to $400,000.
Kevin Brown compiles a 9-12 record, a 4.40 earned run average and assorted other poor statistics; the Texas Rangers want to more than double his salary from $355,000 to $750,000.
It's nice work if you can get it.


Morton International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Trustmark Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Can Gooden Work Off the Cuff?
Dwight Gooden, if he is given the baseball and told to take the mound for the Mets in 1992, will be a diminished pitcher as a result of the surgery that repaired a significantly damaged right shoulder last September.
He will tire faster.
His fastball will lack its full ferocity.
He will face a consuming struggle with fears about his present vulnerability and long-term future.
It's a prognosis that front-office executives with the Mets have fought against in their hearts from the morning of Sept. 7, 1991, when the 27-year-old Gooden had a partial tear of his rotator cuff and a tear of the glenoid labrum corrected by an hour's worth of arthroscopic surgery on his right shoulder at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.


Going Gold


Dunston's Back Ailing
Chicago Cubs shortstop SHAWON DUNSTON was found yesterday to have a bulging disk in his lower back and was hospitalized.
The team physician, Dr.
MICHAEL SHAFER, said Dunston would not need surgery and would be treated with drugs and physical therapy.
Shafer said Dunston would stay in Chicago to work with team trainers until spring training begins in late February.
Dunston, 28 years old, makes his off-season home in Fremont, Calif. (AP)


Stew: Old-Fashioned Winter Warmth
ON a cold winter day, forget grilled fish with salsa.
Nothing beats an old-fashioned stew.
In England recently, on a particularly bone-chilling day, a friend made a beef stew with dumplings, a dish I hadn't had for years.
The dumplings were light and airy, the stew rich and dark, filled with potatoes, carrots and green beans along with chunks of meat.
The dumplings contained an ingredient more familiar in the British kitchen than in America: suet.


Quotation of Day
"All my life, I have worked, saving money bit by bit. And now that money is melting faster than today's snow." -- SVETLANA A. REVOZOVA, an engineer in Moscow who recently reached the mandatory retirement age for women, 55.  [ 1:4 ]


Northern Exposure


Corrections
A dance review last Sunday about the Elizabeth Streb Ringside performance at the Joyce Theater on Jan. 9, a part of the Altogether Different festival, misidentified the lighting designer for the program.
She is Heather Carson, the company's lighting designer.


AIDS: Facts, Fiction
Eleven years into an American epidemic, AIDS-related cases fill the nation's courts.
And in many cases, a new study has found, the courts seem guided more by stereotypes than by scientific evidence.
--------------------
Article, page 16.


Wall Street; Money's Dynastic Dynamics
Conventions are not most people's idea of paradise.
But every savvy stockbroker on Wall Street no doubt would have given an entire year's commissions -- yes, even
last
year's commissions -- for a chance to attend a quiet little gathering last week at the Willard Hotel in Washington.
The three-day meeting, called the Family Financial Forum, was sponsored by the Northern Trust Company in Chicago.
It was attended by several hundred of the bank's clients -- members of 55 wealthy families with combined assets of more than $10 billion.
The seminars included "The Psychology of Transferring Wealth: How to Maintain the Drive and Enthusiasm Into the Next Generation" and "Thinking Creatively About Family Wealth." The speakers included a Rockefeller, a Searle and a Pritzker.


First Michigan reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AST Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


United Carolina Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Atmel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Knape &amp; Vogt Mfg reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Announced that Willie Peete, Dick Moseley, Buddy Geis and Virgil Knight, assistant coaches, will not be offered contracts for the upcoming season.
NEW YORK JETS -- Named Dick Haley director of player personnel.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Named Steve Shafer defensive backs coach.
Hockey National Hockey League  NHL -- Suspended Stu Grimson, Chicago left wing, for 10 games for his part in a brawl during a game against Toronto on Thursday.
College  OHIO STATE -- Announced Monica Taylor, forward, has been permanently dropped from the basketball team.
SOUTHWEST BAPTIST -- Suspended Jerry Kirksey, basketball coach, and Glenn Stanley, forward, until the investigation into possible NCAA violations is completed.
TEXAS A&amp;I -- Named Jim Dawson defensive backs coach.
YOUNGSTOWN STATE -- Extended the contract of James Tressel, football coach, through 2000.
Tressel will also become the executive director of athletics beginning July 1, 1995.


Style Makers; Barbara Korman, Designer of Wood Constructions
Barbara Korman, a designer of painted wood constructions, is especially concerned with the effect of color on the look of her forms.
So after traveling around the world and observing the way shadow and light hit various mountain surfaces, she created a series of works that use colors, along with architectural shapes, to define her personal response.
"I was inspired by the play of light on the peaks and crevices," she said.


Despite Dinkins, Fernandez Opposes Delaying School Board Vote
Putting himself into an unusual rift with Mayor David N. Dinkins, the New York City Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, has come out in opposition to a move that would delay this spring's elections for city school boards by one year.
The State Legislature passed a bill earlier this week to impose the delay, which the Mayor and other city officials have sought in the hope that it would spur the lawmakers to act this year on a major redrawing of district lines and other changes sought by some groups trying to increase public involvement in the schools.


Rahal the Driver Is at Ease With Rahal the Driver-Owner
Bobby Rahal, a race driver more accustomed to selling cars than buying them, found himself on the other end of an irresistible deal a couple of months ago.
Rahal, the 1986 Indianapolis 500 winner, had left the Galles-Kraco Indy-car team for Patrick Racing soon after the end of the 1991 season.
He had felt too confined by the push of the owner, Rick Galles, for a three-year contract, and Rahal also knew that Al Unser Jr., his teammate, had the kind of long-term relationship with Galles, a fellow New Mexican, that would always give Unser an intangible edge on the team.


2 Dead and 5 Injured in Gas Explosions in Chicago


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Branford, Conn. 240,000
77 Flax Mill Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; family room w/fireplace, 2-zone heating, eat-in kitchen, 1 acre; taxes $2,484.
Fairfield, Conn. 300,000
1563 Round Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; exceptional landscaping, 0.33 acre; taxes $4,028.
Somers, Conn. 175,500
56 Beverly Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; walk-out basement, brick patio, 2-car attached garage, 1.4 acres; taxes $1,859.
Bronxville, N.Y. 240,000
20 Chatfield Road
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 77-year-old English stucco; den, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $3,499.
Goldens Bridge, N.Y. 285,000
Green Hill Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 26-year-old contemporary; sunken living room, 2 fireplaces, family room, playroom, deck; taxes $5,636.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 490,000
17 Magnolia Road
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old ranch; cathedral ceiling, new eat-in kitchen, den, deck; taxes $11,450.
OTHER AREAS Howell, N.J. 160,500
13 Cherry Tree Circle
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; 1-car garage, c/a, family room, deck; taxes $3,272.
Raritan Township, N.J. 185,000
28 Bristol Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; deck, finished basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,300.
Farmingville, L.I. 135,000
14 Eva Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 12-year-old ranch; dining room, den, basement; taxes $3,600.


Amy A. Veit and George C. Ludlow Are to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Veit of Denver have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amy Alise Veit, to George Craig Ludlow, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George C. Ludlow of Elizabethtown, N.Y.
An April wedding is planned.


Mark Twain Bancshares Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bancorp Hawaii reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New &amp; Noteworthy
A TRAIL OF HEART'S BLOOD WHEREVER WE GO, by Robert Olmstead. (Avon, $11.) A Vietnam veteran who has become the undertaker in a small New England town learns some surprising lessons about the way people die.
The result is "a kind of prose 'Spoon River Anthology' " notable for "the intelligence and humaneness of the voice, the grace and clarity of the prose," Michael Malone said here in 1990.
BAGHDAD WITHOUT A MAP: And Other Misadventures in Arabia, by Tony Horwitz. (Plume, $10.) Tony Horwitz knew he was adrift in an unfathomable land when, at Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's funeral, a man who had been chanting "Death to America" confessed that his dream had always been to visit Disneyland and take his children on the teacup ride.
From his "wacky, often hair-raising, experiences,  [ the author ]  has fashioned 'Baghdad Without a Map,' a very funny and frequently insightful look at the world's most combustible region," Barry Gewen said here last year.
"Fearlessness is a valuable quality in a travel writer, and Mr. Horwitz, who is now a reporter for The Wall Street Journal, seems as intrepid as they come."


Hey, Walt! Nobody's Perfect!
A HANDBOOK FOR DROWNING
Stories. By David Shields. 178 pp. New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $19.


Here Comes Another Round of Excesses
If the Japanese were galled by the lavish compensation of the American executives who accompanied President Bush on his recent trip to Asia, wait till they see the latest numbers.
The rising stock market has insured that top executives at many public companies will enjoy huge windfalls on stock options they had been granted as far back as 10 years ago.


Fallowfield Journal; In a Simple Life, a Complex Mystery
One night last September, Arthur J. Jones returned home from an ordinary day in an apparently simple life, a life his family and friends say was devoted to selling cars, smoking cigars and watching reruns of "Hogan's Heroes" on television.
But Mr.
Jones's life became Western Pennsylvania's most intriguing mystery early the next morning, when his house exploded and he vanished without a trace.


What Is Human About Furs?
"Long Island Q&amp;A: Maria Cattallanotti, Buying a Fur Coat in an Age of Animal-Rights Protesters"  [ Dec. 22 ]  was both insulting and offensive.
Ms.
Cattallanotti stated "that the raising of the animals for coats is done as efficiently and humanely as possible." Ms.
Cattallanotti failed to elaborate on exactly what this "humane" treatment entails.
Perhaps Ms.
Cattallanotti would like us to believe beavers, raccoons and minks live the good life on an idyllic farm until their time comes.
In fact minks and foxes (animals mostly farmed) spend their man-altered short lives jammed into tiny filthy wire-mesh cages where they suffer from poor diets, inadequate water, contagious diseases and severe stress.
As to her efficiency point, because pelts and profits -- not the animals' welfare -- is what most concerns the furrier, the animals are killed by cheap but agonizing methods such as anal electrocution, poisoning, decompression and suffocation.
Those who don't die outright are simply skinned alive.


Ikos Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


On Videophones and 'Talkies' . . .
To the Editor:
In "Videophone: A Flop That Won't Die" (Forum, Jan. 12), A. Michael Noll wrote that there is no need for face-to-face telecommunication.
Based on a great deal of customer research, A.T.&amp; T. and other electronics manufacturers around the world think he's wrong.
In the days of silent motion pictures, some people said the public didn't need "talkies." So, we'll wait and see.
ROBERT M. KAVNER  Basking Ridge, N.J., Jan. 13  The author is group executive, communications products, at A.T.&amp; T.


Moynihan Falls Ill with Signs of Food Poisoning
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan was taken to New York Hospital yesterday afternoon after he became ill during a return flight from a trip to India, hospital and police officials said.
The Democratic Senator from New York showed "symptoms of food poisoning" after eating fish aboard the flight to Kennedy International Airport, said Andrew Banoff, a hospital administrator.
He said Mr.
Moynihan's condition "is being evaluated."


Banctec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Bridge
It is safe to assume, and the reader may be relieved to learn, that the auction shown in the diagram is both the longest and the most incomprehensible that will appear in this column this year.
It is an example of a relay auction, and it makes as much sense to an average player, or even to an uninitiated expert, as computer language does to someone whose only language is English.
Relay systems are rarely encountered in North America but are popular among some experts on other continents.
The idea was introduced by Pierre Ghestem and Rene Bacherich of France four decades ago, and they used it to good effect as members of a French team that won world team titles in 1956 and 1960.
It was revived in a more comprehensive form 20 years ago by David L. Cliff of Basking Ridge, N.J.
He persuaded several young experts to try his ideas, and they had many successes.
Other relay languages, based on the same principle, have been developed in New Zealand, Australia and parts of Europe.


Century Cellular reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


HEARTS AND MINDS
In Roberto Suro's article "Hearts and Minds" (Dec. 29) on Dean Ornish, a skeptic cautions: "There are charismatic doctors all over the world, and sometimes it is hard to separate the personality of a physician from his application. Maybe there is something like an 'Ornish Factor' here."
Ornish is neither a quack nor a guru: he is an accredited physician.
If he is also charismatic, so much the better.


No Cinderella Story for Russian Economy
To the Editor:
As a member of the three-author panel on Key Issues of Soviet Economic Reform at last week's American Economics Association meetings, I was taken aback by your news article "Russians Urged to Act Fast" (Business Day, Jan. 6) reporting agreement on questions concerning privatization and stabilization, and the type and amounts of aid required: full speed on the former, and a maximally open spigot on the latter.
There was no such agreement.


Austria Fund reports earnings for As of Nov 30


For Ethiopia, Catharsis Lies In Grim Truth
For 14 years, Daniel Admassu was haunted by uncertainty about what happened to his father and brother.
Whisked away by vigilantes during a frenzy of political killings known as the red terror of the old Marxist Government, the two men were never heard from again.
Mr.
Daniel fretted that he did not even have the grim comfort of confirming their deaths.
Many others during that period found their relatives' bodies, often tortured, then shot and thrown on the streets.


ECI Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Imagery in the Service of a Utopian Dream
Revolutions, at least since the French set the paradigm, have depended heavily on images -- symbols, pageants, paintings -- to promote the cause of radical change.
The Soviet Union after 1917 outdid all previous attempts to draft the visual arts into service.
The arts themselves were in revolution -- said the painter Kasimir Malevich, "May the overthrow of the old world of art be penciled on your palms" -- and vanguard artists eagerly sought to communicate the benefits of Bolshevism to the illiterate masses.
The new langagues of art promised a new society, a new way of looking at it, a new human potential.
Artists decorated streets, buildings, buses, trolleys and the trains and boats that traveled through the countryside spreading the message of revolution.
In 1920, Malevich and his supporters painted the streets and walls of Vitebsk white, then added colorful circles and squares -- an entire town re-envisioned.


Gwinnett Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The World; What Kind of Economy Would a Palestine Have?
ISSA ABUAITAH and his 200 employees at the Jordan Plastics Company make mattresses, housewares and industrial containers in this village, a 10-minute drive from Jerusalem.
The factory, wedged between stone houses, is no high-tech wonder: machines mixing polyurethane foam and quilting mattress covers get a lot of help from human hands.
But Jordan Plastics competes successfully in Israeli markets because its products are well made and its labor costs are low.
And just such enterprises, analysts have begun to say, represent the main chance for prosperity in an autonomous or independent Palestine.
The current negotiations over the future of the West Bank and Gaza Strip are still at only the earliest stage.
Last week, announcements that two right-wing parties would leave Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's coalition in outrage that the Israeli leader would even consider autonomy, underscored how tentative the talks are.
But if autonomy ever appeared likely, economic factors would soar in importance.
Already, experts are looking at the possibilities, and many agree on one principle: The viability of an autonomous Palestinian economy would depend on keeping it open to the world in general, and to Israel in particular.


Orton's Last and Best: 'What the Butler Saw'
"YOU can't be rational in an irrational world. It's not rational." Such a blast of irrefutable logic could have sprung up in the wonderland of Lewis Carroll.
But what about an exchange like this?


The Esthetic Pleasure of Trees in Winter
WINTER walks are wonderful to take.
Just being outdoors is a pleasure, and walking is one sure way to see the architecture of trees.
The leaves are gone, and their barks are exposed.
One of the trees that really stands out at this time of year is the sycamore.
It can be seen for quite some distance, because the glorious bark is never as clearly visible as it is now.
Without leaves the outline is truly spectacular.
The massive tree has exfoliating bark.
That is a fancy botanist's term to describe bark that flakes off in irregular patterns to reveal what is underneath.
This pattern is what makes the sycamore worth a second look.
Some may want to describe the massive trunk as having a jigsawlike pattern.
Others may say the tree's bark appears mottled.


Zeus Components Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Artisoft Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Perspectives: Minority Developers; Enlarging the Ranks of Home Builders
IN the plumbing business, Leslie Levi Jr. made his mark long ago.
His company has been in business in Brooklyn for 41 years.
For 27 years, Raleigh W. Hall has been in the home-improvement business in Jamaica, Queens.
And for 19 years Andrew Velez has been plying the general contractor's trade from an office in downtown Manhattan.


Giga-Tronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Capital Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Credit Where Due
To the Editor:
We would like to expand on the article "Cutting Deals Among the Real Broadway Babies"  [ Jan. 5 ]  by noting that our associate Elizabeth Marx is the casting director responsible for finding all the children to play the small boy, Tam, in "Miss Saigon." She brings them to Fred Hanson, the show's production stage manager, and Beatrice Swarm, the young performers' coach, to be put through their paces.


June Wedding For Miss Zimet
Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm Zimet of Purchase, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Danielle Zimet to Stuart Seltzer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Seltzer of Roslyn, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Zimet, 26 years old, is an executive at Consumers Oil Company in Mount Vernon, N.Y., of which her father is president.
She is a graduate of Lehigh University as is her fiance.
Mr.
Seltzer, also 26 and a Lehigh graduate, received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.


Julia May to Marry Marc Boddewyn
Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Cushman May of Manila and New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Julia Cushman May to Marc Jonathan Boddewyn, the son of Jean Boddewyn and Luella Adams of New York.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss May, 27 years old, graduated from Connecticut College.
She is an art adviser assistant at Citibank in New York.
Her father is a director of the Asian Development Bank in Manila.
Her mother, Jean May, is a project adviser in Manila for Americares, a philanthropic organization in New Canaan.


CAMPUS LIFE: Dartmouth; Unification Church Rebuffed in Its Bid To Start a Ministry
Officials at Dartmouth College said they were concerned about recent efforts by the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church to establish a campus ministry here.
Not since the early 1970's has the Unification Church actively recruited Dartmouth students, said the New Hampshire director of the Unification Church, the Rev.
Gunnard Johnston.
Now, he said, "the time has come for a new mission."


According to Lou Reed, Life Is a Fatal Journey
Most of the songs on Lou Reed's brave new album, "Magic and Loss," look squarely at death and dying, a subject that -- except for trite melodramas about teen-age suicide and car crashes, or the Halloween shock imagery of some heavy-metal lyrics -- has traditionally been anathema to rock.
In "Magic and Loss," a suite of 13 songs, one of them repeated in a second version, there are no teen angels beckoning from the other side.
Nor have the departed been reunited to play for eternity in a cozy rock-and-roll heaven.
The suite's dying protagonist is not a sexy young motorcy clist who goes up in a ball of flame, but an unnamed middle-age man wasted away by illness.
"I saw a great man turn into a little child/ The cancer reduce him to dust," intones Mr.
Reed in "The Power and the Glory." "I saw isotopes introduced into his lungs." And in "Dreamin'," he recalls, "They say in the end the pain was so bad that you were screaming/ Now you were no saint but you deserved better than that."


Mary Adams To Be Married
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Adams Jr. of Garden City, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Gwendolyn Adams, to Stephen Mark Miklus, a son of Mr and Mrs.
John E. Miklus of Simsbury, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Adams, 25 years old, and her fiance, 28, received law degrees from the University of Virginia, and are associates at the Boston law firm of Bingham, Dana &amp; Gould.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University.
Her father is a lawyer in Richmond Hill, Queens.
Her mother, Eileen Adams, is a math teacher at Garden City High School.


Kirsten Glass To Wed in June
Erlis Glass of Strafford, Pa., and Louis S. Glass of Wynnewood, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kirsten Margret Glass to Daren Richard Anderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Anderson of Westhampton Beach, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Glass, 23 years old, is studying for a medical degree and a master's degree in public health in a joint program at Columbia University.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is the president of Louis S. Glass Associates, urban planning consultants in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.
Her mother is a professor of German at Rosemont College.


Will the N.F.C.'s String Be Broken by the Bills?
San Francisco 38, Miami 16.
Chicago 46, New England 10.
Giants 39, Denver 20.
Washington 42, Denver 10.
San Francisco 20, Cincinnati 16.
San Francisco 55, Denver 10.
Giants 20, Buffalo 19.
National Football Conference 7, American Football Conference zip.


Hunting Interests Dominated Deer Panel
The White-Tailed Deer Study Committee mentioned in the Dec. 8 article "Hunting Season Revives the Debate Over Deer" was supposed to be balanced and representative of all views -- a blue-ribbon panel.
In actuality, the committee was top heavy with pro-hunting advocates.
Blue-ribbon used as an adjective means: of the highest quality; carefully selected.
Well, the group that was appointed was evidently very carefully selected.


An Exciting Match For Millrose Games
Ever since the venerable Millrose Games, long the Wanamaker Millrose Games and briefly the Panasonic Millrose Games, became the Snickers Millrose Games last year, the meet director, HOWARD SCHMERTZ, has done his best to mouth the name with a straight face.
After all, nobody knows better than he that whether they run department stores, manufacture television sets or make candy bars, sponsors -- and sponsor-paid appearance fees -- are crucial to the success of an indoor meet.
Now, for the 85th games, at Madison Square Garden on Feb. 7, the nomenclature has become a bit easier to swallow.
That's because LEROY BURRELL, the 60-meter world indoor record-holder and the world's top-ranked 100-meter man, has entered the 60-meter event, challenging last year's Snickers winner and the world indoor champion, ANDRE CASON.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
FLY FISHING
The first seminar on freshwater and saltwater fly fishing to be presented by the Hammonasset Chapter of Trout Unlimited will take place Saturday from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. at the Whitehouse Restaurant in Old Saybrook.
Trout Unlimited is a national organization dedicated to the educational and conservation aspects of fishing.
Anglers may explore the latest techniques in fly tying and fly fishing with the help of experts and equipment dealers.
Keith Fulsher, author and authority on fly tying and fly rodding for shad, will present a slide program, and Ed Mitchell, expert in the area of saltwater flies and techniques, will reveal his secrets for hooking stripers and bluefish on flies.
Door prizes, videos, demonstrations, tackle booths, food and drink will be available all day.


FLS Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


News and Advice on TV For Haitians in the State
A GROUP of Haitians is using cable television to reach out to their countrymen in Fairfield County who may have no place else to turn.
Their weekly program, "Haiti Tele Magazine Network," attempts to bring homesick immigrants the news from their homeland while providing instruction and advice on how to get along in America.
The program is the creation of Jean Laubert Vernot and Jean F. Azima, two Haitian-born Fairfield County residents who have successfully made the transition into American society.


Associated Banc-Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ms. Shaffer, Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn D. Shaffer of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Joyce Shaffer to Jonathan Donald Levine, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Levine, also of Princeton.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Shaffer, 21 years old, is a senior at Rutgers University.
Her father is the president of I. E. Shaffer &amp; Company, employee benefit consultants in West Trenton, N.J.
Her mother, Joyce Harrison Shaffer, is the coordinator of campus tours and information at Princeton University.


Argentine Debt Deal
Argentina may clinch a deal on a $3 billion loan from the International Monetary Fund within a few days, paving the way for crucial debt-reduction talks with creditor banks, the nation's Economic Planning Secretary, Juan Llach, says.
"There has been substantial progress," he said Friday after a week of talks with I.M.F. officials.
Mr.
Llach said he would resume negotiations on the $3 billion, three-year loan this week.
Argentina considers the loan a key to talks it plans to hold this month in New York with commercial banks, from which it is seeking a substantial reduction of its $41 billion debt.


Charlie Ventura, 75, Big-Band Saxophonist
Charlie Ventura, a tenor saxophone star of the big-band era, died on Friday at Greenwood Health Care Center in Pleasantville, N.J.
He was 75 years old and lived in Atlantic City.
He died of cancer of the lung, a family member said.


NBC Thinks Being No. 1 Is Too Costly
NBC has no interest in losing tens of millions of dollars on sporting events to remain the highest-rated network, Robert C. Wright, the network's president, told a group of investment counselors on Friday.
Changes in the television business climate -- including the high cost of sports rights fees and the advertising slump -- will make it very unprofitable to be the No. 1 network through 1993, Mr.
Wright said in a speech to the Private Placement Conference in New York.
NBC had been the highest-rated network for six straight years.


Regular Treasury Bill Auction Tomorrow
The Treasury will hold its regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills tomorrow instead of today, because of the observance today of the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
The Treasury will offer two-year notes on Wednesday and five-year notes on Thursday.
Late in the day on Friday, the three-month bills were bid at a price to yield 3.76 percent, and the six-month bills were bid at 3.87 percent.
The most recent two-year notes outstanding yielded 4.98 percent, and the current issue of five-year notes yielded 6.318 percent.


1992 CAMPAIGN: On The Trail; IN A SMALL BUT SELECT POLL, CLINTON IS ON TOP
A new survey shows that Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas has an edge with a distinct group of voters: members of the Democratic National Committee, who are automatically delegates to the Democratic National Convention.
In the survey, for the National Journal, a Washington magazine, Mr.
Clinton was backed by 38 percent of respondents.
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa received the backing of 28 percent; Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, 18 percent; former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, 2 percent, and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, 1 percent.


Quotation of the Day
"In this house, on Jan. 20, 1942, a barrier of civilization was broken and the abyss of barbarism was opened." -- HEINZ GALINSKI, an Auschwitz survivor recalling the German conference that set in motion "the final solution."  [ A1:2. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  EX-K.G.B. SPY ON TOUR
Speaking in flawless English that he refined during more than a decade of service in the United States, a former K.G.B. official has appeared on talk shows and before Congress to offer revelations about Soviet spying.
American intelligence experts admire Oleg Kalugin's style but wonder about his credibility.
A1  THE NAZIS' TURNING POINT
Fifty years after Nazi bureaucrats met at a villa to plan the destruction of European Jews, the building has been turned into Germany's first permanent memorial to six million Jews who were put to death.
A1  ARRESTS REPORTED IN ALGERIA
Tensions increased in Algeria as the national police headquarters was bombed and the new military Government reportedly rounded up more leaders of a Muslim fundamentalist party.
A3  TUNISIA TIGHTENS REPRESSION
In a move to cripple its Islamic fundamentalist movement, Tunisia has stepped up censorship and detentions, as well as harassment of women who wear veils.
A3  CAMBODIANS POISED FOR SPRING
About 370,000 Cambodian refugees are to begin returning to their war-ravaged homeland in March or April, a United Nations official said.
The U.N. wants to have as many of the refugees as possible out of camps in Thailand and back home in time for the planting season.
A2  CITICORP'S WORLDLY VIEW
After a bitter period of losses and cost cutting in the United States, the largest American bank company hopes rapid growth abroad will rebuild its financial strength.
A1  A THREAT TO ENLARGE ISRAEL
Israeli's hawkish Housing Minister proposes to annex areas where Jewish settlers live in the West Bank if Israel agrees to Palestinian autonomy in the occupied territories.
A6  IRAN PAID HOSTAGE TAKERS
Iran paid the captors of Western hostages held in Lebanon about $1 million for each of the 10 hostages released since August, a senior Bush Administration official says.
A6  RUSH TOWARD CONVERTIBLE RUBLE
Over the objections of the Russian central bank and doubts of the Bush Administration, President Yeltsin's advisers are pushing to make the ruble convertible within a few weeks.
A8  Protests against price increases in Russia and Uzbekistan.
A8  BULGARIAN INCUMBENT WINS
President Zhelyu Zhelev was returned to office in Bulgaria's first direct presidential election, unofficial results indicated.
The vote consolidated power in the hands of the Union of Democratic Forces, which backs economic reforms.
A10  National A12-16, B7  ERODING ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS
Mining and timber companies, developers and other rural landowners are mounting the strongest challenge yet to the nation's principal environmental laws.
Their tactic is to file lawsuits claiming that the laws restrict their right to use their own property, tantamount to an unconstitutional "taking" of land.
A1  SLEEPING PILL'S HIDDEN DANGERS
Critics of Halcion, the world's best-selling sleeping pill, said its manufacturer concealed data from the Food and Drug Administration showing it caused serious psychiatric side effects.
The assertions prompted the agency to begin an investigation of the company.
A1  OF MONEY AND MANAGERS
Multimillion-dollar executive paychecks have become a national issue, with critics comparing them to Imelda Marcos's shoe closet.
A1  DEMOCRATS TALK IT OVER
Senator Harkin attacked his Democratic rivals for the Democratic Presidential nomination in their second televised debate, seeking to rejuvenate his faltering campaign.
A14  TORN BETWEEN MEXICO AND U.S.
Imelda H. grew up in Houston eating Mexican food, but when she turned 15 years old she moved out and ate plain white rice for the first time.
Finally, she said, "I felt like an American." In predominantly Mexican neighborhoods across the country, such cultural turmoil is pulling families apart.
A16  KEEPING SEATED IN ILLINOIS
If Americans are angry enough with Congress to throw out local lawmakers, the March 17 primary in once insurgent-proof Illinois will be the first place it shows.
A14  A HARDENING OF HEARTS
Religious leaders say they fear that Americans are turning away from the outstretched hands of the homeless, numbed by the severity of the problem and confused about how to respond.
A1  OFFICIAL CHARGES RACISM
The Mayor of Birmingham, facing a grand jury investigation of corruption charges, used the confrontation to expound his view that the Justice Department unfairly singles out black officials.
A12  AFTER THOMAS HEARINGS, DELAYS
Confirmations of more than two dozen Federal judges have been stalled because of new limits on Congressional access to background reports on Presidential nominees.
A12  A Federal inquiry begins into a natural gas explosion in Chicago A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1 Sports C1-10  Baseball: $25.6 million pact for Larkin.
C5  Basketball: MacLean paces U.C.L.A.
C2  North Carolina tops Villanova.
C3  A prime schoolboy matchup.
C3  Palace coup for Bulls.
C4  Features: Sidelines C2  Question Box C4  Football: Super Bowl scouting report.
C1  Golf: Cook wins Hope Classic.
C8  Olympics: Coleman gets last bobsled spot.
C5  A second Holland brother makes Games.
C5  Tennis: McEnroe dazzles again.
C1  Graf has German measles.
C8  Obituaries B8  Shizuo Takano, electronics executive  Oliver R. Grace, philanthropist and investment expert  John L. Martin, Columbia University professor and AIDS researcher  Arts/Entertainment C11-20  Golden Globes' new prestige.
C11  Theater: Rob Lowe tries a farce.
C11  "Bella, Belle of Byelorussia" at the WPA Theater.
C18  Music: "Savage Land." C11  Superchunk, Luna and Sebadoh at CBGB.
C16  Dance: Dance in Review C12  Word and Image: "Bed of Lies" with Susan Dey.
C11  "Eyeball to Eyeball," on the Cuban missile crisis.
C20  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials A18  A March night in Alabama.
Creative corrections.
How to help Hong Kong.
Letters A18  Leslie H. Gelb: For relief, try Thatcher.
A19  William Safire: Declaring a war of nerves.
A19  J. Anthony Lukas: Fidel Castro's theater of now.
A19  Neediest Cases B3


Goodwill in N.Y.C.? No Lines in Moscow?
Every few years someone in New York City gets excited about luring, or keeping, a sports team and comes up with a grandiose scheme for a stadium.
Remember DONALD TRUMP's idea to build a stadium and sell sky boxes like they sell condominiums??
And, there was going to be a top-to-bottom renovation of Shea Stadium that would make the Jets happy enough to stay.
Of course, nothing ever got done.


Minority College Attendance Rose in Late 80's, Report Says
The proportion of minority students of college age attending colleges and universities increased in the second half of the 1980's but remained below the proportion of whites attending such institutions, according to a report made public by the American Council on Education today.
The overall increase of minority participation in colleges was attributed to more aggressive recruitment by colleges and universities.


Citicorp's Passage: A Humbling Change - A special report.; After Losing Luster at Home, Citicorp Seeks Future Abroad
Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company and America's flagship in overseas markets, finds itself in an unfamiliar role -- that of banking's stumbling giant.
After a bitter period of losses, layoffs, cost cutting and slower growth in many American markets, Citicorp is hoping that rapid growth and high profits overseas will enable it to rebuild its financial strength and stature.


Stars &amp; Stripes Beats Jayhawk
Dennis Conner and his Stars &amp; Stripes crew sailed aggressively today to defeat William Koch, who skippered Jayhawk, by 2 minutes 16 seconds in the trials to pick an America's Cup defender.
It was a classic match-racing duel, in which Stars &amp; Stripes maintained a lead despite the fact that Jayhawk stayed close throughout the 22.6-mile competition.


Fortune Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Inspectors Uncover New Data On Iraqis' Nuclear Program
International Atomic Energy Agency officials say the latest inspection mission to Iraq filled in major gaps in the agency's understanding of the Iraqi nuclear weapons program.
At a news conference Friday, the head of the agency's inspection team, Maurizio Zifferero, said the Iraqis had accounted for all the components and raw materials that the German Government said had been sold to Iraq by German companies and had subsequently been used in the program.


Albany Faces Hard Choices In Cash Quest
As Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo prepares to unveil his financial plan for the coming year, New York finds itself at the brink of fiscal chaos that has at its heart an intractable dispute over how to wring savings from the state's surging Medicaid and welfare budgets.
More than just an academic pursuit by sharp-penciled accountants, the conflict in Albany reflects a national debate over how states should control costs while the recession is simultaneously driving up welfare caseloads and constricting tax revenues.


Beth Portnoy Marries
Beth Portnoy, a medical consultant at the law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton, and Marc Bengualid, an associate at the law firm of Bower &amp; Gardner, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue in New York.
Rabbi Marc Angel officiated.
Mrs.
Bengualid is a daughter of Joel Portnoy of New York and Barbara Schwartz of Great Neck, L.I.
She received a nursing degree from New York University.
Mr.
Bengualid is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henri Bengualid of New York.
He graduated from Cornell University and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Citicorp, now the stumbling giant of banking, is betting its salvation is overseas, where it is aggressively expanding even as other U.S. banks reduce foreign activities.  [ Page A1. ]


U.N. Official Expecting Refugees To Start Return to Cambodia Soon
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said today that she expected 370,000 Cambodian refugees to begin returning to their war-ravaged homeland in March or April.
The commissioner, Sadako Ogata, said the United Nations wanted to have as many of the refugees as possible out of border camps in Thailand and back home in Cambodia in time for the planting season that begins this spring.


Doctors Say Graf Suffers From Rubella
Steffi Graf, who withdrew from the Australian Open because of illness, has contracted rubella, commonly known as German measles, her agent announced today at the tournament.
Philip dePicciotto, Graf's agent, said in a statement that German doctors had determined that Graf's withdrawal from the tournament was caused by two illnesses.


1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; JACKSON'S ROLE IN '92? THE CURTAIN RISES A LITTLE
Last fall, when the Rev.
Jesse L. Jackson decided not to enter this year's Presidential race, he made a vaguely threatening vow to use the influence of The Rainbow Coalition to hold candidates' feet to the fire.
His statements were widely viewed as a step toward using the group that he founded to craft a broker's role for himself.
But the degree of influence he will wield remains something of a mystery.


In Selloff, Some See Opportunity
Despite risks that long-term interest rates could rise further in coming weeks, many portfolio managers and analysts contend that the sharp selloff in the bond market over the last two weeks represents an opportunity to buy.
Long- and short-term interest rates are now higher than they were on Dec. 19, the day before the Federal Reserve Board startled and delighted the financial markets with its bold 1 percent cut in the discount rate.


Belarus Leader in Beijing
The Prime Minister of Belarus, Vyacheslav F. Kebich, arrived here today on the first visit to China by a leader of a newly independent former Soviet republic.
Mr.
Kebich, chairman of the Council of Ministers of Belarus, is to stay for six days at the invitation of Prime Minister Li Peng.
Beijing is moving to secure influence with the new nations, and Chinese officials say Mr.
Kebich's visit will focus on establishing full diplomatic relations.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Fleet/Norstar Financial Group, Providence, R.I., sold $107 million of 8.625 percent subordinated notes on Friday at 99.125 to yield 8.73 percent, through Salomon Brothers.
Preferred Stock  *
Tandy Corp., Fort Worth, said it planned to file for $400 million of preferred equity redemption cumulative stock, known as percs.
Proceeds will be used to purchase the company's common stock in the open market or otherwise.
Common Stock  *
International Paper Co., Purchase, N.Y., sold eight million common shares last week, at $72.75 a share, through First Boston.
Ratings  *
Georgia Power Co.'s senior secured debt rating has been raised by Standard &amp; Poor's to A- from BBB+, and the senior unsecured debt and preferred stock have been raised to BBB+ from BBB, with a total of about $4.7 billion in debt affected.
The rating rise reflects S.&amp; P.'s expectations of better cash flow and other earnings protection measures.
*
Consolidation Coal Co. has received an A-1 rating on its $200 million commercial paper program.
S.&amp; P. cited operating efficiencies and long-term contracts among other favorable factors.


Beijing Journal; Crime Is Up in China, and So Is the Public's Rage
Chinese prisons tend to be short of food and long on lice, beatings, and coffin-sized punishment cells.
Felons can be executed immediately after the most perfunctory of trials, even for nonviolent offenses like embezzlement, and criminals' families are sometimes billed a few cents for the cost of the bullet used to execute their loved ones.
In China many people have strong feelings about these conditions.
They complain that the authorities coddle criminals.


Old Friend Is Shapping The New McEnroe
Your heart may want you to be a free spirit, but your head tells you that discipline pays off.
At least that's the lesson John McEnroe is learning in his 15th year in professional tennis.
When McEnroe started out in 1977 after a year at Stanford University, talent carried him through.
But as he get older, talent needed more and more help.


A Chicken/Egg Debate Over Bolstering Ruble
In the belief that a free market in Russia requires a convertible currency as quickly as possible, President Boris N. Yeltsin's financial advisers are pushing to achieve this goal in the next few weeks -- over the objections of the Russian central bank and the doubts of the Bush Administration.
The battle over convertible currency, which would greatly increase the country's attractiveness to foreign investors, is the most visible aspect of a larger struggle between those who want the Yeltsin Government to end numerous subsidies and payments to the people as quickly as possible, and those who favor a slower phasing out of Government supports.


Aristide Insists on Overhaul of the Haitian Army
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti, whose elected Government was overthrown in a coup on Sept. 30, insisted today that there could be no settlement of the Haitian political crisis without the removal of the army chief and a thorough reorganization of the military.
President Aristide, a populist priest who won Haiti's first genuinely democratic election 13 months ago with more than two-thirds of the vote, was also guarded in accepting the view of the Organization of American States that naming a new Prime Minister would constitute a political solution to the Haitian crisis.


Charlie Ventura, 75, Big-Band Saxophonist
Charlie Ventura, a tenor saxophone star of the big-band era, died on Friday at Greenwood Health Care Center in Pleasantville, N.J.
He was 75 years old and lived in Atlantic City.
He died of cancer of the lung, a family member said.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY BABY'S DEATH RAISES QUESTIONS
A 5-month-old Harlem boy who had been badly burned more than a month ago died early Friday at New York Hospital/Cornell Medical Center.
The case has become the focus of an investigation by the Manhattan District Attorney and the New York City Medical Examiner, who said that the child was abused and that they were also looking into the possibility that mistreatment at the hospital contributed to the child's death.
A spokesman from the medical examiner's office said the autopsy showed that a feeding tube had been misplaced in the boy, puncturing his heart.
B3.


Review/Theater; Olden Days In Minsk, 3 Years Ago
"Bella, Belle of Byelorussia" at the WPA Theater, a delirious new comedy with music about neogeopolitics, might have been conceived by the Marx Brothers (Groucho, Harpo, Chico and Karl).
The play was written by Jeffrey Essmann, the music by Michael John La Chiusa.
Although the show is brief, it is packed with shaggy commentary about everything from gulags to glasnost.
The title character is a young woman out of step with her time.
She is as wide-eyed as Judy Garland in an M-G-M backstage musical.
The year is 1989 and the Soviet Union is on the verge of collapse, but the backward-looking Bella, a tractor-factory worker in Minsk, wants nothing more than to be enrolled as a member of the Communist Party.
In contrast, her pragmatic family and friends are scrambling aboard the leaky ship of capitalism.


INSIDE
An Israeli Hawk's Proposal
Ariel Sharon said that if Israel agreed to Palestinian autonomy, it would have to annex areas where Jewish settlers lived.
Page A6.
Democratic Hopefuls Debate
In an attempt to breathe life back into his campaign, Senator Tom Harkin took the offensive in the second Presidential candidates' debate.
Page A14.
Neither One Nor the Other
In many Mexican-American neighborhoods, cultural turmoil is pulling families apart.
Page A16.
Who Has the Edge?
Bill Belichick, the Cleveland Browns' coach, scouts the two Super Bowl teams.
SportsMonday, C1.


World Economies


Dance in Review
Nuria Olive-Belles Dia Center for the Arts


Unlikely Family Outing Addresses Peer Pressure
The youngsters watching the Sunday matinee of "Juice," the latest film to stir fears of teen-age violence, were not the usual crowd.
Many of them, for example, had their mittens safety-pinned to their sleeves.
And few of them could not have even gotten into the R-rated film without the parents who brought them.
Certainly, the film whose poster says: "Power. Respect. Juice. How far would you go to get it?" seems unlikely fare for a Sunday family outing.
But for many parents in the half-filled theater at 84th Street and Broadway yesterday, "Juice" was one way to address the daily violence and peer pressure their children will probably confront, if they haven't already.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with an article about the resignation of Arnold Biegen, Mayor David N. Dinkins's campaign finance chairman, was published in error.
It showed Alfred Kohn, the treasurer for Mr.
Dinkins's 1989 campaign, not Mr.
Biegen.


New Rules Stall U.S. Confirmations
Confirmations of more than two dozen Federal judges have been stalled because of the sharp limits placed on Congressional access to investigative reports on Presidential nominees, Administration and Congressional officials said.
Members of both parties have told the White House that the restrictive new rules imposed in the aftermath of the Clarence Thomas hearings are impractical.
Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., a Democrat of Delaware and chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, has told the Administration that it will be all but impossible for his panel to consider any of the 28 judicial nominees submitted under the new procedures, several Congressional aides said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Networks Tuning Out Pilots As a Way to Develop Shows
LIKE many other traditions from network television's past, the process of beginning a new prime-time series with a highly produced, carefully polished pilot episode is doing a slow fade-out.
Programming executives from each of the three big networks say they will make fewer pilots than ever this coming spring, looking instead to alternative -- and less expensive -- methods of developing new shows.


It Still Pays to Be Penny-Wise
To the Editor:
I'll tell you one thing pennies can buy ("The Penny Plague," Dec. 31): They buy a slightly lesser sales tax.
It's naive to suppose if pennies were abolished that all the six-, seven- and eight-cent sales taxes would go back to a nickel.
They would leap to 10 cents on the dollar.
Why give governments an excuse to rake in more taxes which they would promptly spend, and oversoak the average and even the poor citizens?
We should keep our pennies and spend them ourselves.
MICHAEL DRURY Newport, R.I., Jan. 9, 1992


CHRONICLE
Such widely divergent recipients as Secretary of State JAMES BAKER, the former heavyweight boxing champion MUHAMMAD ALI and the film director OLIVER STONE will be honored tonight in the Martin Luther King commemorations at the Sheraton Center in Manhattan.
The tribute to the civil rights leader was organized by the Congress of Racial Equality, which celebrates its 50th anniversary this year.
About 2,300 guests are expected to attend the reception and awards dinner, including ambassadors or other representatives from 82 countries.


Martin Luther King Day
NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES -- Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICE -- Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS -- Closed.
PARKING -- Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION -- Regular pickup and recycling schedule. Street cleaning suspended.
SCHOOLS -- Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS -- Open.
TRANSPORTATION -- Subways, buses and commuter lines on regular weekday schedule.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES -- Federal and state closed. Municipal offices, local option.
POST OFFICES -- Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS -- Closed.
SCHOOLS -- Most closed.
TRANSPORTATION -- N.J.
Transit trains on regular schedule; some buses on Saturday or reduced schedules.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES -- Closed.
POST OFFICES -- Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS -- Closed.
SCHOOLS -- Closed.
TRANSPORTATION -- Metro-North and New Haven Line on regular weekday schedule.


California Leader Explains Speech Mix-Up
Gov.
Pete Wilson blamed himself and his press office today for the confusion surrounding the existence and identity of three men he referred to in his State of the State Message.
In a rare Sunday news conference, the Republican Governor introduced three men he said were the people he used in his Jan. 8 speech as examples of Californians who had been harmed by the recession.
The introductions came days after published reports in which Wilson staff members said the three workers did not actually exist but were composites.


1992 CAMPAIGN: Congress; With Ingredients for Revolt, Illinois May Lead Way in Anti-Incumbent Vote
If the American public's general unhappiness with Congress is going to cost individual lawmakers their jobs, the March 17 primary in once insurgent-proof Illinois will be the first place it shows.
The national anti-incumbent mood has already compelled unaccustomed campaigning by veterans here.
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, chafes at hiring "handlers" who remind him to boast of accomplishments like getting money for expressway repairs.
But he takes the advice, adding grimly, "When I decided to run, I decided to win."


Books of The Times; World on the Brink of Nuclear War
Eyeball to Eyeball The Inside Story of the Cuban Missile Crisis By Dino A. Brugioni Illustrated. 622 pages.
Random House. $35.


Tunisia Cracks Down Harder on Muslim Militants
The Tunisian Government, in an effort to eradicate the outlawed Islamic fundamentalist movement from the political landscape, has stepped up measures including censorship, frequent detention of suspected movement members and harassment of those who have beards or wear veils.
The moves have crippled the Islamic movement, which has seen its leaders and hundreds of followers flee into exile, land in prison or go into hiding.
It has swelled the confidence of the Tunisian authorities, who once tried a policy of reluctant accommodation of the fundamentalists.
It has brought a collective sigh of relief among Egyptian, Moroccan and Algerian officials, who are struggling to contain their own Islamic movements.


Dr. Cooke Weds Capt. William Foos
Dr.
Colleen Doris Cooke and Capt.
William Fredrick Foos were married yesterday at the United States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y.
Chaplain Robert Geehan performed the United Church of Christ ceremony at the Cadet Chapel.
Dr.
Cooke, 27, an Army captain, is a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at the Madigan Army Medical Center, Fort Lewis, Wash.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Cooke of Bergenfield, N.J.
She graduated from the College of William and Mary, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and from the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine.
Her father is the engineer and director of public works for Ridgewood, N.J.
Her mother, Adele Cooke, teaches English in the Westwood, N.J., school system.


Reds' Larkin Scoops Up A $25.6 Million Contract
Conceding uncharacteristically to the realities of baseball life, Marge Schott yesterday took the boldest step of her controversial seven-year tenure as operator of the Cincinnati Reds.
She signed Barry Larkin, the Reds' All-Star shortstop, to a five-year contract worth $25.6 million.
Schott, who has cut costs wherever possible, and often where almost impossible, particularly at the scouting level, made Larkin one of the half-dozen richest players in the game.
More important, from the Reds' standpoint, she prevented him from becoming a free agent after the 1992 season.


Hallwood Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Charge Against Mayor Strikes Chord in Birmingham
As Mayor Richard Arrington was resisting a Federal grand jury's investigation of corruption charges here this week, and being cited for contempt in the process he used the confrontation to try once again to attract national attention to his view that the Justice Department unfairly singles out black officials.
Letters went out from the Mayor's office to a host of local and national organizations inviting them to participate in a hearing here next month into "the selective prosecution and harassment of black leadership."


Japanese Stocks Fall
After losing a total of 1,201.62 points last week, Japan's leading stock index slipped below the 21,000 level today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed down 407.55 points, or nearly 2 percent, to 20,913.82.
On Friday, the index lost 290.82 points.


Review/Critic's Notebook; Television's Many Women in Trouble, Real Trouble
Price, the son of a former Texas governor, marries Vickie, a frisky blond waitress whose favorite outfit is a halter and mini-mini-skirt.
She already has two children by her last husband and she and Price produce two more.
But the marriage begins crumbling as Price turns out to be an abuser of both alcohol and women and very likely a closet homosexual.
Vickie finally grabs a rifle.
A killing and a sensational trial ensue.
And television presents the nation with still another movie conveying an unmistakable message: For women these days life is perilous, if not worse.
There is nothing, it seems, like a little fear and paranoia to grease the ratings machine.


Apathy Is Seen Greeting Agony Of the Homeless
A decade after homeless and destitute people began flooding city streets, religious leaders say they fear that Americans are beginning to turn away from the outstretched hands, numbed by the severity of the problem and confused about how to respond.
The compassion that in the 1980's led to shelters, soup kitchens and other private efforts to help the victims of bad economic times has not disappeared, they say, but some fear that it is in danger of being overwhelmed.


It Is Executives' Privilege
It said something about sports and economics these days when only three athletes made the latest listing of The Sporting News's "100 Most Powerful People in Sports."
Of course, it's a subjective undertaking.
But the first athlete doesn't appear in until 31st (Magic Johnson).
Then you have to wait until No. 50 (Michael Jordan) for the next star, and then up to No. 81 for Jack Nicklaus.


Micron to Aid Maker Of Flat-Panel Screens
Micron Technology Inc., one of the few American semiconductor companies trying to compete with the Japanese in computer memory chips, is moving to compete in another arena where few American companies dare to tread: flat-panel display screens.
Micron, based in Boise, Idaho, announced on Friday that it was providing financing to a tiny Silicon Valley company that is developing flat screens using a technology that some experts say offers potential advantages over the liquid-crystal displays now commonly used in notebook computers.


Coleman Pushes Limit For Last Bobsled Spot
Chris Coleman was hyperventilating from the pressure at the finish line of the 50-meter ice track.
Tom Allen was weeping at the start.
And except for the 9-thousandths of a second that separated them, it was impossible to tell which man had won.
"This was the last thing I expected," said Coleman, who on his last push today edged out Allen to earn the eighth and final pushing spot on the United States bobsled team that will compete in the Winter Olympics in Albertville, France, next month.
"I've never experienced anything so difficult in my life. I'm just glad that it's over."


Maker of Sleeping Pill Hid Data On Side Effects, Researchers Say
For two decades, critics contend, the drug company that makes Halcion, the world's best-selling sleeping pill, concealed data from the Food and Drug Administration showing that it caused significant numbers of serious psychiatric side effects.
The critics, who include drug and psychiatric experts who have analyzed company records produced in a recent court case, say the data showed the pill was more dangerous than other sleeping pills and was more likely to cause symptoms like amnesia, paranoia, depression and hallucinations.
The assertions have prompted the Food and Drug Administration to begin an investigation of the manufacturer, the Upjohn Company, and persuaded Britain to ban the drug outright in October.


Oliver Grace, Businessman, Dies; Investment Firm Founder Was 82
Oliver R. Grace, a philanthropist and co-founder of a major private investment company, died on Thursday while vacationing at the Everglades Club in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 82 years old and was a resident of Oyster Bay, L.I.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Market Place; Was Japan's Trading Rigged? A Quiet Yes.
Little-noticed legal decrees handed down last month by Japan's Fair Trade Commission may have finally offered a partial answer to the most persistent, unresolved question from last year's securities scandals: Is the Japanese stock market rigged?
The decrees show how Japan's leading securities houses created bogus trades at will to generate profitable stock trades for selected clients, largely in an effort to win their highly lucrative securities underwriting business.
Well over $1 billion in such improper profits was created from this trading over a period of at least four years.


Dance in Review
Molissa Fenley Joyce Theater 175 Eighth Avenue (at 19th Street)


It Still Pays to Be Penny-Wise
To the Editor:
"Penny Plague" (news article, Dec. 31) was wonderful.
It mentioned many aspects of our smallest coin but did not cover what might be (at least for savvy New Yorkers) the most common attitude.
If one has to pay a bill for, say, $1.76, there is a canonical way to do this.
A sophisticate plunks down two one-dollar bills and adds a penny.
Thus we see the rule: pennies are used most often to avoid geting more pennies!
HARRISON ROTH New York, Jan. 2, 1992


CHRONICLE
After becoming ill with what appears to have been food poisoning on a return flight from India, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan was discharged from New York Hospital yesterday at 1 P.M.
"and is doing fine," said Andrew Banoff, a hospital administrator.
Lawrence O'Donnell, senior adviser to Mr.
Moynihan, said, "the Senator feels absolutely great, aside from being beat after a two-week trip around India." He said he did not know what food had caused the Senator to become ill, and added that they were awaiting results from tests of a sample of fish served on the airline.


U.S. Investigators Sent to Chicago To Find Cause of Gas Explosion
Federal investigators have arrived here to determine the cause of a natural gas explosion that killed at least three people and devastated a 16-square-block residential area.
Faulty equipment is being blamed for the blast, which caused 21 fires and forced dozens of people from their homes Friday, one of the coldest nights this winter.


Recession Puts a Harsh Spotlight On Hefty Pay of Top Executives
The heft of an executive's pay packet used to be a matter of only passing interest outside the corporate community.
The highest-paid executives, ranked in business magazines each spring, were seasonal celebrities at best, envied by their peers, attacked by corporate gadflies.
Yet, suddenly, executive pay has become a national issue.
The slumping economy, layoffs, an election year and President Bush's decision to take a retinue of highly paid executives on his recent trip to Japan, where company chiefs are paid far less, have focused a harsh spotlight on corporate pay.


How Kennedy Viewed the Vietnam Conflict
To the Editor:
The theme of the Oliver Stone film "J.F.K." is that President John F. Kennedy planned to withdraw from Vietnam and that to prevent this, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Pentagon, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and possibly people close to Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson conspired to assassinate him.
Most of this is palpable nonsense, but as Kennedy's Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, the officer responsible for Vietnam, I can testify that the first point is essentially true and correct.
On numerous occasions President Kennedy told me that he was determined not to let Vietnam become an American war.
He agreed to have Americans serve as advisers, and he also authorized American pilots training Vietnamese to fly T-28's to do the actual flying -- covertly -- in bombing missions inside South Vietnam.
But he refused every suggestion to send American combat forces.


How Congress Can Help Hong Kong
If Hong Kong were an independent country, the interests of its people could be defended under international law.
But despite its vibrant economy and singular life style, Hong Kong is not independent.
In just five years, it will switch from being a British colony to being a "Special Autonomous Region" of the People's Republic of China.
Will Beijing abide by its promises to respect personal liberties and Hong Kong's capitalist way of life?
Americans can hope so.
But they can do more than hope.


Airlines Want No Role as Host To Detainees
Saying they are being forced to run what amounts to private jails in airport motels, an organization representing the major United States airlines with overseas routes is seeking to end a policy that requires them to house foreign detainees.
As a result of the policy, established by the Immigration and Naturalization Service, hundreds of aliens have been held for months at a time at the expense of the airlines that brought them here, while they are awaiting for their asylum applications to be processed.


ISRAELI PROPOSES ANNEXATION PLAN
Ariel Sharon, the hawkish Housing Minister and would-be national leader, said today that if Israel agreed to Palestinian autonomy in its occupied territories, it would have to annex areas where Jewish settlers live, declaring them to be part of Israel.
Mr.
Sharon's proposal envisions creating several Palestinian enclaves in the West Bank, centered in major towns like Nablus, Ramallah, Bethlehem and Jenin.
None of those zones would be contiguous.
The much larger land area surrounding them, where there are now at least 140 settlements and 110,000 Israelis, would fall fully under Israeli jurisdiction and law.


Dividend Meetings


Declaring A War Of Nerves
Based on a tip from an intelligence source, a passing reference in a Jim Hoagland column and a quick run of the traps, I wrote here last week about the coming "April Surprise" -- covert stimulation of an uprising against Saddam Hussein, with backing this time from U.S. airpower.
Now comes some solid reporting by Patrick E. Tyler, a Plan B free-agent star enticed from The Washington Post by The New York Times in a move comparable to the Giants snatching Gary Clark from the Redskins.


Rollins Environmental Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Harkin Assails Competition In New Hampshire Debate
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa attacked several of his rivals for the Democratic Presidential nomination tonight in an attempt to give fresh impetus to his faltering campaign.
In a two-hour debate on WMUR, the state's only network affiliate, and on the cable network C-Span, Mr.
Harkin accused Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas of imposing unfair taxes on "the little guy" and asserted that Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska had failed to protect American manufacturing jobs.
New Hampshire's primary, the first in the nation, takes place Feb. 18, and all five of the principal Democratic candidates joined the debate.


Cook Chips His Way to Playoff Victory
Getting hot when it mattered most, John Cook scored dramatic consecutive chip-ins on the last two holes of a four-hole, sudden-death playoff today to win the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic.
After three of the original five players in the playoff were eliminated on the first two overtime holes, Cook chipped in from 20 feet for a birdie on the third extra hole to survive against Gene Sauers, and then made a 75-foot chip for an eagle-3 on the fourth sudden-death hole for the victory.


MacLean Is Not Perfect, but U.C.L.A. Is
U.C.L.A.'s Don MacLean is high (6 feet 10 inches), high scoring (he is on the verge of breaking Kareem Abdul-Jabbar's school career-scoring record) and highly intelligent (a strong B student).
He is also high-strung.
Stories abound about MacLean's temperament.
He has alienated opponents in various ways, by throwing balls at them, for instance.
And a fight once left him with a fractured cheekbone.


SHL Systemhouse reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Aristide Insists on Overhaul of the Haitian Army
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti, whose elected Government was overthrown in a coup on Sept. 30, insisted today that there could be no settlement of the Haitian political crisis without the removal of the army chief and a thorough reorganization of the military.
President Aristide, a populist priest who won Haiti's first genuinely democratic election 13 months ago with more than two-thirds of the vote, was also guarded in accepting the view of the Organization of American States that naming a new Prime Minister would constitute a political solution to the Haitian crisis.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Abaxis Inc., 1.75 million shares. Furman, Selz.
American Adjustable-Rate Term Trust, six million shares. Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood.


Watching Bubbles Rise In Caldron of Diversity
WHETHER Peter Minuit cheated the Indians or an enterprising tribe sold him an island it didn't own, their historic transaction may have been the first ethnic or racial conflict recorded in New York -- by whites, anyway.
For nearly four centuries since, New Yorkers have been obsessed by real estate and by race.
Ethnic and racial violence continues to strike an even more visceral chord as the threshold of indignation rises with each horrific crime.
The historic resonance of these conflicts may be comforting to some people because, after all, the city survived earlier episodes when verbal abuse gave way to violence.


6,800 Miles From Tokyo, East Meets West at a Shopping Mall
About once a month, when the selection at the local Stop and Shop in Warwick, R.I., just won't do, Masatomo Kobayashi gets into the car with his 9-year-old son and drives nearly four hours to Edgewater and the Yaohan Plaza.
There he first buys the cooperation of his son, Keiichiro, with a couple of plastic Japanese toy robots.
Then he goes about filling his shopping cart with enough soba noodles, daikon radishes and the like to save his family from falling back on hamburgers.


Bridge
Those who play regularly in clubs and tournaments will find many good things in a new book by Dr.
George Rosenkranz of Mexico City.
It is "More Tips for Tops", a wide-ranging discussion of important aspects of bidding, play and defense, and it is available for $12.95, including mailing, from Baron-Barclay Bridge Supplies, by calling (800) 274-2221.
One of the many useful tips for the player who wants a top concerns play from sequences in defense.
The normal play in third position is the lower of touching cards, but this routine move should be abandoned when the information it gives is more likely to help declarer than the other defender.


How to Aid Russians Is Debated
The breakup of the Soviet Union and Russia's swift embrace of radical economic reform have shifted the debate from whether the West should aid the former Soviet republics to how and on what terms.
At issue, according to some of the nation's leading economists, is finding the best way to bring vanquished cold war enemies into the camp of peaceful, prosperous capitalist democracies and avoiding anarchy, an authoritarian backlash and mass emigration.


Riley Yells 'Foul!' And Takes A Shot
The Knicks' 108-106 loss to the Cleveland Cavaliers on Saturday night figures to have a wide-ranging impact.
Pat Riley, the Knicks' head coach, may be fined for criticizing the officiating.


American Film Magazine Sees the End
American Film magazine, which once aspired to gain a broad audience with serious, gossip-free articles about movies and television, has ceased publication after failing to reverse a decline in circulation.
Last week, the bimonthly's list of about 58,000 subscribers and other assets were sold to Entertainment Weekly, a more mass-appeal competitor of American Film's, for an undisclosed sum.


Leader of Bulgaria Wins Election Over Ex-Communists' Candidate
President Zhelyu Zhelev won the country's first direct presidential election on Sunday, defeating a lawyer backed by former Communists, unofficial results indicated.
Mr.
Zhelev's victory in the runoff consolidates power in the hands of the Union of Democratic Forces, which now controls the presidency as well as the Government it formed after winning a general election in October.


Bombing by Shiites Kills a Lebanese Mayor
A bombing by Shiite Muslim guerrillas today killed the mayor of a town in the Israeli-controlled zone of southern Lebanon.
Hours later, Israeli troops and their Lebanese militia allies shelled Shiite villages in the vicinity.


Vivigen Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For Relief, Try Thatcher
Nasty business is going on between the United States and Western Europe, and it could seriously damage this week's multi-nation conference in Washington on relief aid to the republics of the former Soviet Union.
What Euro-American parties need is a bold idea to overcome mutual suspicions about burden- and power-sharing and political credit-grabbing.
They need someone of international stature such as a Margaret Thatcher or Helmut Schmidt to coordinate emergency efforts all believe essential.
At a minimum, the conference should set up a high-powered executive committee to do the job.


Coming Back; Get Creative on Corrections
New York City officials are looking for a strong leader for the city's jails after last month's resignation of Correction Commissioner Allyn Sielaff.
The vacancy invites dramatic reorganization as well.
Merging the jail system with the Probation Department could make better use of funds spent on corrections, particularly to impose more meaningful sanctions for petty crimes that have become a routine irritant of city life.
New York City's jail system employs 14,000 people to incarcerate about 21,000 prisoners awaiting trial or serving short terms for minor crimes; Probation's 1,565 employees keep track of 60,000 adult and juvenile offenders released to the community under court supervision.


Death Sentence Reaffirmed For Cuban Exile, Report Says
Cuba's governing State Council has upheld a death sentence against one of three Cuban exiles convicted of planning terrorist attacks on the island, state-run Radio Reloj reported today.
Eduardo Diaz Betancourt, 38 years old, who was captured with two other men on Dec. 29 when they landed on Cuba's northern coast, faces the firing squad now that the Council headed by President Fidel Castro has declined to reduce his sentence, the radio said.


Review/Pop; Big Helpings of Punk-Rock Energy
A bright-eyed, collegiate audience was crammed into CBGB on Friday night for a bill that included Superchunk (from North Carolina), Luna (from New York) and Sebadoh (from Massachusetts).
All three are guitar-driven bands, steeped in punk-rock and seeking their own amalgams of candor, self-consciousness, irony, melody and noise.
Jumping all over the stage of CBGB, shouting about cynicism and alienation, strumming guitars and clobbering drums at top speed, the members of Superchunk wholeheartedly summon punk-rock's barrage of energy, as carried forward by bands like the Replacements and Husker Du.


It Still Pays to Be Penny-wise
To the Editor:
I found Richard E. Mooney's Editorial Notebook (Jan. 5) "Penny Wisdom" fascinating.
To date, since 1980, I have found a total of $120.34 including a copper penny from 1896.
I cash in coins to make dollars and dollars to create larger bills.
Tokens are used upon finding, and all foreign coins are left behind for tourists.
Tip: taxi seats have proved to be most lucrative; however, you must look before you sit down, otherwise change or, if lucky, bills, will slip behind the seat.
Curbs have also proved to be a good spot.
The hunt continues.
GEORGIA K. FRIEDMAN New York, Jan. 5, 1992


Sports-Tech International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Pro-Communists Support Maintenance of Lenin's Mausoleum


Citicorp's Passage: A Humbling Change - A special report.; After Losing Luster at Home, Citicorp Seeks Future Abroad
Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company and America's flagship in overseas markets, finds itself in an unfamiliar role -- that of banking's stumbling giant.
After a bitter period of losses, layoffs, cost cutting and slower growth in many American markets, Citicorp is hoping that rapid growth and high profits overseas will enable it to rebuild its financial strength and stature.


Something New Under the Sun: It's McEnroe
The ghost of John McEnroe's past must have been lurking around the Australian Open, waiting for him to return and reclaim his place in the sun.
In 1992, he has shown up.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Housing Starts . . .
Dec.
Thursday  Federal Budget Balance . . .
Dec.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday None


Scholarships for Jobless Engineers
In 1961, in the heady aftermath of Sputnik, in the age of the missile gap, some of the region's largest military contractors banded together to set up a school on the edge of an airfield here to train a new generation of engineers and scientists.
But three decades later, with the collapse of the Soviet Union and cuts in American defense spending, thousands of engineers who designed the planes, and missiles and electronic systems of modern warfare have been thrown out of work.


Magazine Focuses On Men Having Fun
A trade advertising campaign for a new men's magazine that will focus on travel and adventure contradicts singer Cyndi Lauper, claiming that it is guys, not girls, who just want to have fun.
The campaign, which begins today, presents Men's Journal as the magazine for men when their thoughts turn from the workaday world.
The initial print ad, to appear in the trade publications Advertising Age and Inside Media, shows a single photograph of a man skiing amid 39 identical photographs of a man waiting for a commuter train.
Future ads will repeat the device, contrasting hailing a cab with kayaking, and mowing a lawn with hiking.


Police Arrest 3 People In Hostage Situations
Police officers in Brooklyn and the Bronx defused two potentially dangerous hostage situations over the weekend, freeing the hostages without injury and arresting the suspects.
In Gravesend, Brooklyn, the police received a phone call about 7:40 A.M. yesterday from Gloria Gurspan, 38 years old, reporting that her husband, Theodore, 40, was under the influence of drugs and alcohol and that he was threatening her with a shotgun, said Capt.
Joseph Valente, duty captain for the Brooklyn South command.
The man later fired a blast at his apartment door toward officers who were in the hallway.
After Mrs.
Guspan managed to flee the apartment, the police entered to find her husband in a stupor and arrested him on a charge of attempted murder.


St. Anthony Streak Ended By Top-Ranked Dunbar
Rodrick Rhodes may be the toast of Jersey City, but the 6-foot-7-inch senior for St.
Anthony met his match Saturday night on the final day of the inaugural Charm City Classic.
Rhodes scored 22 points, but so did Donta Bright of Dunbar of East Baltimore.
Bright, a 6-6 forward who shadowed Rhodes all evening, scored 22 points and converted a pair of free throws with 19 seconds left as Dunbar, the nation's top-ranked high school team, snapped St.
Anthony's winning streak at 40 games with a 50-49 victory.


Campbell Shifts Work to BBDO
BBDO New York is the beneficiary of a decision by the Campbell Soup Company, Camden, N.J., to consolidate advertising for various frozen-food brands that had been handled by both BBDO and Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.
An estimated $15 million to $20 million in billings will be shifted to BBDO from Ogilvy, for Campbell's Le Menu frozen meals and Great Starts frozen breakfasts.


U.S. Says Iran Paid Captors $1 Million for Each Release
Iran paid the captors of Western hostages held in Lebanon about $1 million for each of the 10 hostages released since early August, a senior Bush Administration official said today.
The payments, which were first reported today in The Washington Post, were in addition to regular financing that the Administration said Teheran had provided for years to shadowy Shiite Muslim fundamentalist groups holding hostages in Lebanon.


Todd-AO Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Baby's Death At Hospital Investigated
A 5-month-old Harlem boy who had been badly burned more than a month ago died early Friday at New York Hospital/Cornell Medical Center, the police said yesterday.
The case has become the focus of an investigation by the Manhattan District Attorney and the New York City Medical Examiner, who said that the child was abused and that they were also looking into the possibility that mistreatment at the hospital contributed to the child's death.


Seymour Rotker Weds Barrie Stern
Barrie Stern, an art director, was married yesterday to Acting Justice Seymour Rotker of New York State Supreme Court.
Rabbi Joseph Weiss officiated at the Water's Edge Restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
Ms.
Stern, 45 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the director of the art department in the New York office of the Cahners Publishing Company, a magazine publisher in Newton, Mass.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
She is a daughter of Loretta Stern of Cranbury, N.J., and the late Tobias Stern.
Her mother, who is retired, was a teacher in the Rockaway Township school district in New Jersey.
Her father was an engineering designer for the Foster Wheeler Corporation, an engineering construction company in Clinton, N.J.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Taylor Takes Turn For the Best
He was fighting before hometown fans and that might have emboldened Meldrick Taylor, the World Boxing Association welterweight champion.
Who knows why, but in the Civic Center ring on Saturday night against Glenwood (the Real Beast) Brown, Taylor got himself into the sort of wild-swinging brawl that his superior boxing skills seemed to militate against.


Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Legal Star May Emerge From Maxwell Collapse
To many lawyers and bankers, Richard A. Gitlin was a surprising choice to be the United States examiner in the bankruptcy of the Maxwell Communication Corporation.
Although Mr.
Gitlin had built a solid, yet aggressive, reputation representing insurance companies as creditors in bankruptcy cases, the 49-year-old lawyer had never represented debtors and rarely represented an entire creditors committee, a position that most demands the skills of building a broad consensus.


A Chicken/Egg Debate Over Bolstering Ruble
In the belief that a free market in Russia requires a convertible currency as quickly as possible, President Boris N. Yeltsin's financial advisers are pushing to achieve this goal in the next few weeks -- over the objections of the Russian central bank and the doubts of the Bush Administration.
The battle over convertible currency, which would greatly increase the country's attractiveness to foreign investors, is the most visible aspect of a larger struggle between those who want the Yeltsin Government to end numerous subsidies and payments to the people as quickly as possible, and those who favor a slower phasing out of Government supports.


Finding a Bad Night's Sleep With Halcion
Although many people take Halcion without incident and although it is impossible to ascribe cause and effect to isolated case reports, many who took the sleeping pill swear it made them crazy.
William Styron, the author, became severely depressed in the summer of 1985, while he was using Halcion.
In his book, "Darkness Visible: A Memoir of Madness," published in 1990 by Random House, he wrote that he had amnesia and suicidal thoughts, forcing him to enter a hospital.
There, he said, the doctor took away his Halcion, his obsession with suicide vanished, and his depression lifted.
He concluded that the drug was "responsible for at least exaggerating to an intolerable point the suicidal ideas that had possessd me."


Shizuo Takano, 68, an Engineer Who Developed VHS Recorders
Shizuo Takano, a former electronics executive who led the development of the VHS videocassette recorder, died today in Japan, news reports said.
He was 68 years old.
He died of a respiratory ailment, according to The Associated Press, which attributed the information to Mr.
Takano's former employer, the Victor Company of Japan, known as JVC.


Review/Opera; Weill's Rendering of an African Tragedy
For more than four decades, Kurt Weill's last musical, "Lost in the Stars," has drifted in and out of theaters and opera houses, always with the hope that it would finally prove a classic.
In 1949, this adaptation of Alan Paton's novel "Cry, the Beloved Country" was a success, playing on Broadway for 273 performances.
Maxwell Anderson, who wrote the book and lyrics, gave the drama theatrical cachet, and Weill's songs promised classy melodies.
The New York City Opera presented the work in 1958; other revivals were mounted in 1972, 1986 and 1989.
A film version was released in 1974.


Rob Lowe Braves Farce
It was open season on Rob Lowe -- yes, that Rob Lowe -- as soon as the usual suspects realized the actor was making his Broadway debut in "A Little Hotel on the Side," the second offering of the National Actors Theater.
"A National Scandal," punned the headline on the People page of The Daily News when it ran pictures of Mr.
Lowe.
And Cindy Adams reminded her readers in The New York Post that Mr.
Lowe "personally staged a now famous production a while back in some little hotel on the side in Atlanta," referring to the actor's naughty videotape at the 1988 Democratic National Convention.
But Mr.
Lowe insists he's having the last laugh.
After all, he plays the ridiculously virginal Maxime, the earnest philosophy student, in the restaging of an 1894 farce by Georges Feydeau.
It is in previews at the Belasco Theater preparing for its opening on Sunday.


Russia's Cup Entry Appears Grounded
Russia's first attempt to compete for the America's Cup, characterized by bizarre circumstances, appears to have reached a bitter conclusion.
The Red Star '92 syndicate, the only one of two Russian groups authorized by San Diego race officials to compete in cup competition, acknowledged today that it has given up trying to transport by air its 75-foot racing yacht here from Estonia.


From Pulpits, Talk to Calm Racial Tensions
From the majestic pulpit of Riverside Church, the Rev.
Dr.
James A. Forbes Jr. scanned the diverse faces that showed his congregation to be one of the city's most racially mixed.
He urged them to look at one another.
"We are not integrated because we are shoulder-to-shoulder," he declared to the hundreds of worshipers.
"We are integrated because we are heart-to-heart."


International Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


It's One for All And Millions for One
Do baseball players resent it when a newcomer to their team makes a lot more money than anyone else?
BOBBY BONILLA will be playing his first season as a Met while earning $5.8 million a year, twice what any current Met earned last year.
Will dissension compromise the Mets' ability to win this season?
"In baseball, teams seem to do better when they have unequal salaries," said Prof.
JOSEPH W. HARDER of the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.
The conclusion is that the clubs that go for the expensive free agents do better.


ENVIRONMENT LAWS FACE A STIFF TEST FROM LANDOWNERS
Angry about regulations that control the use of their land, mining and timber companies, developers, farmers and other rural landowners have organized a movement that represents the strongest challenge to date to the nation's principal environmental laws.
In the most successful tactic they have discovered so far, the movement's lawyers have been filing lawsuits for the last two years in a little-known Federal court in Washington, the United States Claims Court.
Arguing that the rapid increase of environmental regulations in the last 20 years has restricted their right to use their own property, the landowners say such restrictions are tantamount to a "taking" of land.
They argue that just like landowners whose property is seized for roads, bridges, parks or other public purposes, they are entitled to just compensation as provided by the Fifth Amendment.
Backing in Congress
The Supreme Court is considering one such case from South Carolina, and a proposal to require the Government to compensate landowners affected by environmental regulations was approved by the Senate last summer and is pending in the House.
That proposal has vigorous support in the White House, which has also proposed legislation to make Federal agencies pay judgments in such cases from their own budgets, making officials accountable for the effect of the regulations.


Triad Systems Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Road to Minneapolis On 615 Miles of Film
It's back to football this year for STEVE SABOL.
"I've noticed recently there's a tendency by commentators to over-intellectualize," said Sabol, president of N.F.L.
Films.
"But to me, football's a visceral sport."


After Hiding, Killer Leaves Road Map
The escaped murderer who was captured on Saturday told the police that he eluded a widespread search in Rockland County, N.Y., by sleeping in the woods near the center of the police activity, dropping pepper to distract police dogs, using "survivalist" techniques and eating at fast-food restaurants on busy Route 59 in Spring Valley.
Officials said they were not sure they believed that account from Frank Vandever, who was captured on Saturday.
But they now believe that Mr.
Vandever and Ronald Rutan, who escaped with Mr.
Vandever from a Connecticut maximum-security prison on Dec. 31, robbed four 7-Eleven convenience stores in Bergen County, N.J., during the 10 days they were staying at an Econo Lodge motel in Spring Valley.


New Magazine By Times Co.
The New York Times Company Women's Magazines is starting Fitness, a sports and health magazine for women that will be published four times a year, starting in February.
The magazine has been published once or twice a year since 1987 as a spinoff of Family Circle magazine under the title Family Circle's Fitness Now!
Its success on the newsstand encouraged the company to redesign and reposition the magazine as a stand-alone publication.


Track Record Polishes Golden Globes' Gleam
Barbra and Bette showed up.
So did Warren and Annette.
And Dustin and Kevin and Arnold and Michelle and Robin and Anjelica and Jodie and just about every other major star and powerbroker in town crammed into a hotel ballroom on Saturday night for an old-fashioned Hollywood event that was, by all accounts, the glitziest and most curious awards ceremonies of the year.
The occasion was the 49th annual Golden Globe gala, a Hollywood tradition that is now taken with considerable seriousness -- tempered by plenty of private amusement and even derision -- in the movie world.
"Everyone is in on the joke and we're all dressed up sitting there and, like, in the middle of the dinner you always say, 'Can you believe we're all here?" said one prominent movie executive who, like numerous others, would only speak on condition of anonymity because the Golden Globes have emerged as increasingly influential on the Academy Awards.


Results Plus
SKIING  Up in the Aerials Eric Bergoust of Missoula, Mont., tightened the battle for an Olympic berth yesterday by winning his first World Cup aerials event.
Bergoust compiled 230.72 points for his two aerials at Breckenridge Ski Area in Colorado to top Didier Meda of France, who had 228.18.
Third was Kris Feddersen of Breckenridge with 223.67, followed by Trace Worthington of Plymouth, Minn.
Bergoust is vying for one of the two aerialist berths with Fedderson and Worthington. (AP) Tomba Is on Target: Alberto Tomba of Italy won a slalom yesterday in Kitzbuhel, Austria, for his 25th World Cup victory.
Patrice Bianchi of France was second, followed by Armin Bittner of Germany, Hubert Strolz of Austria and Paul Accola of Switzerland. (AP)  Nordic Combined to Frenchman: Fabrice Guy of France won his fourth World Cup Nordic combined of the season.
Guy finished fifth in the 15-kilometer cross-country race in Murau, Austria, easily winning the combined after his third-place finish in the ski jump.
Klaus Sulzenbacher of Austria was second and countryman Klaus Ofner was third. (AP) Austrians Dominate: Andreas Felder finished first as his Austrian team took four of the top five places in individual World Cup ski jumping in Engelberg, Switzerland.
Stefan Zuend of Switzerland was second.
Werner Rathmayr of Austria was third.(AP) SPEED SKATING Dutchmen Are Flying Falko Zandstra of the Netherlands won the men's European championship yesterday by winning the key 1,500-meter event.
Zandstra, 20, beat the all-around champion, Johann-Olav Koss of Norway, and capped a blazing performance by the Dutch men's team, which also took the third, fifth and sixth places.


John Martin, 38, a Researcher Who Studied the Impact of AIDS
John L. Martin, a Columbia University professor and an AIDS researcher who started a pioneering study on the sexual behavior of gay men and the emotional impact of the AIDS epidemic, died of the disease on Friday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 38 years old and had his primary residence in Manhattan.


Book Theft at St. Patrick's
A large religious book was stolen early yesterday from an altar in St.
Patrick's Cathedral, the police said.
The Book of the Gospels, on display in the Sacred Heart Altar, was taken between 6 and 7 A.M., before the first Mass at the cathedral on Fifth Avenue at 50th Street.
A police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Theresa C. Tobin, said a 16-year-old boy tried to take the book on Saturday night, but was stopped.
A young male was seen rushing from the church at 6:20 A.M. yesterday, she said.
A spokesman for the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, Joseph Zwilling, said that the book was a gift and that he did not know its age or value.


Techknits Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Pepsi Widens 'Generation' With New Pitch to All Ages
WHEN Coca-Cola introduced a completely new marketing campaign for its Pepsi-like "new" Coke in 1985, exultant Pepsi-Cola executives boasted that "the other guy blinked." Now, as Pepsi readies a revamped marketing campaign, it is Coke's turn to make the same taunt.
The new campaign for the Pepsi-Cola brand, to be introduced during the CBS telecast of the Super Bowl next Sunday, replaces the eight-year-old theme "The choice of a new generation" with a broader appeal, "Gotta have it." The campaign's initial three television commercials play down Pepsi's longtime yen for the young -- the so-called "Pepsi generation," which made its debut in 1962 -- in favor of inviting consumers of all ages to pick Pepsi over Coke.


Explaining the Reason for Today's Holiday


Despite Polls, Mulroney Bid Seems Likely
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney has turned setback into advantage before.
In 1984, when he first sought to become Prime Minister of Canada, his Progressive Conservative Party was 14 percentage points behind the Liberals in opinion polls.
In 1988, six months before his second-term victory, the Tories were 25 points behind.
Canada's next elections are not likely before the fall of 1993.
Still, the Tories today are supported by only 16 percent of those surveyed, the lowest voter-approval rating for any governing party in this country.


Research Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nat Holman Finds Life Still Bears His Name
Suddenly in the last few weeks the name Nat Holman has been in the news again on a daily basis, on the front page of newspapers, in the lead stories on television newscasts.
It had been 40 years since people had heard and read the name so often, when the man and not just the name was in the news.
The reason for the re-emergence was because the Nat Holman Gymnasium on the campus of the City College of New York was where the recent stampede of a crowd attending a basketball game of rap music celebrities resulted in nine deaths.
"It destroyed me, made me very unhappy," said a 95-year-old man sitting in his room, holding his cane, in the Hebrew Home for the Aged in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
"All these things are shockers. I'm sorry for those involved."


More Suppliers Helping Stores Push the Goods
Not very long ago, a West Coast drugstore chain told Brown &amp; Haley, maker of fancy chocolates, that the chainwould probably stop selling boxed chocolates because they were not profitable.
The news did not surprise Mark T. Haley, president of the Tacoma, Wash., candy company founded by his grandfather.


Sven Dodington, 79, Inventor of System To Guide Aircraft
Sven H. Dodington, the inventor of the basic navigation system used to guide aircraft throughout the world, died on Jan. 13 at the Crestwood Nursing Home in Whippany, N.J.
He was 79 years old and a resident of Mountain Lakes, N.J.
He died of natural causes after a long illness, his family said.


Review/Jazz; Deflating Pretensions In Celebrating a Genre
Because music used to be strictly divided into either of two categories -- serious and nonserious -- the popular notion of stirring together jazz, pop and classical styles, often in a single piece, still carries some overtones of an impish avant-gardism.
And on Friday evening at the second concert of Town Hall's Not Just Jazz series, four ensembles offered fresh, sometimes humorous perspectives on generic musical division.
In their various ways, the Turtle Island String Quartet, the California Guitar Trio, Nancy King and Glen Moore, and Lenny Pickett and the Borneo Horns deflated highbrow pretensions while celebrating the pleasure principles of pop and jazz.
The Turtle Island String Quartet, from Oakland, Calif., has been struggling for years to create a fluid, swinging ensemble style that can comfortably embrace everything from Beethoven to Miles Davis.
Its biggest obstacle has been a rhythmically anemic bottom end.
But on Friday evening, the group played with a robust verve that didn't detract from the music's textural outlines.


In Albany, a Long-Term Budget Is Best
To the Editor:
As a general rule, finger-pointing is rarely productive, especially when misdirected as in "The Republican Obligation in Albany" (editorial, Dec. 27).
The obligation in Albany to reach an agreement that will close New York State's budget deficit is neither Republican nor Democratic.
It is incumbent on all the parties to talk, negotiate and ultimately to make a difficult decision.
To lay blame at the feet of Senate Republicans is to unfairly burden them with the sole responsibility of forging consensus.
Criticize some of the specifics in the Senate plan if you will, or some of the plan's omissions.
But don't criticize its focus.
Any real long-term solution to the state's fiscal problems will have to include major restructuring of our explosively expensive Medicaid and welfare programs.


A Chicken/Egg Debate Over Bolstering Ruble
In the belief that a free market in Russia requires a convertible currency as quickly as possible, President Boris N. Yeltsin's financial advisers are pushing to achieve this goal in the next few weeks -- over the objections of the Russian central bank and the doubts of the Bush Administration.
The battle over convertible currency, which would greatly increase the country's attractiveness to foreign investors, is the most visible aspect of a larger struggle between those who want the Yeltsin Government to end numerous subsidies and payments to the people as quickly as possible, and those who favor a slower phasing out of Government supports.


A March Evening in Alabama
Thinking back to a soft spring evening in Alabama many years ago, he realized why critics of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. seem so ignorant.
For years, officials somewhere have been quick to belittle Dr.
King as a lothario, a plagiarist, someone who consorted with people of
Communist
proclivities, and therefore undeserving of a national holiday.
The problem with the criticisms is not that they are petty or nasty.
It's that they are irrelevant.
For as Americans today take note of the murdered leader, they also recognize the millions who marched behind him, and do so still.


'Great Writ' Not at Issue in Habeas Debate
To the Editor:
In criticizing Chief Justice Rehnquist's proposal to restrict Federal habeas corpus review of state criminal convictions ("The High Court v. Habeas Corpus," editorial, Jan. 4), you condemn it as an assault on the "Great Writ of habeas corpus."
The "Great Writ" of history is the right of an arrested person to compel justification for his arrest before an independent magistrate or judge.
Though the Constitution only labels it a "privilege," the writ serves as an essential element of the separation of powers; for if the executive may also judge, it "might behave with all the violence of an oppressor" (Montesquieu, "Spirit of the Laws," XI 6).
We tend to take the "Great Writ" for granted, since our prosecutors and police forces are trained to bring those they hold before judges -- though we have always argued about how quickly that should occur.


Vikonics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


How Kennedy Viewed the Vietnam Conflict; Further Evidence
To the Editor:
Historians and pundits criticize the movie "J.F.K." on the grounds that it plays loose with the facts.
On the subject at the very heart of the debate -- John F. Kennedy's Vietnam policy -- they play loosely with the facts themselves.
They claim that because Kennedy appointees like Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara and others advised Lyndon Johnson to send combat troops to Vietnam, that Kennedy, had he lived, would have sent them in too.
Sound convincing?
Perhaps, but it is so far from the truth.
Those same men also advised Kennedy to send in the combat troops, but that was something Kennedy always refused to do.
Kennedy turned down combat troops, not when the decision was clouded by ambiguities and contradictions in reports from the battlefield, but when the battle was unequivocally desperate, when all concerned agreed that Vietnam's fate hung in the balance, and when his principal advisers told him that vital U.S. interests were at stake.


At Central Park Lake, It's Hockey Weather


Planned Parenthood Clinic In Montana Damaged by Fire
The office of a Planned Parenthood clinic where abortions are performed was heavily damaged by fire Saturday.
The fire, which broke out at 5 A.M. in the wooden building housing the clinic, was deliberately set, the authorities said.
Helena Fire Chief Don Hurni said gasoline was used to start the fire.


CHRONICLE
On a cruise of New York harbor yesterday, WOLFGANG PUCK, the Los Angeles chef who is credited with reviving Californian cuisine, received the Moreau Award for Culinary Excellence.
The award was established last year by the Vatel Club, a national organization of chefs, and Frederick Wildman &amp; Sons, wine importers.
What distinguishes Mr.
Puck from other chefs, according to some, is that he combines 18 years of European classical experience with American flair and tradition.
The winemaker CHRISTIAN MOREAU flew from Chablis, France, to present the award.


Supporters of Georgia's Ousted President Rally


Holiday Today; Markets Open
In observance of the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., Federal Government offices will be closed today.
State government offices will be closed in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, and most municipal offices will be closed.
Financial markets in the United States will be open, although most banks will be closed and the weekly Treasury bill auction will be postponed until Tuesday.


Uno Restaurant Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Donors to Neediest Cases Favor Fund's Low-Key Approach
A combination of shrinking government support and swelling caseloads is forcing many charities to use more sophisticated and aggressive efforts to raise money.
Modeling themselves after mail-order discount houses, more nonprofit agencies are expanding their pool of potential donors by buying mailing lists from magazines and credit card companies and by increasing the frequency of their appeals.


K.G.B. Telltale Is Tattling, But Is He Telling U.S. All?
A spy who came in from the cold is suddenly hot.
Oleg Danilovich Kalugin, the former senior K.G.B. official who burst into public view in mid-1990 by denouncing the Soviet intelligence service that employed him for 32 years, is barnstorming America.
Appearing nonstop on radio and television talk shows from Los Angeles to New York, Mr.
Kalugin is helping Cable News Network promote its book on the collapse of the Soviet Union.
He is also addressing foreign policy groups, trying to find a publisher for his memoirs, arranging television and movie projects and talking to officials in Washington about his assertion that the Soviets interrogated American prisoners of war in Vietnam long after such prisoners were reportedly released.


Dark Tale of Keels And Potted Plants
Security is tight along San Diego's waterfront now that the America's Cup yachts are in place.
High-wire fences, alarm systems, guards and steel gates are as common as radar is in the military.
Almost everyone is trying to keep keel designs safe from the roving eyes of competing yachtsmen.
The boats, which are pulled by crane from the water each day, are draped with cloth to hide their undersides.
Access to the compounds is blocked by land, but divers in past cup campaigns have tried to spy from the water.
The skulduggery has prompted caution at the docks.


After X's and O's, Focus Is on $'s and 's
Memo to National Football League general managers: Maybe those eager young players coming out of college really do need an agent.
RALPH CINDRICH, a lawyer and a former National Football League linebacker with New England, Houston and Denver in the early 1970's who is also an agent, decided to find out just how much N.F.L.-eligible players know about economics.


Germany Marks Place Where Horror Began
Fifty years after Nazi bureaucrats met at an idyllic lakeside villa here to plan the destruction of European Jews, the villa has been turned into Germany's first permanent memorial to the six million Jews who were put to death.
"In this house, on Jan. 20, 1942, a barrier of civilization was broken and the abyss of barbarism was opened," Heinz Galinski, an Auschwitz survivor who now heads Germany's largest Jewish organization, said at the opening ceremony today.


Sports of The Times; Why Wellington Mara Deserves to Be in the Hall of Fame
WHEN Wellington Mara and Bob Tisch began discussing the sale of 50 percent of the Giants' stock a year ago, Tisch, the billionaire president of the Loews Corporation, mentioned that he was looking forward to "10 years of fun" as the co-owner of the franchise.
"To have 10 years of fun," Mara told him with a smile, "you'll have to stay in 30 years."


1992 CAMPAIGN: TV Critic's Notebook; Sound Bites Are Tuned Out, And Clearer Images Emerge
The producers of last night's two-hour get-together of contending Democrats on C-Span evidently learned something from NBC's 90-minute sound-bite festival last month.
Instead of trying to squeeze a few words from all the suspects on every subject in the world, Cokie Roberts, presiding, focused on three big domestic matters: the economy, education and crime.
She pressed the candidates politely if not always successfully for direct answers without trying to upstage them.
Although viewers may have been left with only a fuzzy notion of the specific proposals to which most laid claim, differences of message and of personality did come through.
To be sure, the candidates were united in their put-downs of President Bush for getting the country into its present predicament, three of them spoke of their young daughters and all celebrated their superior compassion.
But along the way they began to turn themselves into distinctive figures.


Lattice Semiconductor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Amgen Takes Court Action
Amgen Inc., which won a long patent battle over its first drug, now appears to be getting ready for a battle over its second one.
The biotechnology leader, which is based in Thousand Oaks, Calif., said it had asked in Federal District Court in Washington late Friday to declare that Amgen's new drug for stimulating the production of white blood cells did not infringe patents held by the Chugai Pharmaceutical Company of Japan.
Amgen also asked the court to declare the two Chugai patents invalid.


Police Look For Gay Bias In Car Death
A United States Customs inspector was run off the road in Nassau County because his assailant believed he was gay, the police said yesterday after charging a man with manslaughter in the inspector's death.
The Nassau County Police Department has not officially classified the death of 26-year-old Henry Marquez on Dec. 28 as a bias-related homicide.
A special unit of the police force will make that determination on Tuesday, said Detective Sgt.
William Cocks, who supervised the investigation.


Review/Opera; From China, Echoes of Puccini
A lot of bogus Puccini is being written these days by European and American composers with no evident stylistic convictions of their own, eager to capitalize on proven musical and dramatic formulas.
"Savage Land," a four-act opera from 1987 by the Chinese composer Jin Xiang, which was given its American stage premiere here by the Washington Opera on Saturday evening, is something else: a highly individual creation that -- though it nearly matches Puccini on his own terms, with slightly updated orchestral effects and far more convincing Orientalisms -- is invested with great conviction by a composer for whom turn-of-the-century European styles remain fresh and vital.
By his own account, Mr.
Jin, who is 56 years old, became enamored of both Western classical music and Chinese folk music in childhood and began a long march toward a career in composition.
But no sooner had he completed studies at the Central Conservatory in Beijing than he was sent to a remote forced-labor settlement because of "rightist" political leanings.
Finally, in 1979, he was released and allowed to compose.
But, Mr.
Jin has said, "my original foundation had been badly eroded, and I was unfamiliar with the new techniques." He had to retrain himself, and through these varied experiences he evolved a distinctive esthetic, which, in his description, combines Western technique and Chinese tradition with his own feelings and ideas.
The libretto of "Savage Land" was drawn from a well-known Chinese play, Cau Yu's "Wilderness," by Mr.
Cau's daughter, Wan Fang.
The story, set in northern China in the 1920's but similar in its themes to many an Italian opera plot, undoubtedly carried special resonance for the composer.
It centers on Zhou Hu, a young man wrongfully imprisoned for eight years, who escapes and wreaks vengeance on the family of the evil landlord responsible for his arrest and the destruction of his family, only to destroy himself in the process.
Mr.
Jin's vivid score quotes more or less directly from Stravinsky, Ravel and Prokofiev.
But the overriding sensibility is Puccinian, manifest in arias of arching lyricism.
Such a wholehearted adoption and eclectic mix of dated Western gestures by an Easterner might have been considered naive two decades ago.
But remarkably, Mr.
Jin's tortuous career path has landed him squarely in the current American mainstream, dominated by New Romanticism.
And he wields these varied styles and weds them to one another and to his native idiom with wondrous skill and subtlety.
Still, for a listener who has serious misgivings about the New Romanticism to begin with, this opera proves doubly disconcerting in some respects.
One of the notable achievements of the modern age has been the international dissemination of the products of the world's great civilizations, but with it has come a homogenizing tendency that now threatens the existence of certain cultural strains.
Though Mr.
Jin should not be made to bear undue responsibility, the very success of his cross-cultural enterprise further suggests a future in which the most salient features of all cultures are blended at the expense of the refinements of each.
This suggestion is only enhanced by the extent to which Mr.
Jin's long-breathed, soaring melodies obliterate the quicksilver pitch inflections of Chinese speech, so ingeniously mirrored in traditional Chinese opera.
The production is sung in Chinese, with English supertitles, and the six-member cast consists entirely of young Chinese singers trained in Western vocal style.
Sun You, who created the role of Zhou Hu in Beijing in 1987, acted and sang the part here with appropriate bluster, but also managed moments of tenderness, scaling his baritone down to an affecting thread of half-voice.
Ye Ying sang the role of his beloved, Jin Zi, with agility and clarity; an occasional hard edge to her soprano, rather than contradicting the vulnerability of her characterization, suggested an underlying strength.
But the most impressive performance of the evening was Jianyi Zhang's as Da Xing, the weak-willed son of the landlord.
Though Mr.
Zhang's forceful tenor, with ringing high notes and excellent evenness throughout its range, perhaps gave his character too much grandeur, in strictly vocal terms it was a joy.
Completing the fine cast were Yun Deng, as the landlord's blind widow, and Yuxin Li and Haojiang Tian, in lesser roles.
The conductor was Paulette Haupt, who was primarily responsible for bringing Mr.
Jin's opera to this country.
Having heard a rehearsal of the work in 1987 in China, she presented it a year later in piano readings at the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford, Conn., of which she is artistic director.
Though it was good to see the company's orchestra back in the pit after a protracted lockout earlier in the season, string ensemble was scrappy, and attacks, both instrumental and vocal, were often tentative.
The austerely beautiful production, directed by Leon Major, with sets by Andrew Jackness and costumes by Martha Mann, will run at the Eisenhower Theater in the Kennedy Center through Feb. 9.


Griffith Joyner Goes Distance in Her Debut
Florence Griffith Joyner rose at 6 A.M. today and did 40 minutes of exercises in preparation for her 5-kilometer race in the American Airlines Miami Mile.
Then she got a little comic relief from her husband and coach, Al Joyner.
"I told her at 200 meters I wanted her to pick up any stragglers she can," Joyner said with a grin.


Generational Chasm Leads to Cultural Turmoil for Young Mexicans in U.S.
Imelda H.'s temper flares when she talks about her upbringing in Magnolia Park, the oldest Mexican neighborhood in Houston and a place rife with confused identities.
"We could never get stuff like pizza at home, just Mexican foods," said Imelda, who is 15 years old and who spoke only on the condition that her last name not be used.
"My mother would give me these silly dresses to wear to school, not jeans. No jewelry. No makeup. And they'd always say, 'Stick with the Mexican kids. Don't talk to the Anglos. They'll boss you.' "


A Chicken/Egg Debate Over Bolstering Ruble
In the belief that a free market in Russia requires a convertible currency as quickly as possible, President Boris N. Yeltsin's financial advisers are pushing to achieve this goal in the next few weeks -- over the objections of the Russian central bank and the doubts of the Bush Administration.
The battle over convertible currency, which would greatly increase the country's attractiveness to foreign investors, is the most visible aspect of a larger struggle between those who want the Yeltsin Government to end numerous subsidies and payments to the people as quickly as possible, and those who favor a slower phasing out of Government supports.


Chasing the Success of Danielle Steel
The seduction began with a flower, one perfect red silk rose.
Then there were telephone calls, lots of telephone calls, and sweet notes.
Chocolates followed, expensive, delicious chocolates, dragees dipped in gold flakes and luscious truffles.
There were invitations to fancy parties, spur-of-the-moment visits and glossy you-can-trust-me photos.
All that you would expect in a storybook courtship can be found in the way that Eileen Goudge and her publisher, Viking, have been trying to romance reviewers, bookstore managers and readers to turn her into a commercial fiction writer with the stature and sales of Danielle Steel.


Nina Szap Wed To Mark Ditmar
Nina Catherine Szap, a social worker at the Children's Seashore House in Philadelphia, and Dr.
Mark Ford Ditmar, the staff pediatrician at Cobleskill Health Care, a group practice in Cobleskill, N.Y., were married yesterday at the Georgian Court College Chapel in Lakewood, N.J.
The Rev.
John H. McDonnell performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
Mrs.
Ditmar, 29 years old, graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received a master's degree in social work from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Szap of Toms River, N.J.
Her father, who is retired, was a research chemist at Ciba-Geigy in Toms River.
Her mother, Catherine Szap, is the administrative assistant for the chemistry department at Georgian Court, where Mr.
Szap teaches as an adjunct.


Question Box
True Super Bowl Rematches
Q.
It won't happen this year, what with the New York Giants having been eliminated a month ago, but have there ever been Super Bowl games matching the same teams for two straight years?


Plum Creek Timber Co. L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


700 Burmese Muslims Said to Die in Detention
At least 700 Burmese Muslims died of suffocation in crowded warehouses in their homeland where they were detained by soldiers, a newspaper reported today.
The victims were among about 2,800 Muslims the soldiers detained in northern Arakan Province a month ago, the independent Bangladeshi daily Sangbad said.
The deaths occurred in the last week, the paper said.


Two Wounded in Shooting
Two people were shot last night on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, the police said.
Robert Vargas, 22 years old, of 59 West 87th Street, was shot in the right leg by one of several men he was arguing with at Columbus Avenue and West 88th Street.
A 15-year-old youth, who was not involved in the dispute, was hit in the right shoulder.
Both victims were reported in stable condition.


So What's in the Cage? Excitement With Ears
THE excitement had built all week in the preschool class at the Wilton Family Y. The animal lady was coming, and she might bring real live animals.
Now kids know instinctively that no sane adult, especially teachers like Marcia Shushan and Maggie Schluntz, is ever going to suggest the exciting possibility of live animals unless they know darned well the creatures are coming.
No one, even after nap time, invites the volatile disappointment of a platoon of short people whose lifetime perspective is measured in months.
So the excitement of these 3- and 4-year-olds focused on exactly which animals were coming.
The teachers fanned all the flames of imagination -- well, almost all.
One boy's ominous suggestion about bears was squelched.
What animals this time?
The teachers feigned ignorance.
Could they touch them?
The teachers were certain.
Importantly, what were their names?
The teachers professed no knowledge.


Star Clusters Astonish Astronomers
PEERING deep into the heart of a distant galaxy, the Hubble Space Telescope has astonished astronomers by revealing a scattering of dense clusters of young blue stars.
They appear to be clues to the cataclysmic collisions of galaxies eons ago.
Astronomers were surprised by the discovery of such young examples of the celestial structures known as globular clusters, long supposed to be among the oldest features in any galaxy.


Washington Talk; Trying to Turn a Deficit Into a Political Asset
The problem for President Bush's budget planners this year was how to meet his election-year political needs without seeming to ignore the enormous Federal deficit.
They resolved the problem in the tried and true method inaugurated by Ronald Reagan when deficits first began to mushroom, and employed annually in the last few years by Mr.
Bush and his budget director, Richard G. Darman.
It involves proposing, with considerable fanfare, popular tax and spending measures and offsetting their cost on the balance sheet with accounting gimmicks and putative spending reductions that might be good policy but that the President has no intention of going to the mat for.
That lets him take credit for measures the voters like and blame Congress for the rising deficit.
This year, the President plans to propose a tax reduction of a few hundred dollars a year for the middle class, a tax credit of a few thousand dollars for first-time home buyers, tax writeoffs for medical insurance premiums, new depreciation rules to make investments in plants and machinery more attractive, tax breaks for the real estate industry that were scrapped six years ago and a little more money for Head Start, one of the few programs Democrats and Republicans alike favor.
These proposals were written to appeal to particular voters or contributors like middle-class taxpayers, manufacturers, builders, realtors and investors.
But they would cost money.
So how would he pay for them?In part, with some proposals that would make some voters tighten their belts:
*Deep cuts in Medicare payments to hospitals, stiff increases in the premiums affluent elderly people are charged for Medicare insurance against doctors' bills and the imposition of the Medicare payroll tax on state and local government workers.
*The abolition of some entrenched Government programs like operating subsidies for mass transit and education grants to communities with military bases.
Do not expect to hear much about these items after the budget is made public Jan. 29.
They have all been offered before and were rejected by Congress out of hand.
Mr.
Bush has never expended an ounce of energy on their behalf.
The budget will also show increased revenue from proposals that cause little if any pain to anyone: a modest reduction in military spending; a cut in the capital gains tax that the Administration calculates would actually raise revenue; a new kind of savings account that would raise a few billion in additional revenue for the Government at first but cost billions more years down the road; bookkeeping changes in the way deposit insurance and pension guarantees are accounted for.
These Mr. Bush will talk about on in his campaign.
Unlike government budgets in parliamentary democracies, Presidents' budgets are not blueprints for the policies to be followed.
Here, Congress controls the purse strings.
The President can use his veto power to prevent the lawmakers from moving in directions he opposes.
But he can win acceptance of his own proposals only if he throws his weight around, and on his most controversial budget items, he has rarely done so.
If he had given the same kind of attention last year to persuading Congress to limit benefit payments to the affluent that he devoted, say, to blocking civil rights legislation or to winning confirmation of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, he might have carried the day and cut the deficit by billions of dollars.
As the election year wears on, Mr.
Bush will doubtless try to get off the hook with voters concerned about high taxes, bad schools and unaffordable medical insurance by pointing to his budget proposals and blaming Congress for inaction.
But the Democratic Presidential candidates can hardly complain.
They are free to make outlandish proposals.
And they do not have to present the other side of the ledger.


Review/Rock; Sound and Style of the 60's
An MTV-era musician whose values vastly predate the video age, Chris Whitley is a welcome anachronism.
Tonight at Maxwell's here, this New York-based singer and guitarist gave the kind of performance that might have seemed less unusual 20 or 25 years ago.
Wearing a scant white tank top that defied the winter cold, switching back and forth between an array of gorgeous antique guitars, Mr.
Whitley played a set that had much less to do with showmanship than with music itself.
Like some of the late-1960's British invasion guitarists who took their cues from Delta blues, Mr.
Whitley's rugged acoustic-slide style is derived from such proto-rock legends as Elmore James; like Neil Young or Keith Richards, he was completely absorbed in his playing, to the point that he seemed oblivious to the devoted capacity crowd urging him on.


Review/Television; Sun Myung Moon Changes Robes
If you've been wondering what the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon is up to these days, tonight's edition of "Frontline" offers a suspicion or two.
"The Resurrection of Reverend Moon," at 9 on Channels 13 and 49, produces evidence that since serving 13 months in Federal prison for conspiracy and false tax returns in the early 1980's, the head of the Unification Church has become a behind-the-scenes political force.
After a reminder of his celebrity or notoriety some years ago, when young Moonies were peddling flowers at airports and marrying en masse, the program focuses on operations like The Washington Times and the American Freedom Coalition, which it strongly implies are run to the right-wing specifications of the Unification Church.


Paris Business Forms Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Raytheon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


F.D.A. Tells Company To Release Implant Data
The Food and Drug Administration has told the Dow Corning Corporation to make public some 90 documents on silicone gel breast implants, but company officials said today the company may not comply.
Dr.
James S. Benson, the chief F.D.A. official in charge of medical devices, told the company that the agency would disclose the documents if the company did not do so by Wednesday.


Global Marine Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prague Has to Drive Fast in Economic Mud
To the Editor:
Valtr Komarek's attack on Czechoslovak reform ("Shock Therapy and Its Victims," Op-Ed, Jan. 5) misstates a few facts.
But the real mistakes are in the analysis.
First, Mr.
Komarek wrongly blames the bulk of Czechoslovakia's economic woes on the Government's reform program.
True, the Czechoslovak economy, like that of its neighbors, suffered in 1991.
But a major contributing cause was external shock, not just domestic therapy.


American Electric Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Broader Use Of Macintosh Software Set
A Silicon Valley company plans to announce a program on Wednesday that permits users and developers to run programs designed for Apple Computer's Macintosh on Sun, I.B.M. and Silicon Graphics work stations.
It will be the first significant attempt to use software designed for the Macintosh on other computers.
The company, Quorum Software Systems, said that it had shown the software to Apple executives and that the companies were discussing possible licensing or other arrangements.


Review/Theater; Looking Inward and Finding Emptiness
In a theatrical space as intimate as the Manhattan Theater Club Stage 2, you can tell when a play has gripped its audience, for no one seems to breathe, let alone shift in his seat.
The phenomenon can be observed first-hand these nights at "Sight Unseen," a smart and sad new comedy by Donald Margulies that has all sorts of unpleasant things to say about the 1980's art scene, the loss of love and the price of assimilation, both ethnic and intellectual, in an America where authenticity often has little to do with an artist's -- or anyone else's -- rise to the top.
The scene that reduces the house to a dead hush is an Act II encounter set in a sleek London art gallery where a provocative American painter named Jonathan Waxman (Dennis Boutsikaris) is being honored with a retrospective.
Jonathan, an intense, fashionably dressed young man who wears a pony tail and may or may not resemble Eric Fischl or Julian Schnabel, has been the subject of adulatory profiles in Vanity Fair and The New York Times.
He has a long waiting list of patrons who have commissioned his future pictures, sight unseen, at outrageous prices.
But to maintain his marketability, he must suffer through tedious interviews, like the one he is now giving to Grete (Laura Linney), a leggy blonde German woman who is a ferocious student of his work and tends to ask long, multi-clause questions in impeccable, if strongly accented, English.


Aggrieved British Car Owners Toast Notable Man of Action
Ever since John Thompson tried to dump the parking worker into Torquay harbor, people won't let him pay for his own beer.
Mr.
Thompson, a businessman in southwest England, recently became a kind of national hero for doing what thousands of motorists have probably wanted to do themselves.
After discovering that an employee's parked car had been immobilized by a wheel clamp, he took a forklift truck, hoisted a van carrying a worker from a private car clamping company, and tried to dump the van into the harbor.


Q&amp;A
Swimming Weather
Q. What determines when ocean conditions are best for swimming?


Landmark Graphics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Karl Confirms It: He's Talking to Sonics
GEORGE KARL said yesterday he was going to Seattle to be interviewed for the vacant head-coaching job with the SuperSonics.
Karl, a former coach of the Golden State Warriors and the Cleveland Cavaliers, told reporters he had talked by telephone with the Sonics' president, BOB WHITSITT, but had not struck a deal.
On Sunday, he resigned midway through a two-year contract with Real Madrid of the Spanish League.


Versa Technologies Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reading Lips, and Votes, in Trenton
Gov.
Jim Florio's new support of citizen lawmaking through initiative and referendum puts enormous pressure on the Republican majority to enact the legislation they have sworn to support for more than a decade.
But nobody is betting it will happen.


2 Revlon Brands Sold; Executives Also Move
In what is emerging as a strategy to focus on its core business, Revlon Inc. has sold two more of its brands, and several of its top international executives went along with the businesses, the company said yesterday.
The company said four unidentified Saudi brothers bought Halston, a troubled fragrance and licensing business.
They also bought Princess Marcella Borghese, a solid high-priced line of cosmetics and skin-care products sold mainly through department and specialty stores.
Revlon did not say how much the two businesses had fetched.


Treasury Market Study Said to Seek New Policy
The Government report done in the wake of the Salomon Brothers trading scandal will propose that the Treasury Department sell extra bonds or notes when the department determines that there is a squeeze in the government securities market, according to people who have seen part of the study.
This move, aimed at relieving the pressure on investors who are forced to pay higher prices because of an illegal or legal shortage of securities, will represent a significant policy change for the Treasury.
It has traditionally kept its hand out of the $2 trillion market, where the Government borrows the money it needs to cover the growing budget deficit.


Separating Margarita From Foster Parents Was Grave Injustice
To the Editor:
In "A Warning From Margarita" (editorial, Jan. 3) you focus, as you should, on the child's well-being by asking, "Does it make sense for a child who has lived with  [ the same ]  foster parents for seven years, almost her entire life, to be returned to her natural mother?" But your answer, "Perhaps not," is wrong.
You should have said: "Absolutely not."
Instead, you shift focus from Margarita's plight to the injustice done to her natural mother by the private and New York City agencies that had failed, as the law required, to encourage and help her establish a relationship with Margarita.
Your comment that "this case has no happy solution" obscures the fact that for Margarita there could and should have been a less detrimental outcome.


Sports of The Times; The Perils Of Life in Minneapolis
THEY have signs on some of the larger streets here that inform drivers that these are "Snow Emergency Routes." The signs draw a glance from the Super Bowl crowd beginning to stream in for next Sunday's game.
The signs in fact are not taken down even in summer.
I remember asking someone about this when I moved here in 1965.
"Remove them?" she said.
"For three days?"
This was kind of a joke, but you never know when it's going to snow in Minneapolis.
Last Halloween, just a couple of days after the World Series here, 28 inches fell.
So the people are prepared: like the hotel doorman who greets you in a raccoon hat and a raccoon coat; like those residents who sought to make the snowplow the offical pace car for the Super Bowl.


In Chill of the Night, the Homeless Change Habits
His bare feet jammed into high-top sneakers, James Murray stumbled out of his shack and into the 14-degree weather late Sunday night.
He would not have gone out at all, but charity workers were serving pea soup at his shantytown, an encampment on the Lower East Side built around a 20-foot canvas tepee.
Like others there -- and many of the city's homeless people -- he had only a few frosty words for the weather, the coldest in New York City this winter.


A Spiral Galaxy
Scientists say they have found the strongest evidence yet for a distant spiral galaxy in which one arm points in the opposite direction from the others.
The wrong-way "leading arm" extends counterclockwise from near the center, pointing in the presumed direction of the galaxy's rotation, while two "trailing" arms reach out clockwise, said Dr.
Ronald Buta, an author of the study.


Czechs by Millions Invest $35 in Big State Sale
Czechoslovakia has been swept up in a frenzy that can perhaps be described as gold fever.
Government offices across the country have been swamped as the deadline approaches for signing up for a virtual giveaway of a large chunk of the state-owned economy.
Under the program, known as "coupon privatization," the Government is about to divide ownership of roughly 40 percent of the economy among all citizens over 18 who register.
The cost of entry is 1,035 crowns, or about $35, a little more than a week's average wage in Czechoslovakia.


Mets and Magadan Meet Halfway
Feelings may still need to be mended, but the Mets and Dave Magadan yesterday did manage to end one significant difference of opinion when they agreed on a one-year contract for a figure that fell midway between their salary arbitration filings of last week.
Magadan, who was the Mets' first baseman for the last several seasons but lost his regular job to Eddie Murray during the off season, signed a deal for $1,393,750.
That represents a slight raise from his $1.25 million salary of last season.


Miller Building Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article in the Arts and Leisure section on Jan. 12 about the television producers Joshua Brand and John Falsey misstated Mr.
Brand's educational background.
His undergraduate degree is from City College in New York, where he majored in English literature.
He received a master's degree in English literature from Columbia University and at one point sought a teaching job at LaGuardia Community College in New York.


Corrections
An obituary on Sunday about a Holocaust survivor who was active in organizations that helped other survivors misspelled his name.
He was Milton Butnick.


Dibble and Surhoff Sign
ROB DIBBLE of Cincinnati and B. J. SURHOFF of Milwaukee have negotiated 1992 salaries with their teams.
Dibble, whose 31 saves were second in the National League last year, nearly tripled his $500,000 salary.
He will receive $1.4 million, halfway between the $1.8 million salary he sought and the $1 million the Reds submitted.


1992 CAMPAIGN: Endorsements; Elaborate Ritual Mates Candidates and Backers
Once every four years, people like Louis L. Goldstein, Joseph E. Gardner and Don Fraser migrate to the center of the political universe.
Governors call them at home.
Presidential candidates visit them at work.
Rich and powerful friends take them out to expensive meals.
All three have modest profiles on the national scene but considerable regional fame and popularity.
In a Presidential season, that makes them choice quarry for candidates hunting endorsements.


Chess
The University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign triumphed in the 1991 Pan-American Intercollegiate Team Championship, held at the Palmer House Hotel in Chicago from Dec. 27 to 30.
The Illinois team scored 5 1/2- 1/2 to surpass 33 teams from Canada, Central America and the United States in the six-round, Swiss-system tournament.
The toughest hurdle the University of Illinois had to overcome was Brooklyn College, which took second place with a 5-1 score and which had the United States champion, Gata Kamsky, playing first board.
But Vivek Rao, Board 1 for Illinois, a graduate student in physics who starred for Harvard in its winning 1988-90 years, came through to upset his illustrious opponent.


Central &amp; South West Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cornhusker Is Charged
A University of Nebraska football player was charged yesterday in Lincoln in the beating of a 23-year-old woman and was sent to a state mental hospital for an examination to determine his competency to stand trial.
The player, Scott Baldwin, 22, of Roselle, N.J., a running back who missed much of last season with injuries, was charged with first-degree assault and assault of a police officer.


The Children's Hour
In truth, it was not an hour but two, during which five would-be Presidents debated and polished their personas Sunday night on C-SPAN.
Under Cokie Roberts's courteous prodding, three of them -- Kerrey, Tsongas and Harkin -- were sharper than on a previous outing with Tom Brokaw.
Two of them -- Brown and Clinton -- gave warmth to previously sketchy impressions.
But for all five Democrats, it was the children's hour.
Maybe they're powered by a genuine desire to improve the lot of the most vulnerable of all Americans.
Maybe they're moved by pragmatism.
Either way, it's a hopeful change in politics that they, like President Bush, consider children high on the list of campaign issues.


Jailed Drug Cartel Chief Still Feared in Colombia
Seven months after Pablo Escobar, Colombia's most notorious drug trafficker, entered a luxury jail here, his word still inspires terror across the land.
One recent morning, Ariel Otero, a prominent leader of rightist death squads that killed suspected leftists, told reporters that Mr.
Escobar, a former ally, had put out a contract on his life.
In revenge, Mr.
Otero said he planned to give the police documents and cassette tapes implicating the Medellin cocaine trafficker in a series of murders.


Structural Dynamics Research Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bruno's Inc.  reports earnings for 14wks to Dec 28


Critic's Notebook; Robert Shaw Magic: It's Based on Sweat
Sometimes a musical project proves so interesting and valuable that it survives its original purpose.
In November 1990, Carnegie Hall sponsored its first Professional Training Workshop as part of its centennial celebration.
Robert Shaw, the pre-eminent American choral conductor, was invited to lead the program, and more than 200 choral conductors, singers and music administrators came from all over the United States for five days of intensive work on Brahms's German Requiem, and a performance with the Orchestra of St.
Luke's.
It was evident both from the performance and from the videotapes of the training sessions that something special had happened.
Mr.
Shaw had taken a disparate group and transformed it almost overnight into a chorus disciplined and flexible enough to give a moving, persuasive performance of a towering work of the choral repertory.


Business and Health; Efforts to Reduce Retiree Costs
PUSHED by a new accounting rule, most large employers are examining ways to reduce the enormous future costs of medical benefits they have promised to retirees.
Benefits consultants say some executives view the benefits as a "gratuity" rather than a permanent obligation, when they are not detailed in an employment contract.
But most employers say they are committed to continuing the programs, albeit often with reduced benefits, despite rapid growth in both medical costs and the numbers of retirees.
Under an accounting rule that takes effect in 1993, corporations with at least 500 employees must calculate future retiree medical obligations and charge off the costs against income -- either all at once, or spread over 20 years.
The rule does not require setting aside cash for the future costs.


Bills Fans Overheat Buffalo (in January)
Cathy Jo Woloszyn spent a lonely 1991 Super Bowl on Manhattan's Upper East Side, desperately looking for a bar populated with Buffalo Bills fans.
Instead, the Buffalo native recalled, she found swarms of New York Giants fans, who cheered their team to victory over the Bills.
This year, she will be safely ensconced at the Buffalo Sports Garden, a sprawling warehouse-like bar and restaurant where 1,500 fans watched the American Football Conference championship game on more than two dozen 27-inch televisions (including several in the rest rooms) and three gargantuan screens as large as 23 feet.


Borland International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sealright Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Careers; Some Views On Job Loss By an Expert
WITH so many thousands of middle managers losing their jobs, the outplacement business should be booming.
But while business is good, it is not booming because companies dismissing large numbers of middle and top managers do not want to pay the costs.
Often they pay only for group sessions and other short-term guidance.
This means that older, higher-paid employees tend to be the ones these days whose companies provide full outplacement.


FOR SOUTH AFRICA, ONE STEP FORWARD
Negotiations on South Africa's future took a small but significant step forward today as representatives of 19 political parties and groups gathered to work out the first practical details for formal talks leading to a non-racist constitution.
The representatives of the Government, the ruling National Party, the African National Congress and others convened in five working groups that have been set up to address various aspects of the negotiating process.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  U.N. DEMAND ON LIBYA EXPECTED
The United Nations Security Council is expected to serve Libya with a virtual demand that it hand over agents accused of blowing up two airliners or face the threat of economic sanctions.
A1  EAST GERMAN GUARDS CONVICTED
In a case that raised far-reaching political and moral questions, two former East German border guards were convicted of having shot and killed a fleeing refugee in February 1989.
A1  GULF WAR STILL HAUNTS ISRAELIS
A year after the Scud attacks and the fears of chemical devastation they produced, some Israelis, notably children, are still plagued by sleeplessness, edginess, bad dreams and other signs of distress.
A1  Israel's premier said the building of settlements would continue.
A8  AIRLINER CRASHES IN FRANCE
A French domestic airliner carrying 96 people crashed in snow and fog in eastern France.
At least 9 survivors, including a child, were found in the wreckage.
A3  RUSSIA AND FINLAND SIGN NEW PACT
Russia and Finland signed a treaty agreeing to treat each other as equals and effectively putting an end to the era when Moscow maintained the right to dictate Finnish foreign and defense policies.
A9  CUBA EXECUTES EXILE
A Cuban man who had fled to Miami died at the hands of a firing squad in Cuba after being sentenced to death for plotting sabotage against the Government of President Fidel Castro.
A3  BRITISH VOW TO FIGHT I.R.A.
Prime Minister John Major vowed to press Britain's fight against the Irish Republican Army in Northern Ireland, but the Government sidestepped demands for hard-line security measures.
A6  ALGERIA MAY BAN ISLAMIC PARTY
The Algerian Government appears to be moving toward an official ban on the Islamic fundamentalist party as well as significant changes in the multiparty system that it has permitted since 1989.
A6  INDIA-PAKISTAN A-BOMB RACE SEEN
In sharp contrast to the rest of the world, South Asia is on the brink of a nuclear arms race, say senior Western diplomats and foreign political figures who have visited New Delhi in recent weeks.
A13  The South African talks took a small but significant step forward.
A3  Czechoslovakia is caught up in a virtual gold rush.
A7  Caracas Journal: Where protesters throw rocks during a boom.  4  National A14-19  FIGHTING AS BUSH SLIPS
Bush's slide in opinion polls has fanned rivalries in the White House, officials said, with the Skinner camp saying the President's political problems require quick action on the economy and the Darman camp arguing that Bush's problems are a matter of communications.
A1  HOLDING BACK THE RED TAPE
Bush is expected to stop all Government agencies from issuing new rules for three months as part of a broad campaign to stimulate the economy by reducing the burden of Federal regulation.
A18  LAWMAKERS PROMISE QUICK ACTION
Congress gets back to work today, and leaders predicted they would quickly act on measures intended to stimulate the economy, like a tax cut for the middle class and an extension of unemployment benefits.
A18  Washington Talk: Turning a deficit into political points.
A18  A LOT OF IMAGE-CARVING AHEAD
Political Week: Everybody had an angle in Sunday night's debate among the Democratic Presidential candidates.
And it was clear that everybody had a lot to accomplish before the next debate.
A19  The candidates' delicate hunt for political endorsements.
A19  HELPING OR HURTING FRUIT
A plant in Florida is prepared to bombard fruit with gamma rays, a process the owners and many scientists say would retard spoilage and kill dangerous bacteria, but which others say might harm humans and the environment.
A1  REMEMBERING THE DREAM
Martin Luther King Day was celebrated across the nation with remembrances of the struggle for civil rights, condemnation of the despair facing black America, and challenges to national leaders to work for hope.
A14  POLICE CHIEF AND CITY ON TRIAL
The corruption trial of Detroit's police chief is just more bad news for a city that seems to draw it like a magnet draws iron.
A14  Metropolitan Digest, B1 AN OPTION TO OIL
A major natural gas pipeline is to begin operation on Long Island this month, providing the largest single new source of energy to the New York region since the 1950's.
A1  PLAN TO CLOSE FISCAL GAP
Governor Cuomo is proposing to close a gap of almost $5 billion in next year's budget through measures that include authorizing sharp tuition increases at SUNY campuses and eliminating more than 5,000 state jobs.
A1  Neediest Cases B4  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-9  A Galapagos mystery is solved.
C1  China aims to harness mighty rivers.
C1  Clue to cancer is found in the way cells communicate.
C1  International crew set for shuttle launching.
C2  Scientists unravel early steps in cervical cancer.
C3  Fashion Page B7  Real clothes from Adolfo.
Obituaries B8  Pietro di Donato, writer Arts/Entertainment C13-18  George Carlin as Mr.
Conductor on "Shining Time Station." C13  Theater: "Sight Unseen." C13  Music: Robert Shaw's magic: inspiration and sweat.
C13  Word and Image: A new Mona Simpson novel.
C17  Sports B9-15  Baseball: Mets and Magadan meet halfway.
B11  Steinbrenner financed suit.
B11  Basketball: Victory for Knicks.
B9  Celtics beat Cavaliers.
B10  Football: Redskins' front men.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  The children's hour.
Andrew Stein's interests.
Winter dreams.
The Tiananmen in East Timor.
Letters A20  Russell Baker: Six mind benders.
A21  A. M. Rosenthal: In search of Buckley.
A21  Larry Agran: And we call ourselves Democrats?
A21  Ivan Major: Why Eastern Europe is going nowhere.
A21  Nadine Strossen: Decision time on abortion.
A21


Sonoco Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Dance; Stories Told in Movement and Talk
Irene Hultman is one of the best dancers around.
Her way of moving is a miraculous mix of simplicity and juiciness, of robustness and delicacy.
There is a blunt good humor to the way she presents herself and her resilient body to her audience, her round elf's face brimming with teasing, impudent cheer.
But there is also a miracle flow to her dancing, and a gift for deft and telling inflection as subtle as any music.
There was a good deal of Trisha Brown's slippery, continuous motion to what she danced on Saturday night at St.
Mark's Danspace, unsurprisingly, since Ms.
Hultman performed with Ms.
Brown for five years.
But Ms.
Hultman, who is Swedish, has made Ms.
Brown's style her own.
She began to speak to the audience as she moved through her 1988 "Solo Untitled," a piece without accompaniment that seems simultaneously both the raveling and unraveling of a dance.
"Yes, I should talk here," she said.
"But for some reason it feels inappropriate." She continued, however, the end of the dance coming when she announced that she had decided to stop talking.
By then, the casual, amiable monologue had begun to sound a little cute.
It didn't add much to the solo.
But there was the promise of Ms.
Hultman's dancing in the balance of the program.
And one could go on watching such a dancer with pleasure forever.


Pietro di Donato Is Dead at 80; Wrote of Immigrants' Experience
Pietro di Donato, whose novel "Christ in Concrete" was acclaimed as an American classic when it was published in 1938, died on Sunday at University Hospital in Stony Brook, L.I.
He was 80 years old and lived in Setauket, L.I., for many years.
He died of bone cancer, said Teresa Cersuola, a family friend.


Paul P. Gewirtz, 87, Music Publisher, Dies
Paul P. Gewirtz, a retired music-publishing executive, died on Saturday while vacationing in Satellite Beach, Fla.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of pneumonia at Holmes Hospital in Melbourne, Fla., his family said.


New Image Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Debate Is Mere Tuneup On Democrats' Journey
Everybody had an angle in Sunday night's debate among the Democratic Presidential candidates.
Stirring political theater it certainly was not, but it gave some clues about what each of the five will be trying to do in the weeks ahead.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas portrayed himself as the tribune of the middle class.
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts said his economic program was more highly regarded by experts than those of his rivals.
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska talked a lot about health insurance.
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California rolled out a whole new tax plan.
And Senator Tom Harkin worked hard to justify his claim to be "the only real Democrat" in the lot.


Nets Find a Coach to Turn It Around: His Name Is Fitch
Wouldn't it be wild if Bill Fitch wound up as the National Basketball Association's Coach of the Year?
Coach of the Atlantic Division might be enough to make the Nets' ownership gag, Willis Reed squirm and Derrick Coleman burn.
Those three parties, denials notwithstanding, believed that Fitch had less of a chance to last the season than any contender for the Democratic presidential nomination.


Dover Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Quotations of the Day
"This is going to be a real bonanza for growers and consumers alike." -- SAM WHITNEY, president of a company that is about to begin irradiating fresh fruit in Florida.  [ A1:1. ]
"This is toxological Russian roulette." -- DR.
SAMUEL S. EPSTEIN, professor of occupational and environmental medicine at the University of Illinois, who opposes irradiation.  [ A16:5. ]


Kimball International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Steinbrenner Helped to Pay for Lawsuit
Prohibited by agreement from suing the baseball commissioner himself, George Steinbrenner financially backed Leonard Kleinman's lawsuit against Fay Vincent by establishing a $250,000 escrow account for Kleinman's legal fees.
But Steinbrenner subsequently terminated the account, although not his financial support, because the lawyers threatened to sue him after he disputed their bills and refused to pay them.
Details of the $250,000 legal fund and the dispute with Kleinman's lawyers, including their threat to sue Steinbrenner for nonpayment, are included among 67 exhibits Vincent's lawyers filed in United States District Court in Manhattan last week as part of their effort to shortcircuit Kleinman's suit.


Parcells in 'What Contract? Part 2'
A rose may be a rose, but is a contract a contract if one of the parties is Bill Parcells?
During his recent, botched flirtations with a return to coaching, Parcells was said to have three years left on his NBC contract to return as the analyst on "The N.F.L. Live" or step up to No. 1 game analyst.
The latter option appeared to gain immediacy last week when Bill Walsh, the top analyst, left NBC to coach the Stanford University football team.


Iomega Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Observer; Six Mind Benders
Now that we have been told everything we always wanted to know about sex but were afraid to ask, could somebody please tell us the answers to some other questions we've been afraid to ask because the answers are probably so obvious that asking the questions would make us look stupid?
Question 1: Why does the United States have to import paper clips from Taiwan?
Cars from Japan are one thing.
Making a car may take a lot of good old Japanese know-how, which may be beyond Americans at the moment.
But paper clips?


Valley Resources Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Dentist's Assistant Is Killed in Robbery
A dentist's sister, who was also his dental assistant, was shot and killed yesterday by two men who burst into her brother's office on the Lower East Side and tried to rob it, the police said.
Two other people, a mother and her 18-month-old child, were in the office at the time, but were not injured.


Jury Selection Process Is Not a Waste of Time
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb is right ("Call Me Juror," A Look at the City, column, Jan. 10): the jury system does work, and jury service is often ennobling.
But his ridicule of the jury-selection process is wide of the mark.
Lawyers who know what they are doing can, through intelligent questions to individual prospective jurors, expose pernicious biases of which even the jurors themselves are unaware.
Too bad that Mr.
Gelb found voir dire tedious: it is often the most important stage in a trial.


U.S. Aide Rejects View From Japan on Illiteracy
A Department of Education official today denied the assertion of a senior Japanese politician that nearly a third of American workers cauld not read.
The official, Diane Ravitch, Assistant Secretary for the Office for Educational Research and Improvement, said that Yoshio Sakurauchi, the Speaker of Japan's lower house of Parliament, was not speaking from facts.


And We Call Ourselves Democrats?
Last summer, before I announced my candidacy for the Democratic Presidential nomination, it never occurred to me to worry whether the chairman of the Democratic National Committee in Washington or network executives in New York would like my message.
Instead, I worried whether millions of Americans would respond to a campaign calling for immediate measures to cut the military budget in half and use the funds to rebuild our country.
Fortunately, they did.
After several of my appearances on national television, positive reactions came in from every part of the country.
It seemed that a former mayor -- a liberal Democrat, from conservative Orange County, Calif., no less --
could
run for President.
This long-shot possibility was confirmed when my name appeared in several early polls, including a Gallup Poll in September.


New Show Spurs Debate On Old Issue
A TELEVISION program being offered to local stations around the country would combine elements of traditional talk shows with the buy-it-now sales pitches of home-shopping channels.
If it enters production this fall, the program would be the latest in a spate of new media ventures that blur the line between editorial content and advertising.
The hourlong daytime program, called "Day-to-Day Live," is being presented to station programmers this week in New Orleans, at the 29th annual convention of the National Association of Television Programming Executives.
Besides carrying conventional commercials, 12 minutes during each hour, as many as four of the seven segments in each show would feature guests who laced their interviews with pitches for merchandise like books, clothing or cosmetics.
Toll-free telephone numbers for ordering would flash onto the screen.


G.M.'s Gone, but This City's Alive
On Nov. 6, 1986, General Motors delivered a body blow to this city of 24,000.
To cut costs, the auto maker said it would close its 64-year-old plant here that assembled Chevrolet Camaros and Pontiac Firebirds.
Residents feared that G.M.'s departure would mean the end to life as Norwood had known it for generations.
G.M.'s taxes afforded this small city its independence from neighboring Cincinnati and spawned a wealth of services, including free paramedic services, and generous budgets that had allowed the city to buy a $750,000 incinerator and a $110,000 fire truck, both for cash.


1992 CAMPAIGN: Almanac; Presidential Primaries


AICorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prudential Payment Ordered
The New York Stock Exchange has ordered Prudential Securities Inc. to pay more than $686,000 in damages to Anglo-American Financial, a private partnership that accused Prudential of fraud, breach of contract and misrepresentation in a 1988 transaction.
According to a document provided by the exchange yesterday, Anglo-American, which is based in New York, asserted that it was sold mortgage-related securities by Prudential, whose dealers failed to inform the buyer that the underlying mortgages were already in default.


Patterns
Just Ask for Josie
Josie Natori has built a fashion empire by taking chances.
She gave up a six-figure salary as an investment banker in 1976 to go into the lingerie business, where she carved out a niche by offering at-home wear with special details.


So What's in the Cage? Excitement With Ears
THE excitement had built all week in the preschool class at the Wilton Family Y. The animal lady was coming, and she might bring real live animals.
Now kids know instinctively that no sane adult, especially teachers like Marcia Shushan and Maggie Schluntz, is ever going to suggest the exciting possibility of live animals unless they know darned well the creatures are coming.
No one, even after nap time, invites the volatile disappointment of a platoon of short people whose lifetime perspective is measured in months.
So the excitement of these 3- and 4-year-olds focused on exactly which animals were coming.
The teachers fanned all the flames of imagination -- well, almost all.
One boy's ominous suggestion about bears was squelched.
What animals this time?
The teachers feigned ignorance.
Could they touch them?
The teachers were certain.
Importantly, what were their names?
The teachers professed no knowledge.


Scientists Suggest Global Warming Could Hasten the Next Ice Age
IF global warming proceeds as forecast, it could cause the Northern Hemisphere's ice sheets to expand much as they did at the start of the last Ice Age, when the world's climate was slightly warmer than it is today, American and Canadian scientists say.
That possibility may seem to go against common sense.
But the scientists say the conditions that led to the last great glaciation could materialize again if the global climate warms significantly in the next few decades.


Rochester Telephone Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Environmental Hazards to Poor Gain New Focus at E.P.A.
An Environmental Protection Agency scientist in Chicago is putting the final touches on a computer program that can identify neighborhoods where childhood exposure to lead is likely to be rampant.
Corrective measures would be concentrated there -- most likely focusing the benefits on black children, who are known to suffer disproportionately from lead poisoning.
In California, the Federal agency sampled drinking water supplies at migrant labor camps last year and found 191 violations in water systems serving 8,500 farm workers in 20 counties.
Now the agency is working on enforcement actions, hoping to clean up the water without closing the camps and displacing the predominantly Hispanic workers.


Electronic Arts reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prague Has to Drive Fast in Economic Mud; Lustration Is Necessary
To the Editor:
"The Perils of 'Lustration' " (editorial, Jan. 7), criticizing the lustration process in Czechoslovakia where former Communist Party officials are banned from employment in high posts for five years, misreads the situation in my country.
You have assumed a stable country with a normal market economy, but neither of these conditions hold.
At all levels and in all sectors of society, former members of the Communist Party are employed, many of whom acted as agents of the notorious secret police.
In the current situation in Czechoslovakia, where the economy is dominated by state enterprises, they have enormous power.


Congress Returns Today To Fight Over Economy
Congressional leaders are predicting that they will kick out of the starting block when they return to work Tuesday, trying to overcome election-year partisanship and act quickly on a number of measures intended to stimulate the economy, like a tax cut for the middle class and an extension of unemployment benefits for the jobless.
The political discord of Presidential election years usually shackles Congressional action, but leaders say this year could be different, at least on tax policy, because the recession demands efforts to stimulate the economy.


George Carlin, Small but Amusing
All actors hunger for a role that allows them to stretch.
George Carlin landed one that requires him to shrink, all the way down to 18 inches.
As the magical Mr.
Conductor, he appears out of thin air to advise, amuse and tell stories about Thomas the Tank Engine to the children of "Shining Time Station," the children's series on PBS.
Mr.
Conductor's appearance is more surpising than young viewers could guess.
This is the same Mr.
Carlin whose most recent comedy album, "Parental Advisory: Explicit Lyrics," offers the following notice: "This recording contains no backtracking or subliminal suggestions. All messages from the Devil are recorded clearly and audibly in standard American English."


Dispute Over a Dam on the Scenic Yangtze
THE Three Gorges Dam would be far from the highest ever built, but it certainly would be among the most controversial water projects in the world.
Vigorously criticized by environmental groups from as far away as Canada, the dam would submerge one of the Yangtze River's most scenic spots and it would require a huge expenditure that some argue could be better used elsewhere.
For backers, the primary argument for the project is not so much that it would generate electricity sorely needed for economic growth, but that it would aid in flood control.


Caracas Journal; Venezuela's Two-Faced Boom: Riches and Riots
High in a tinted glass office tower that rises from this city's valley floor, Venezuela's Planning Minister recently listed the statistical mileposts of his country's economic resurgence: a treasury brimming with foreign reserves, inflation at its lowest level in five years and an economy growing at the fastest rate in the Americas, 9.2 percent in 1991.
Seven miles up the valley, in the raw brick shantytown of Petare, two student leaders cited a different set of official statistics to describe the three-year-old presidency of Carlos Andres Perez: 5,000 street protests, with 2,068 ending in violence.


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Becton, Dickinson &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 East German Guards Convicted Of Killing Man as He Fled to West
In a case that raised far-reaching political and moral questions, two former East German border guards were convicted today of having shot and killed a fleeing refugee in February 1989.
The verdict set a legal precedent, establishing that officials from what was once the Communist state of East Germany could be punished for actions that were not only legal under East German law, but which were compulsory for them to carry out.


Black Box: Out of Sight but Crucial
THE hard disk drive may be the most important component of a personal computer system, yet because it is usually out of sight it is often out of mind.
The little black (or silver) box seems pretty simple, but it holds nearly everything dear to the computer owner: all the important business reports and love letters and phone numbers and customer invoices and other data that make the world go round.
When the hard disk stops going round, or loses its memory, the rest of the computer is temporarily incapacitated.
In worst cases, hours, days or even years of work can be lost.


In Move to Spur Economy, Bush Is Urged to Order 90-Day Ban on New Federal Rules
President Bush's senior advisers have recommended that he stop all Government agencies from issuing new rules for three months as part of a broad campaign to revive the economy by reducing the burden of Federal regulation, White House officials said today.
The recommendation, most likely to be included in Mr.
Bush's State of the Union Message on Jan. 28, comes from Vice President Dan Quayle and other officials, including C. Boyden Gray, the White House counsel; Richard G. Darman, Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and Michael J. Boskin, chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers.


New Cancer Clue: How Cells Talk To Each Other
SEVERAL times each day, a normal cell in the body mutates into a cancerous one but is knocked out by the body's defense mechanisms.
Occasionally, however, the mutant cells take hold and grow uncontrollably into a malignant tumor.
Uncontrolled growth is distinguishes cancerous cells from normal ones.
But precisely what goes awry in the cell and the defenses to permit the cancerous cells to take over is one of the great mysteries of science.


AID TO EX-SOVIETS IS BEING HINDERED
Two months after Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan announced a $165 million program to send free American food to what was then the Soviet Union, no food has been delivered and only one contract, worth $15 million, has been awarded.
And that contract, providing for deliveries of mostly butter to Armenia, will not be carried out until Feb. 20 because shipping companies refused to lease refrigerated air-freight containers for fear they would be stolen, said the Rev.
Yeznig Balian, who is supervising the delivery for the Diocese of the Armenian Church of America, which is based in New York.


LIBYA IS EXPECTED TO GET U.N. DEMAND ON BOMB SUSPECTS
The United Nations Security Council is expected to serve Libya on Tuesday with a virtual demand that it hand over agents accused of blowing up Pan American Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland in December 1988 or face the threat of economic sanctions.
The resolution also calls on Libya to cooperate with an investigation into the destruction of a French airliner over West Africa in 1989.


The Protest That Won't Go Away
A group called the National Summit on Racism in Sports and the Media will be using the Super Bowl to try and focus attention on attempts to eliminate American Indian mascots and symbols from sports.
The group will conduct a seminar on racism in sports here on Thursday and Friday, and will picket the National Football League Alumni player-of-the-year awards dinner Friday night outside the hotel headquarters for the Super Bowl.


Troubled Redmen Defeated
As the Big East season reaches the point where contending teams are seeking the confidence of consistent success, the St.
John's Redmen find themselves grasping in vain for both.
Their 75-60 loss to Seton Hall at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight, the third in the last five conference games, held just one bright spot:
Shawnelle Scott did not break a bone in his right foot.


Evelyn Openhym, 89, University Benefactor
Evelyn Tennyson Openhym, a book collector and benefactor of Alfred University in western New York, died on Jan. 13 at her home in Wellsville, N.Y.
She was 89 years old.
She died of cancer, said Edward G. Coll Jr., president of the university, where she was a trustee.


It Wasn't Exactly a Winter Wonderland, but . . .


Bank Director to Head British Takeover Board
Frances Heaton, a director of the investment bank Lazard Brothers, was appointed director general of Britain's Panel on Takeovers and Mergers, the regulatory body that reviews business combinations and acquisitions.
Mrs.
Heaton, 47, is the first woman named to the post, which she will take over in March, beginning a two-year leave of absence from Lazard.
She succeeds Geoffrey Barnett, 48, who has completed a two-year term.
Mr.
Barnett will return to the position of finance director at Baring Brothers &amp; Company, a London investment bank.


Cypress Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Hope and Anger Mix on King Day
In pride, anger and sorrow, the nation, and blacks in particular, paid homage to the memory of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. today on the seventh observance of the national holiday established in his honor.
At the Ebenezer Baptist Church, where Dr.
King preached, speakers talked of his unfinished work in often harsh tones that reflected the ravages of the ailing economy and the tide of violence and despair in the nation's inner cities.


Home Health-Care Employees Reach Pact on Wage Increases
In a labor agreement likely to set the pace for publicly financed home health-care services in New York City, the union representing about 20,000 nurses' aides announced a tentative agreement yesterday with 28 private agencies on a 5 percent wage increase, from $5.90 to $6.20 an hour.
The agreement affects about a third of the 60,000 workers in New York City who are paid under the Medicaid program to care for elderly and disabled patients who are stable enough to be discharged from a hospital.
The number of home health-care workers has swelled in recent years as government agencies have tried to cut costs by moving people out of the hospitals and nursing homes.
Lump-Sum Payments
Union officials say the workers, many of them middle-aged women with much less clinical training than registered nurses or therapists, are among the lowest-paid employees in the health-care industry.


Books of The Times; Wanted: A Father, and a Cure for Love and Loss
The Lost Father  By Mona Simpson  506 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
With her stunning first novel, "Anywhere but Here" (1987), Mona Simpson not only tackled some of the essential American myths -- a belief in the endless possibilities of progress and freedom, a belief in people's ability to reinvent themselves, tabula rasa -- but she also created a compelling family chronicle of love and hate, devotion and resentment.
Indeed, the mother and daughter in that story emerged as one of the most fiercely memorable such pairs to come along in years: Adele, the consummate con woman, vain, selfish, possessive and determined to subjugate all to her dreams; and her teen-age daughter, Ann, a strangely observant girl who emulates her mother's survival skills even as she yearns to escape her shabby world of self-delusion.


Woodhead Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Cuban Firing Squad Executes Exile
A Cuban exile convicted of sabotage and terrorism was executed by firing squad today in a warning the Government said was aimed at right-wing exile groups operating from the United States.
Eduardo Diaz Betancourt, 38 years old, was shot after appeals for clemency were turned down by Cuba's Supreme Court and the ruling Council of State headed by President Fidel Castro.


Northeast Gas Pipeline Ready But Critics Still Doubt Need
After a decade of planning and construction that has provoked fierce opposition from environmentalists, homeowners and oil executives, a major natural gas pipeline from Canada is to begin operation here this month, providing the largest single new source of energy to the New York region since the 1950's.
The pipeline, the Iroquois Gas Transmission System, has been the region's most contentious energy project since the failed Shoreham Nuclear Power Station, which is being dismantled 30 miles east of here.
The Iroquois pipeline, along with projects under way to expand pipelines from domestic oil and gas fields, would increase the capacity to pump natural gas to New York, New Jersey and New England by more than 50 percent.
Marketing Campaigns
With the Iroquois pipeline nearing completion, experts in the energy industry say it may lead to a historic shift in a region that is far more dependent on oil from the Middle East to heat its homes and fuel its power plants than other sections of the nation are.


Some Gifts to the Neediest Are in the Spirit of Protest
Most letters attached to contributions to the The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund recount personal experiences or insights that prompted the impulse to give.
But a few contributors are moved by larger forces, making donations in celebration of great political events or in protest of government policies.
"Times are hard, but you know priorities are skewed when we can somehow afford to fight useless wars in Panama and the Persian Gulf but cannot help 100,000 homeless people in New York and countless others in cities and towns across the U.S.," Katherine Manning of Manhattan wrote in a letter attached to her $300 contribution.
"Why doesn't the Government have a Neediest Cases fund?  It's not the answer, but right now private charity seems to be the only way to do the job the Government should be doing: helping the weakest among us so that we can say with pride that this is a country which takes care of its own."


Andrew Stein's Interests
City Council President Andrew Stein can't seem to keep his reasoning straight.
Originally he said he wouldn't participate in New York City's system of public campaign financing, designed to limit the influence of monied interests, because he couldn't justify spending taxpayer dollars on politics.
Now, set to challenge Mayor David Dinkins in 1993, Mr.
Stein adds, "I don't see why I should have one hand tied behind my back running against an incumbent."
In other words, Mr.
Stein wants all the money he can get for next year, and that could be quite a bundle.
Tickets to his fund-raising extravaganza tonight are between $1,500 and $5,000 each, and about 1,400 people are expected to join Frank Sinatra and other celebrities.
A single donor can sponsor a $50,000 table.
So Mr.
Stein will certainly raise lots of money.
He will also lose a chance to show moral leadership.


Thrift Office's Eager Terminator
In the mire of the savings and loan mess, T. Timothy Ryan Jr., the nation's top savings and loan regulator, has gotten remarkably little mud on his clothes.
The 46-year-old regulator has won so many political points for his swift seizure of faltering institutions and his crackdowns on industry scoundrels that his name has come up as a possibility for the next Comptroller of the Currency.
He has successfully calmed a worried Congress, and his personal ties to President Bush and Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady have brought him into the Administration's inner circle.


Stratus C0mputer Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Bowater Inc. (X) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
Many of the world's best partnerships were contending in the Netherlands during the weekend, but only two of them were in contention at the finish.
It was the sixth Cap Gemini Pandata World Top tournament played in The Hague, and the winners were Zia Mahmood and Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan.
With one match remaining they led by two imps over the star Dutch pair, Enri Leufkens and Berry Westra.
They held on to win by exactly that margin, but the places would have been reversed if a good slam contract reached by the Dutch pair had succeeded.
The standings were: First, Zia and Rosenberg, 103 imps; second, Leufkens and Westra, 101; third, Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco of Brazil, 73; fourth, Krzysztof Martens and Marek Szymanowski of Poland, 56; fifth, Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., and Eric Rodwell of West Lafayette, Ind., 54; sixth, Bill Eisenberg of Los Angeles and Benito Garozzo of Palm Beach, Fla. (the defending champions), 30.


CIT Group Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Steelers Hire Cowher
BILL COWHER, 34, will become the National Football League's second-youngest coach and the 15th in Pittsburgh Steelers' history when he is introduced today at a news conference.
Cowher, the Kansas City Chiefs' defensive coordinator for three years, accepted the job Sunday.
DAVE WANNSTEDT, a finalist for the Steelers job, has been promoted by Coach JIMMY JOHNSON to assistant head coach of the Dallas Cowboys.
Wannstedt will retain his duties as defensive coordinator and linebackers coach. (AP)


Corrections
The Patents column in Business Day on Dec. 21 misidentified an anti-ulcer drug that improved the behavioral problems of a schizophrenia patient and prompted a psychiatrist at Mount Sinai Medical Center to begin research into using such drugs for treating a form of schizophrenia.
It was Pepcid, from Merck &amp; Company, not Zantac, from Glaxo Holdings.


Antley Is Suspended
Aqueduct stewards suspended jockey CHRIS ANTLEY yesterday through Jan. 27 for careless riding aboard Choice Prize in Sunday's fourth race.
Choice Prize, who ran first, was disqualified and placed sixth. (AP)


Legent Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Pragmatism Is a Big Winner As Clinton Gains in New York
In a display of political pragmatism that brought together Democrats who spent the early months of the Presidential campaign waiting first for Jesse Jackson and then Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to declare their intentions, several prominent New York City Democrats announced yesterday that they would support Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
The endorsements, which were announced at a news conference in midtown Manhattan, gave Mr.
Clinton a political toehold in New York.
He plans to use this as a blueprint for assembling what he described as a broad-based effort to win mainstream and minority support in the April 7 New York primary.


Corrections
A book review yesterday about "Eyeball to Eyeball: The Inside Story of the Cuban Missile Crisis" omitted the reviewer's byline in some copies.
The review was by Christopher Lehmann-Haupt.


Paris Showcase of Ukrainian Performing Arts
In his film "Meeting Venus," the Hungarian director Istvan Szabo used a Paris production of Wagner's "Tannhauser" as a metaphor for the quarreling cacophony of the new Europe.
"Ukraine in Paris," a five-month showcase of the performing arts from that newly independent country, which began here on Friday night, seems a kind of real-life echo of Mr.
Szabo's film, exposing the mixture of privation and pride, confusion and purpose that defines the Ukrainian intelligentsia in these unsure times.
The showcase, planned before independence but given a new weight by it, will consist of two opera productions this month by the Kiev Opera, several ballet programs by the Opera Ballet in February, performances by the National Ballet of Ukraine in March and April and by the Kiev branch of the Red Army Chorus (billed on some posters as the Ex-Red Army Chorus) in May.


Insurer Has Big Investor: Metropolitan
The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company has agreed to buy half of the Executive Life Insurance Company of New York, a move that should greatly ease the concerns of the 100,000 policyholders in limbo since insurance regulators seized Executive Life and its sister company in California last spring.
Details of the agreement were disclosed yesterday by people working on the deal, who insisted on anonymity.


Florio Signs Regulations On Batteries
In a move to reduce the amount of metal pollutants dumped in New Jersey, Gov.
Jim Florio today signed into law a bill that he said imposed one of the toughest standards in the nation on the manufacture and disposal of dry-cell batteries.
The measure will ban most of the house hold batteries now in use because of their high mercury content and require manu facturers to redesign rechargeable prod ucts like hand-held vacuums so that the batteries can be removed.


BASEBALL;
The Yankees assured themselves of having a sturdy starting catcher for the next three seasons as they avoided arbitration with Matt Nokes and signed him yesterday to a three-year, $7.5 million contract.
Just three days after players and teams submitted their arbitration figures, Nokes became the first and the most important of seven Yankees to settle with the club by signing for almost three times the amount he earned last season.





Zilog Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prosecutors Ask Removal Of Another Gotti Lawyer
On the eve of jury selection, the judge presiding over John Gotti's racketeering case in Brooklyn is considering a prosecution request to knock another defense lawyer out of the trial of the reputed Mafia leader and a defense countermove to disqualify a prosecutor.
The prosecutors have urged the judge to remove George L. Santangelo as a lawyer for Mr.
Gotti's co-defendant, Frank Locascio, contending there was evidence that he served as one of Mr.
Gotti's "house counsel" for the Gambino crime family.
Last July, prosecutors succeeded in removing three defense lawyers including Bruce Cutler, Mr.
Gotti's longtime lawyer.


Irradiated Food Coming, But Not Without Protest
After years of scientific debate and commercial hesitation, the first food irradiation plant in the nation now stands ready for service and could begin shipping specially treated fruit as early as next week.
Many scientists at universities and Federal agencies regard irradiation of food as a safe and efficient way to retard spoilage and kill organisms that cause illnesses like salmonellosis and diarrhea.
Investors in the plant hope that an initial scheduled shipment of irradiated strawberries will soon be followed by other fruits and vegetables and, eventually, poultry and seafood.


Shadow of the Russian Bear Is Lifted From Finland
Russia and Finland signed a treaty today agreeing to treat each other as equals and effectively nullifying the era of Finlandization, when Moscow maintained the right to dictate Helsinki's foreign and defense policies.
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia discussed the new trade and economic agreement in a telephone call with President Mauno Koivisto of Finland.


Treasury Prices Up a Bit Abroad
Prices of Treasury securities moved a bit higher in overseas trading yesterday.
There was no activity in cash fixed-income markets in the United States in observance of the holiday for the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Futures markets in Chicago were open, but they closed early because of the holiday.


Trash Station In Rail Yard Is Scrapped
After bitter opposition from residents and business people and intervention by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the Long Island Rail Road has dropped plans to install a garbage-shipment operation at a freight yard in Queens.
The railroad had raised the ire of people and political leaders in Long Island City by proposing to use the yard -- in the heart of a neighborhood where major commercial and residential redevelopment is planned -- to load up to 1,000 tons of trash into boxcars nightly.
The cars were to carry the garbage to landfills in the Midwest.


Blockbuster Entertainment Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Diplomats Are Edgy as India Stubbornly Builds Its Nuclear Arsenal
In sharp contrast to the rest of the world, South Asia is on the brink of a nuclear arms race, say senior Western diplomats and foreign political figures who have visited New Delhi in recent weeks.
This arms race is viewed with particular alarm because of the continuing tension between India and Pakistan over Kashmir, a region over which two wars have already been fought.


CHRONICLE
There is no job-placement office at the United States Military Academy at West Point, so leaders of the West Point Society, an alumni association in the New York area, decided last year that it was time to promote a little networking to help graduates with their job searches.
The effort was such a success that it is being repeated tonight at the Union League Club in Manhattan.
Job hunt?
"The Army is downsizing from 725,000 to about half that size, so what was viewed as a lifetime career no longer is," said EDWARD C. HANDLER 3D, class of 1960, now a lawyer in New York.
"Because of the reduction in force, they are letting people go in big numbers. The Berlin wall came down; the Evil Empire has retired; Desert Storm was just a blip on the screen headed downward."


Commonwealth Edison Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Southern Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounts
*
Tire America, Wheeling, W.Va., a tire retailer, to Barkley &amp; Evergreen Advertising Inc., Shawnee Mission, Kan., for its advertising and marketing account, which was formerly in-house.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Marigold Foods to Martin/Williams, both in Minneapolis, for the national introduction of its Kemps Frozen Yogurt line.
Martin/Williams has handled advertising for the product on a regional basis.
Billings have not been determined.


People
*
Daniel S. Tomlinson Jr. has been named the chairman and chief executive of the Sawyer Ferguson Walker Co., New York, succeeding Roy G. Blackfield, who has retired.
Mr.
Tomlinson had been president of the company, the nation's largest independent newspaper advertising sales representative firm.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the public's attitude toward homeless people described it incorrectly, as did a headline in some copies.
While polls show that the public perceives widespread apathy toward the homeless, there are no firm numbers showing an increase in that attitude.


Tests by Genzyme
Researchers from the Genzyme Corporation and Tufts University said they had developed a possible way to mass-produce a protein for the treatment of cystic fibrosis, a lung disease.
They said they had genetically altered mice with a human gene that governs production of the protein and harvested it from fat globules in the mices' milk.
Genzyme, which is based in Cambridge, Mass., said the tests marked the first time proteins normally attached to cell membranes had been produced in animal milk.


Legg Mason Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
The Guide column of the Westchester Weekly on Sunday misstated the date of the Thomas Paine National Historical Association's dinner honoring Robert MacNeil of PBS.
It will be held in New Rochelle, N.Y., on Jan. 30, not this Thursday.


Twin Disc Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A brief article by Reuters in the Media Business columns of Business Day on Jan. 13 about the Turner Broadcasting System misstated the year in which the company expects to earn more than $100 million.
It is 1992, not 1991.


Computer Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


A Top Japanese Politician Calls U.S. Work Force Lazy
One of Japan's most senior politicians said over the weekend that America's economic troubles were rooted in a work force "too lazy" to compete with Japan, and argued that one of the biggest problems of the United States was that nearly a third of its workers "cannot even read."
The harshly worded assessment by Yoshio Sakurauchi, the 79-year-old Speaker of Japan's powerful lower house of Parliament, seemed bound to fuel the trans-Pacific arguments over the causes of America's trade and competitiveness difficulties with Japan.
Though Japanese politicians rarely speak publicly in such direct and confrontational terms about the United States, Mr.
Sakurauchi's comments seemed to amplify themes that have appeared in the Japanese press and on television since President Bush and his entourage of business executives left Japan 10 days ago.


China and Belarus Set Up Ties
China and Belarus have established diplomatic relations after the first visit to Beijing by a leader from the Commonwealth of Independent States, , the official Chinese newspaper reported today.
China Daily said that Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Tian Zengpei and Belarus Foreign Minister P. Kravchenko also agreed late Monday on a pact to promote trade and economic ties.
China now has diplomatic relations with eight of the 15 former Soviet republics: Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan and Tajikistan.


Introducing the Most Powerful Group in Washington
Mark Rypien stepped to the line of scrimmage, called for a timeout and went to the sideline for a brainstorming session with Coach Joe Gibbs.
The Detroit Lions were bunching their defense toward the middle of the field.
That led Gibbs and Rypien to conclude that "Blast" was the ideal play to call.
It was fourth-and-1 at the Detroit 3 with Washington ahead by only 10-7 and nearly seven minutes left before halftime in the National Conference championship game.


Britain Rejects a Hard Line in Ulster
Prime Minister John Major and rival political leaders vowed today to press Britain's fight against the Irish Republican Army in Northern Ireland, but the Government sidestepped demands for hard-line security measures in the province, including detention of suspected terrorists without trial.
Three days after an I.R.A. bomb killed seven workmen, the highest civilian toll in the province in nearly five years, Mr.
Major made a surprise visit to Belfast early today, where he declared that the I.R.A.
"is not winning and will never win."


Kennametal Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Most Markets Open Yesterday
Trading in government, corporate and tax-exempt bonds was suspended yesterday in observance of the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., and the regular Monday Treasury bill auction was postponed until today.
The markets for stocks, futures contracts, commodities, precious metals and currencies, however, were open as usual.
Most banks were closed, as were Federal, state and municipal offices in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.


Galapagos Mystery Solved: Fauna Evolved on Vanished Isle
TO biologists, the Galapagos Islands are very special places, not least because their distinctive wildlife prompted Darwin to hit upon the theory of evolution.
But the islands, off the coast of Ecuador, have long posed a troublesome evolutionary mystery: geologically, they are far too young for evolution, operating at its usual pace, to have produced the many unique life forms that now inhabit the islands.
A team of oceanographers and geologists has now happily resolved the mystery.
They have found evidence that the first plants and animals to colonize the Galapagos chain probably landed on ancient islands that are no longer visible because they long ago sank beneath the waves.
Their inhabitants were presumably forced to move on to the younger islands that exist today.


Winter Dreams
"It must be wonderful to be in New York now, with the snow falling and children sledding in Central Park," a young Australian said last month to a visitor from America.
"Yes, it is," the visitor replied.
Who was she to shatter his illusions?
The young man has never seen New York.
In truth, he's never seen much besides Sydney.
But he believes, because books and movies have told him so, that New York in winter is a place where blizzards rage and sleigh bells ring and sleepers are wakened by the scrape of snow shovels. .


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Nestle made a $2.4 billion bid for Perrier, setting up a battle with the Agnelli family of Italy, which in December began an effort to acquire Exor, a holding company that has a controlling stake in Perrier.  [ D1. ]


Nationsbank Posts Loss After Merger
Nationsbank, the new name for the country's fourth-largest banking company, created by the year-end merger of the NCNB Corporation of Charlotte, N.C., and the C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation of Atlanta, said it had a $243.8 million loss in the fourth quarter and a profit of $201.8 million, or 76 cents a share, for all of 1991.
The loss, the bank said, was a result of its previously announced plans to lump various merger expenses into the final quarter of last year.
Nationsbank also said it expected to cut costs by $450 million annually as a result of a closer study of the merger plans, rather than $350 million as it had previously forecast.
The bank first, however, had to charge off $314 million of expenses in the fourth quarter for costs that included closing offices, combining computer systems and making severance payments to employees.


Corning Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Southwestern Bell
Heard of call-waiting?
Get ready for call-nagging.
The Southwestern Bell Corporation is testing a service in which an operator tries to deliver a recorded message every 30 minutes over a six-hour period to any telephone number that has a busy signal or does not answer after five rings.
The message can be up to three minutes long and the customer who records it can designate the best hours to try to deliver the message and when to stop trying.
The service, which costs $1.50 a message, is being tested in Oklahoma in the 405 area code.


Knicks Hold Off Pacers to Regain Peace of Mind
It was not pretty, nor was it particularly exciting.
But their victory yesterday was something the Knicks sorely needed.
Ending a losing streak at three games, New York (23-14) held the Indiana Pacers to 6 points and just one field goal during the final 6 minutes and pulled out a 105-97 victory in a Martin Luther King Day matinee at Madison Square Garden.


Prague Has to Drive Fast in Economic Mud; Ban Proven Agents
To the Editor:
"The Perils of 'Lustration' " (editorial, Jan. 7) finds fault with the process of lustration that citizens of Czechoslovakia are obliged to undergo as a condition of holding public office, because the process allegedly violates the legal principles of presumption of innocence and of individual, rather than group, responsibility.
The principle of presumed innocence does not apply, because the lustrations are not criminal processes but rather efforts to determine the fitness of individuals to hold public office, much like our confirmation hearings.
In any society, those who expect to hold positions of public trust are required to conform to a higher set of standards than is applied to the population at large.


Rasterops Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Can a Symbol of Fiscal Aplomb Ever Retire?
In 1975, Felix G. Rohatyn was recruited from the lofty confines of investment banking to help rescue the city from its own excesses.
Mr.
Rohatyn quickly emerged as a household name.
Today, Mr.
Rohatyn is a frustrated gray eminence, an economic statesman whose vision is largely unfettered by a green eye shade and who understands the liabilities of a budget that meets legal definitions of balance but breaches the social contract.
His advice as chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation is valued by an eclectic following that includes Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, congressmen, chairmen of multinational corporations and, among others, the Government of Kazakhstan.


Review/Fashion; Real Clothes Designed for Real Women
Adolfo opened his show at the Plaza last week with festive short black lace dresses embroidered with white braid and embedded with rhinestones.
Then he tied a long taffeta skirt in pastel colors or black over each dress.
It was clear that in his spring and summer show, he would be concerned with hemlines.
And so he was, but never in a banal way.
Following his success with calf-length culottes last season, he presented new warm-weather versions of the divided skirt.


Lebanese Says Israel Widens Its Army Zone
A prominent Shiite Muslim leader charged today that Israel had expanded the area it calls its security zone in southern Lebanon by adding a town to the zone.
"I can assert that the Israel Army has widened its occupation of southern Lebanon by adding the town of Rashaf to the security zone," Nabih Berri, a Minister Without Portfolio in the Lebanese Cabinet and leader of the mainline Shiite movement Amal, said at a news conference.
"This has happened despite the fact that the Lebanese Government has been engaged in peace negotiations with the Jewish state."


Classical Music in Review
Music Today
Merkin Concert Hall
Christopher Kendall, the conductor of the Music Today concert on Wednesday evening, suggested the program's theme in a preconcert discussion: dark visions.
But Jon Deak, one of the composers represented, hinted at a disparity in the realization of those visions, especially in their approach to literary sources.


Qualcomm Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


International Dairy Queen reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


This Time, The Bills And Levy Are Ready
Last year, in his team's first appearance in the Super Bowl, Bills Coach Marv Levy skipped media day, one of the first mass press gatherings of the week, choosing to work on his game plan instead.
He was fined by the National Football League for that break with protocol.
Shortly after the team's plane arrived here tonight in advance of this Sunday's game against the Redskins, Levy did not make the same mistake.
Another year wiser, and with an additional week to work on the game plan this year, Levy showed up for the team's first news conference, kicking off a week of megahype that culminates with the game itself.


Net Up 9.9% At Raytheon
The Raytheon Company today reported a 9.9 percent increase in quarterly earnings, saying its diversity helped shield the company from a weak economy and military cuts.
Raytheon, a leading Government contractor, reported earnings of $157.8 million, or $2.37 a share, for the last three months of 1991.
That compared with profits of $143.6 million, or $2.20 a share, in the 1990 quarter.


A Graphics Program That Isn't Child's Play
DELTA Drawing Today is deceptively simple on the surface, a graphics program for children from preschool through third grade.
With it, a teacher or parent can help a child learn or discover simple and essential concepts, like right and left; fundamental shapes, like squares, rectangles, triangles and circles, as well as the rudiments of reading and writing and even the logic of programming.
And it's fun.
It was only the day before yesterday that it seemed anyone who wanted to be computer-literate would have to learn to program the machine.
That day is gone; commercial software is available for just about any task.
But programming, like plane geometry, teaches valuable lessons in itself, and these lessons have been part of education since the abacus was the only mechanical computer.
A book read long ago, and otherwise forgotten, called the computer "an abacus on amphetamines."


Oregon St. Player Who Had Stroke Dies
Earnest Killum, who decided to play basketball for Oregon State despite a blood-clotting disorder, died today, three days after suffering his second stroke in six months.
Dr.
Carl Orfuss, a neurologist here at Daniel Freeman Memorial Hospital who treated Killum, said that the death of the 20-year-old sophomore was not related to his playing basketball.


Dow Drops 10.95 in Quiet Holiday Trading
Stock prices pulled back a bit yesterday from last week's surge to a record, remaining in a fairly narrow range throughout the session.
Because of the holiday honoring the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., trading was far quieter than last week's hectic pace.
The Dow Jones industrial average slipped 10.95 points to finish at 3,254.03.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 180.9 million shares, compared with 287.4 million on Friday, as losing issues outpaced those that gained by 947 to 759.
The Big Board's composite index was down 1.22 points, winding up at 229.67.


CHRONICLE
The ROBERT MAXWELL story goes on, and another chapter will unfold on Feb. 14, when Sotheby's sells the contents of the press lord's London home at auction.
From 1987 until the time of his death last Nov. 5, Mr.
Maxwell and his wife, ELISABETH MAXWELL, lived part of the time in a three-bedroom apartment on the 10th floor of the Maxwell Communication Corporation building; the corporation is now in bankruptcy.
It was the only residence in the building on Holborn Circus.


Stocks Decline in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices posted a 16-month low today for the second day in a row.
The Nikkei index of 225 shares closed at 20,858.30 at the end of afternoon trading, down 55.52 points, or 0.27 percent.


SHAMIR IS VOWING NEW SETTLEMENTS
In a direct challenge to Bush Administration calls for his Government to stop building settlements in occupied lands, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir declared defiantly today that "this construction will continue and no power in the world will prevent this construction."
His Finance Minister went a step further by saying that if the United States insisted on a settlement freeze as the price for $10 billion in American loan guarantees that Israel says it needs to absorb new Jewish immigrants, he would rather forgo the assistance, no matter what the economic consequences.


Chief's Woes Are a Trial for Detroit, Too
While this hard-luck city descended into the quicksand of crack and violence, Federal prosecutors say, the police Chief was stealing from a fund set up to fight drugs, funneling the money to phony corporations and setting up his mistress in an apartment in the suburbs.
The scandal will be laid bare and the city's wounds reopened in Federal District Court over the next few months as William L. Hart, the city's first black police chief, goes on trial on charges of embezzlement, conspiracy and obstruction of justice.
Opening arguments begin on Tuesday.


Horse of the Year 1991: Down to an Unlikely 3
The envelope, please. And, for Horse of the Year in 1991, the winner is. . . .
Whoever it is, the three finalists may be the strangest slate of superstars in the history of the Eclipse Awards.
One is a 2-year-old colt from France.
Another is a 3-year-old filly from Canada.
The third is a 5-year-old horse from Ireland.


Shift at the Top At Campbell Offices
Campbell-Mithun-Esty has announced significant changes at its offices in Houston and Southfield, Mich.
In Southfield, David Welch, 53 years old, has relinquished his position as chief executive of that office, while continuing as Campbell's corporate chairman.
Succeeding Mr.
Welch was Michael J. Vogel, 45, the president and chief operating officer.


Watch Out for the Widening Ozone Hole
To the Editor:
It almost seemed like a cruel joke when I read "Broad Effort Under Way to Track Ozone Hole's Effects" (Science Times, Jan. 7).
You quote unnamed scientists as saying the dangers of intense ultraviolet radiation exposure are now under control but that the hazard is expected to increase sharply and that experts have begun the most comprehensive monitoring study of its kind.
It seems like a bitter joke because, faced as we are with a catastrophic change in a system that has been evolving for more than 3.5 billion years, there is no ground-based ultraviolet radiation monitoring system on earth!
There are a few scattered instruments that measure ultraviolet and they are located mostly where nothing much lives, like the South Pole.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; BUSH AIDES DIVIDED ON HOW TO CORRECT SLIP IN POPULARITY
The struggle over how to stop President Bush's political slide has fanned staff rivalries in the White House and intensified a broader debate over campaign tactics and economic policy, Administration officials and Republican strategists said today.
Inside the White House, they said, there is a lingering sense of confusion as Samuel K. Skinner, the new chief of staff, struggles to gain control of the policy apparatus and dominate Richard G. Darman, the powerful White House budget director.


TransCanada Pipelines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Two architects and a United States Senator will receive the first Thomas Jefferson Award for Public Architecture, to be given by the American Institute of Architects tomorrow.
The awards will be presented at a reception expected to draw 600 people to the institute's headquarters in Washington.
The winners are JAMES INGO FREED, a partner of Pei Cobb Freed &amp; Partners in New York; GEORGE M. WHITE, architect of the United States Capitol, and Senator DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN, Democrat of New York.
Mr.
Freed's projects include Kips Bay Plaza and the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in New York, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington and the San Francisco Main Public Library.


INSIDE
French Airbus Crashes; 9 of 96 Survive
A French domestic airliner carrying 96 people crashed in snow and fog on a wooded ridge in eastern France.
At least 9 survivors, including a young girl, were found in the wreckage after a four-hour search.
The plane was on a flight from Lyons to Strasbourg it crashed shortly before the scheduled landing.
Page A3.
Blunt Language From Japan
A Japanese politician said America could not compete with Japan because American workers were lazy and many were illiterate.
Page D1.
Darwin's Lost Islands
Evidence suggests that vanished isles of the Galapagos sheltered evolution of the chain's unique species.
Science Times, page C1.


Standard Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


O'Sullivan Back for Mile
MARCUS O'SULLIVAN, a 30-year-old Irishman, has won indoor track's most celebrated race, the Wanamaker Mile, four times in the last six years.
Yesterday, Snickers Millrose Games officials announced that O'Sullivan would head the field for this year's Wanamaker Mile on Feb. 7 in Madison Square Garden.





BRIEFS
Common Stock  *
Synopsys Inc. of Mountain View, Calif., has filed for two million shares of common to be sold through Morgan Stanley at a price between $13 and $15 a share.
The company, which will use proceeds for working capital and other general purposes, develops computer software.
Ratings  *
Chevy Chase Savings Bank received a downgrade on $128 million in subordinated debt to CC from CCC+ from Standard &amp; Poor's, reflecting asset-quality problems in the Washington-area residential real estate market.
The rating service did, however, cite the bank's profitable consumer-lending business and strong retail deposits.  *
Union Pacific won an AA+ rating for $83 million in equipment trust certificates from Standard &amp; Poor's.


Sifco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Remembering King


NS Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Diebold Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.80
3.80
n.a.
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.76
3.76
6.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.87
3.87
6.17
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.75
6.79
7.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.58
7.60
8.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.80
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.66
6.67
7.44
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Free Care for the Poor and Pregnant Comes on Wheels
It has been just over a year since a large white van began lumbering into some of the poorest sections of this city, offering free medical care to pregnant women who seldom see a doctor except on television and who see far more of their babies die than other American women.
With a death rate of 20.2 per 1,000 births, New Haven has the highest infant mortality rate of any city in the nation, according to the most recent calculations by the Children's Defense Fund, based on 1987 statistics.
New Haven's rate is twice that of the nation as a whole.


Cuomo Wants to Increase Tuition And Cut State Jobs and Medicaid
To close the gap of nearly $5 billion in next year's $31 billion budget, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposes authorizing sharp tuition increases at SUNY campuses, eliminating more than 5,000 state jobs, cutting Medicaid spending by about $1 billion and deferring more than $1 billion in tax cuts.
Most of the biggest elements of the plan, which the Democratic Governor is to present to the Legislature on Tuesday in his annual budget message, have been discussed for some time.
The tuition increases, of $200 at some campuses and up to $800 at others, were disclosed today by Cuomo administration aides.
If they are enacted, the cost of attending some State University schools will have doubled over the last two years.
Major Stumbling Block
In addition, the new budget would eliminate between 5,000 and 10,000 state jobs on top of the 20,000 cut in the last year.
It would also pay for about $500 million in borrowing that the state will likely have to undertake this spring because of the failure of the Governor and the Legislature to agree on any plan for closing the gap in budget for the current fiscal year, which ends on March 31.


Mitek Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Research on Cervical Cancer, A Wart Virus Is the Prime Suspect
SCIENTISTS have discovered the nasty tricks used by a virus that causes genital warts, and largely because of these discoveries the virus has emerged as the primary suspect in nearly all cervical cancer.
Researchers say they have found after several years of study that the virus invades healthy cells, chemically manipulates them into dividing and then steals the substances the cells make in division to make copies of itself.


Classical Music in Review
Ilya Itin  Pianist Alice Tully Hall
Ilya Itin, a 24-year-old Russian who won the Casadesus International Piano Competition last year in Cleveland, began his recital bravely on Friday evening, tackling Beethoven's big late Sonata in A flat (Op. 110).
But he seemed bent on defying the stereotypes of the brawny Russian pianist and the flashy contestant.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Concord Camera Corp., Avenel, N.J., agreed with its senior lender, Midlantic National Bank, Newark, N.J., to restructure a $2.5 million partial repayment of its existing credit line. *
Corning Inc., Corning, N.Y., a chemicals company, completed the sale of a less than 10 percent equity interest in its Corning Japan K.K. unit, a maker of flat glass substrates used in liquid crystal display screens, to Japanese investors.
Terms were not disclosed.


Chinese Aim to Harness Yangtze and Yellow Rivers
DISCONTENT with the way the heavens have arranged its rivers and rainfall, China is embarking on a program to build huge waterworks that could have a colossal impact on the nation's development in the 21st century.
The Yellow River, so thick with silt that it sometimes seems a flowing yellow mud pie, courses past timeless villages in northern China whose peasants are constantly threatened by floods from the same waters that sustain them in irrigating their fields.


Winter's Coldest Weather Forces the Homeless to Use Survival Skills


Omni Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Crew Set For Shuttle Launching
THE space shuttle Discovery is poised to carry an international crew into orbit on a mission that will simulate many of the planned activities aboard Space Station Freedom.
The Discovery is to be launched tomorrow with a crew of seven and a pressurized laboratory in its cargo bay.
During the seven-day flight, the crew will conduct medical and scientific experiments that depend upon escaping the influences of gravity.


Progress Software Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Giant Meteorite Blast Gouged a 30-Mile Trail
THE explosion of a giant meteorite as it grazed Earth less than 10,000 years ago gouged a 30-mile chain of elongated depressions in the Argentine pampas, scientists say.
The energy released by the meteorite, which was 500 to 1,000 feet in diameter, appears to have been equivalent to the explosion of 350 million tons of TNT.
This is 30 times larger than the energy believed to have been released in 1908 when a mysterious object exploded over Tunguska in Siberia with worldwide effects.


Flak Jackets Available For New York Jockeys
Flak jackets to protect jockeys in spills will be furnished to riders at New York's tracks, the New York Racing Association announced yesterday.
But the jackets, which are mandatory in England, will be optional with riders here and will count against the weight limit stipulated for each horse.
The jackets, sleeveless garmets worn under the rider's silk shirt, are already worn by some jockeys.
They cost between $150 and $200 and weigh about 1 1/2 pounds.
They will be made available in each rider's size at Aqueduct, Belmont and Saratoga, and extra jackets will be stocked in various sizes for visiting jockeys.
No Connection With Spill
The decision to purchase jackets was announced eight days after Angel Cordero Jr. was seriously injured in a four-horse spill at Aqueduct.
Cordero, 49 years old and the senior star at New York's tracks, suffered a broken arm, several cracked ribs and the loss of his spleen.
He is not expected to ride again for perhaps two months.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Alpo Petfoods, Allentown, Pa., a unit of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., named Kevin T. Martin president. *
American International Group, New York, an insurance company, named Steve A. Schleisman president of the North American division of American International Underwriters, the company's overseas property and casualty insurance organization.


Programming &amp; Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Continuum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
GAS PIPELINE SET TO OPEN
After a decade of planning and construction that has provoked fierce opposition from environmentalists, homeowners and oil executives, the Iroquois natural gas pipeline from Canada is to begin operation this month, providing the largest single new source of energy to the New York region since the 1950's.
With the pipeline nearing completion, experts in the energy industry say it may lead to a historic shift in a region that is far more dependent on oil from the Middle East to heat its homes and fuel its power plants than other sections of the nation are.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY SEEKING REFUGE FROM THE COLD
The cold spell that has dropped temperatures to as low as 11 degrees since last Tuesday has been especially hard on the city's homeless.
And this year, their options for shelter are even fewer, as the Port Authority and the Transit Authority eject people from the bus terminal and the subways and try to persuade them to enter city shelters.
B3.
L.I.R.R.
SHELVES TRASH PLAN


New Microsoft-Intel System
The Microsoft Corporation and the Intel Corporation announced a software system today that they said would extend the battery life of portable computers.
The approach, which the companies hope will become a standard for computers based on Intel microprocessors, allows parts of a computer that are not immediately needed to be shut off, preserving power.


By Design; All-Weather Fabrics
This winter's weather has proved that "miracle" fibers are magic.
Last week, when one day was a balmy 62 degrees and the next was in the teens, a microfiber coat was the ideal solution.
Microfiber is the name for fabrics woven of polyester and nylon threads.
The finest weave feels like silky velvet, is lightweight and yet wears like iron.
A coat made of this is water repellent and warm as toast, yet porous enough to allow the garment to "breathe" when the thermometer climbs.


Classical Music in Review
Daniel Saidenberg Faculty Recital Series
Juilliard Theater
Admirers of Rudolf Serkin's piano playing will be interested to know that the dogged forward logic that made his performances so deeply reputable was also invested in his early attempts at composition.
As a young man, Serkin not only played Schoenberg's music, but also studied theory with its composer.
Program notes for Thursday's faculty recital at the Juilliard School report that some of the late pianist's music was actually performed in Vienna in the 1920's, but that in ensuing years he destroyed what he thought was all of it.


Dun Software's Unix Alliance
Dun &amp; Bradstreet Software, a leading supplier of application software for mainframe computers, is set to announce a joint development agreement today with both the Hewlett-Packard Company and the Data General Corporation.
Dun &amp; Bradstreet will work with Hewlett and Data General to develop Unix-based applications for its 12,000 corporate customers.
Tom McNeight, Dun's executive vice president, said the new Unix products will be available this year and will allow current Dun &amp; Bradstreet software to run on smaller powerful computers called servers.


VMS Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Henry Stommel, 71, Theoretician Influential in Ocean Current Study
Henry M. Stommel, a leading theoretician on ocean currents, died Friday at the age of 71 at the New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston.
His wife, Elizabeth Stommel, said he died of a heart attack after surgery for a liver tumor.
He lived in Woods Hole, Mass.
Although he never earned an advanced degree, Mr.
Stommel was considered one of the most influential oceanographers of his time.
He became known worldwide in the 1950's for his speculation on circulation in the Atlantic.
He recognized the role of the earth's rotation in pushing the Gulf Stream westward along the coast of North America and also proposed that its northward flow must be balanced by a deep, southward flow beneath it.
He proposed a global circulation in which surface water sinks in the far north, feeding the deep, south-flowing current, whereas water rises in the Antarctic, supplying a northward flow along the entire east coast of the Americas.


The Tiananmen in East Timor
What President Bush has called "the tragedy in East Timor" is finally eliciting more than ritual sympathy.
The former Portuguese colony was forcibly seized by Indonesia in 1975, an act comparable to Iraq's devouring Kuwait.
This was largely ignored until last Nov. 12, when Indonesian troops killed 50 Timorese at a wreath-laying ceremony for a slain youth, an act reminiscent of China's 1989 massacre of pro-democracy students in Tiananmen Square.
Unable to ignore protests, Jakarta's military rulers ordered an inquiry.
They now acknowledge the 50 deaths, but say they resulted from a "spontaneous reaction by soldiers" provoked by mourners waving "anti-Indonesian" banners.
Numerous witnesses, including two American journalists, say the troops acted with cool deliberation.


Sharpton Will Enter Race for the United States Senate


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Agreed to terms with B.J.
Surhoff, catcher, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with Matt Nokes, catcher, on a three-year contract.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Rob Dibble, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Agreed to terms with Scott Service, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
Named Martin Robitaille coach for Jamestown of the New York-Penn League and Kevin Greatrex Australian scout.
Invited Matt Maysey, Sergio Valdez, Dean Wilkins and Blaine Beatty, pitchers; Jerry Goff, catcher; Arci Cianfrocco, infielder; and Eric Bullock and Rob Katzaroff, outfielder, to spring training.
NEW YORK METS -- Agreed to terms with Dave Magadan, infielder, on a one-year contract.
Basketball National Basketball Association
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Placed Tom Garrick, guard, on the injured list.
Activated Tod Murphy, forward, from the injured list.
Continental Basketball Association
COLUMBUS HORIZON -- Named Fred Bryan coach. Football National Football League
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Named Dave Wannstedt assistant head coach in addition to his duties as defensive coordinator and linebackers coach.


New Zealand Is Odd but Solid Challenger
When New Zealand's America's Cup team practices for racing here, the syndicate's boats aren't hard to find.
It's as if the yachts have gone sailing in a giant ocean eddy that has sucked in every other boat for miles.
There is no question that New Zealand is the team to watch.
Its newest yacht, the final in a series of four designs, stands out as radical in a field already stretching the far side of conventional.


On My Mind; In Search of Buckley
After more than a year of study of the abundant record, William F. Buckley Jr., columnist, novelist, television host, lecturer and distinguished sailor, finally has delivered the judgment that Patrick Buchanan, Republican candidate for the Presidency, really has said "things about Jews" that are anti-Semitic.
For this discovery, part of a voyage for which he felt it his duty to skipper first his intellectual ship and now the readers of his magazine through 40,000 words, Mr.
Buckley is receiving the applause of those editorial writers, columnists and friends who had worried about him while he was pitching so far out at sea.


Ban on Muslim Political Party Expected in Algeria
The Algerian Government appears to be moving toward an official ban of the Islamic fundamentalist party as well as significant changes in the multiparty system that it has permitted since 1989, senior Algerian officials said today.
The officials made these comments in telephone interviews as the Algerian police announced that it had arrested an unspecified number of officials from the Islamic Salvation Front.


Market Place; Nasdaq at Night: Risky Trades in the Dark
The overnight trading of American stocks on Nasdaq began yesterday with a clear warning to brokers of the risks of global trading, as one trader apparently managed to sell shares in a small American company at an unrealistically high price.
While the losses to an unidentified market maker from that trade were small in total dollars, they served to highlight one risk of global trading, that of foreigners being blind-sided by local traders who often learn important information before overseas traders do.


Scuds Are Gone, but the Israelis' Fears Linger
The problem with her new apartment on Jabotinsky Street, Ofra Ovadia says, is not so much that it is spare as that it overlooks a broad and noisy avenue.
Fire trucks and ambulances zoom past her window at night with sirens at full tilt.
The wails, she said, are like knives flaying the fragile mental defenses of her 5-year-old daughter, Batel.


Foundation Health Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


47th St. Photo Files for Bankruptcy
Embroiled in legal squabbles and unable to pay its creditors, 47th Street Photo Inc., whose stores epitomize the feisty, combative world of consumer electronics retailing, filed for bankruptcy protection yesterday.
The company, known for being the first with the latest gadgets at the lowest prices for those shoppers willing to brave curt clerks and congested floors, said that all four of its stores in New York City and on Long Island would remain open as usual.
Indeed, it was business as usual yesterday at its stores on West 45th Street and West 47th Street, which were swirling with bargain hunters searching for VCR's, stereo equipment, cameras and computers.


Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Florio Signs An Overhaul Of Welfare
Gov.
Jim Florio signed a legislative package today that mandates sweeping revisions in the welfare system, among other things making New Jersey the only state in the nation to deny additional payments to welfare mothers who have more children.
If they are approved by the Federal Government, the changes would remove any possible financial incentive for a welfare mother to have additional children.
They would also encourage family stability by allowing welfare mothers to marry without losing their benefits and reward employment by allowing them to earn as much as 50 percent of their total welfare payment without having their benefits cut.


Dinkins Bid to Put Gay Irish In Parade Spurned by Sponsor
An attempt by Mayor David N. Dinkins to assure a gay organization a place in the St.
Patrick's Day Parade hit a major snag yesterday when the Irish order that he chose to direct the parade announced that it, too, planned to bar the gay group.
Leaders of the New York State chapter of the Ancient Order of Hibernians said that they would follow the precedent set last year by the Manhattan chapter, the parade's traditional organizers, in barring the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization.
The national, state and Manhattan chapters all cited what theycharged was the group's outrageous behavior during the parade last year.
Assertions Are Denied
The state group's decision put the Mayor in the awkward position of having to deal again with the controversy.
It also raised the possibility that he had been outmaneuvered in his attempts to find a solution that would please the gay groups that are an important part of his political base without alienating Irish-American voters.
Mr.
Dinkins declined to say yesterday if he was surprised by the decision of the state Hibernians.
"We are still hopeful; we are still discussing things" was all he would say.


RESULTS PLUS
FIGURE SKATING  Russians Take Lead Yelena Bechke and Denis Petrov edged the defending champions, Natasha Mishkutienok and Artur Dmitriev, in the original program to take the lead in the pairs competition yesterday as the European figure skating championships began at Lausanne, Switzerland.
The couples, both from St.
Petersburg, Russia, performed for the Commonwealth of Independent States, a name decided on after last-minute talks with international skating authorities.
Bechke and Petrov, runners-up last year, earned marks in the 5.6-5.8 range.
The maximum is 6.0.
The original program is worth one-third of the total mark.
The free skating takes place today and is worth the remainder.
At the competition draw Monday night, the Baltic republics of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia were officially welcomed back into the International Skating Union, 53 years after they were absorbed into the Soviet Union. (AP) BOATING  4th Straight for Defiant  Defiant did it again, overcoming a slow start to beat its America 3 stablemate, Jayhawk, off San Diego yesterday for its fourth straight victory in the first round-robin of the America's Cup defender selection series.
Defiant trailed by five seconds at the start, equivalent to about a boat length.
But the newer of the two America 3 yachts went on to win the sixth race of the series by 2 minutes 36 seconds. (AP)


Ashland Coal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Texaco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New York Announces Plans For Executive Life Bailout
Insurance regulators in New York announced a rescue plan yesterday for the Executive Life Insurance Company of New York that should pay 100 cents on the dollar to the insurer's 118,000 customers.
But insurance professionals said the plan would make it impossible for customers to cash in their policies without incurring substantial penalties, known as surrender charges.
The professionals said that under the plan, which requires the approval of a New York State court, some customers would earn significantly lower interest on their policies and annuities than they had before Executive Life of New York and its sister company in California were seized by the respective state regulators last spring.
Both were units of the bankrupt First Executive Corporation of Los Angeles.


Economic Scene; The Economy Is In/Out of Woods
FORECASTING, the economic wits say, is difficult especially about the future.
But these days you can't even put much faith in descriptions of the present.
Depending on which professional is doing the appraisal, the American economy is now: A) Grinding slowly ahead for the third straight quarter but carrying such heavy regulatory and other burdens that the recovery is glacial; B) Turning down again after an aborted, post-Iraq recovery; C) Still gripped by a recession that is now the longest since World War II.


Shortage of Professors Is Envisioned
The nation could run short of researchers and college professors in the arts and sciences in the next several years unless graduate programs at American universities are strengthened by new financing and greater attention to students, according to a study on graduate education.
The heart of the problem is that the number of recipients of doctorates in the six areas covered by the study -- economics, English, history, mathematics, physics and political science -- has sharply declined in the last decade.
The doctoral degree is almost always a requirement for appointment as a professor or researcher.


New on the Laser Menu: Potato Skins, Well Done
A research lab in Ohio is using sophisticated laser technology in the service of one of the most mundane culinary tasks: peeling potatoes.
Battelle Memorial Institute, a research laboratory in Columbus, has devised a way to use lasers to burn the skin off potatoes instantly.
"You just see a little puff of vapor, and there is a naked potato," said Dr.
William McComis, Battelle's projects manager for food science and engineering.
"It's a fascinating thing to watch."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  IRISH GROUP BARS GAY MARCHERS
The state Irish group given responsibility by the Dinkins administration to take over the St.
Patrick's Day Parade has announced that it, too, will bar a gay Irish group from marching.
The move by the national and state boards of the Ancient Order of Hibernians comes two weeks after City Hall took away the parade permit from the Manhattan chapter and gave it to the state board -- an action that many had hoped would end the bitter two-year controversy over the presence of a gay group in the parade.
A1.
A POLITICAL PARTY
With the election only a year away, the mayoral campaign is beginning in earnest, and if City Council President Andrew J. Stein's birthday party is any indication, the campaign looms as long, costly and bitter.
The party last night, which was expected to raise $1.7 million for his campaign from a cast of high-profile contributors, boasted entertainment by Frank Sinatra, Liza Minnelli and Shirley MacLaine, and a promise by Mr.
Stein to lead a "revolution in this city." B3. 2 police officers are robbed at gunpoint.
B3.
REGION  CUOMO'S BUDGET: CUTS ALL AROUND
After months of fruitless bids to forge a unique long-term solution to New York State's chronic fiscal ills, Governor Cuomo reverted to the old way.
He proposed a 1992-93 budget that would pare spending on nearly all state and local-aid programs.
And he pleaded with lawmakers to pass it by April 1, the statutory deadline that has not been met for the last seven years.
A1.
The Governor arms himself for the battle ahead.
News Analysis, B6.
New York City officials say Cuomo budget would create a $100 million city shortfall.
B6.
WARMUS GOES ON TRIAL AGAIN
The love-triangle murder trial that turned the image of the quiet, colorless suburbs on its ear with tales of infidelity, conspiracy, romantic obsession and the shadowy world of private detectives is about to start all over again.
Carolyn Warmus, a 28-year-old Westchester teacher, is being retried on charges of killing her former lover's wife.
B5.
DID THE VICTIM HAVE A GUN?
The converted starter's pistol found in Phillip Pannell's parka pocket after he was fatally shot by a Teaneck, N.J., police officer in April 1990 had been there for "some time," a retired state police chemist testified.
His testimony was the strongest corroboration yet of a report by the defendant and another officer that they found a handgun in the teen-ager's pocket moments after the shooting.
B5.
AN OFFICER AND A SUSPECT
Robert Fioretti was a New York City police officer when his first wife disappeared in 1986.
Almost from the first the authorities called him a suspect.
But when he appeared in court in Suffolk County yesterday, the only charge he faced was bank fraud.
B5.
New Jersey Supreme Court weighs death sentence in murder-for-hire case.
B4.
Yale gallery receives $10 million gift.
B4.
Judge in Attica trial agrees to cut short his vacation.
B5.
About New York B3  Neediest Cases B3


'Falsettos' Headed For Broadway, Not the Beaumont
"March of the Falsettos" and "Falsettoland" are coming to Broadway this spring, but it won't be the production everyone was expecting.
In a move that has taken much of the theater industry by surprise, Barry and Fran Weissler announced yesterday that they would produce the two William Finn one-act musicals, directed by James Lapine in late April, probably at the Golden Theater.
Andre Bishop, the new artistic director of Lincoln Center Theater, had previously announced that he would be bringing the Hartford Stage production of "Falsettos," directed by Graciela Daniele, to the Vivian Beaumont Theater on April 27.


Tandy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Recession Prompts First-Time Gifts as Neediest Cases Lead '91 Pace
"I have not donated money to the Neediest Cases fund before," Deborah Dorfman of Princeton, N.J., wrote, "but the need seems so great this year."
That simple note goes a long way toward explaining the remarkable success of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund this year.
The appeal, which continues through Feb. 29, has managed to surge $476,000 ahead of last year's pace in part because of a large increase in the number of first-time contributors like Ms.
Dorfman, who gave $50.
So far, almost 13,000 donors have contributed almost $4.4 million.


Homestead Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Orchestra Reaches Pact With Musicians
The New York Philharmonic and negotiators for its musicians reached a tentative agreement on Monday for a four-year contract.
The agreement provides for salary increases, an extension of the orchestra's current health benefits at a reduced cost to the players and a new arrangement to give the players a voice in running the orchestra.
It was presented to the musicians yesterday and they will vote on it today, spokesmen for both sides said.
The musicians' lawyer, I. Philip Sipser, described the proposal as "the best settlement I have seen in the 24 years I've been representing symphonic musicians." The Philharmonic's managing director, Deborah Borda, characterized the agreement as the kind that allows both sides to claim victory.


Yanks Sign Stanley
The Yankees signed MIKE STANLEY, a free-agent catcher, to a minor league contract yesterday, and he will attend spring training as a nonroster player.
The 28-year-old Stanley hit .249 with 3 homers and 25 runs batted in last season for the Texas Rangers, but was sent outright to the minors after the season.


Theater in Review
Tom Scallen's Ice Capades  Madison Square Garden Seventh Avenue and 33th Street Manhattan Through Sunday  Produced and directed by Willy Bietak and Mr.
Scallen; choreography by Sarah Kawahara; production design, Robert W. Rang; Firebird costumes, Pete Menefee; other costumes, Jef Billings; lighting, John McLain; musical direction and arrangements, Euromusica Design Group.
Presented by L'eggs Sheer Energy Panty Hose.
WITH: Yelena and Vladimir Bogolyubov, Rick Boudreau, Angelo D'Agostino, Dave and Joey, Tom Dickson, Angelique Gandy-Doud, Brad Doud, the Foy Flying Ballet, Kitty Kelly, Catarina Lindgren, Kristan Lowery, Chip Rossbach and Steve Wheeler.


Capriati Succumbs to Pressure As Sabatini Steps to Semifinal
Jennifer Capriati, with tears welling in her eyes, struggled to explain a collapse that led to her ouster from the Australian Open today and instead found herself pouring out the frustrations of a 15-year-old rising star on the women's tennis circuit.
Capriati hit six straight unforced errors to begin a second-set tie breaker against Gabriela Sabatini, who went on to win the quarterfinal match, 6-4, 7-6 (7-1).
Capriati's only point came on a backhand cross-court winner.


Stride Rite reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Allies Differ Over Aid
A 47-nation conference for coordinating aid to the former Soviet Union opens today in Washington, with tensions between the United States and its allies bubbling just beneath the surface over how best to help Russia and the other republics, officials and experts involved say.
Article, page A7.


Texaco's Profit Down 16.5% in 4th Quarter
Texaco Inc., the first big oil company to announce fourth-quarter earnings, said yesterday that net income fell 16.5 percent because of lower prices for crude oil and natural gas and weak demand for gasoline, chemicals and other refined products.
Net income was $324 million, or $1.15 a share, compared with $388 million, or $1.40 a share, in the corresponding period a year ago.
Revenues for the company, based in White Plains, fell 24.9 percent, to $9.76 billion from $12.99 billion.


1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Moves on 2 Fronts To Widen Support in South
Long before the Southern primaries on March 10, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas is trying to sew up the support of the mostly white Democratic establishments in those states and also garner enough endorsements from black officials to shore up his standing with minority and liberal voters.
The Clinton strategy has produced early results in party organizations, bringing him endorsements from moderates like Gov.
Zell Miller of Georgia.
He has also been endorsed by Representative John Lewis of Georgia, a civil rights pioneer, and Representative Mike Espy of Mississippi, the first black Congressman from that state since Reconstruction.


Paine Webber Reports a $46.9 Million Profit
Paine Webber yesterday reported quarterly earnings of $46.9 million, lifting the securities firm's yearly profits to a record $150.7 million.
In 1990, Paine Webber Group Inc. completed a painful contraction, dismissing 400 employees and taking a large restructuring charge that resulted in a $92.3 million loss for the fourth quarter and a $57.4 million loss.


Improved Play of Blaylock Keeps Anderson on the Bench
When looking for reasons why Kenny Anderson, the team's No. 1 draft choice, is not getting more playing time with the Nets this season, those wondering point to Anderson's size, his age, his lack of National Basketball Association experience or some grudge between him and Coach Bill Fitch.
The tendency is to overlook the soundest answer to the question: the improved play of Daron Oshay Blaylock, who is known to teammates and opponents alike as Mookie.


Gotti, the Sequel, Begins With Roundup of the Usual Suspects
John Gotti arrived at Federal Court in Brooklyn from jail by van in a solemn five-car police motorcade yesterday.
Invisible behind blackened windows, Mr.
Gotti was driven into an underground parking lot from a side-street entrance to the courthouse -- a decidedly less dazzling performance than his last court appearance, when he danced to his waiting limousine after being acquitted of assault charges in Manhattan in 1990.
Even before he appeared in court, serenely confident and bronzed from weekly sunlamp treatments, the courthouse had begun to revolve around the man they call "the Teflon Don."


Woodhead Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Meredith Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Los Angeles on Verge Of Ending Japanese Pact
Smoldering American resentment against Japanese economic competition has flared into a political firestorm in California, and Los Angeles County officials appeared today to be on the verge of canceling a $122 million contract they awarded just a month ago to a Japanese company to build rail cars for a new mass transit line here.
Instead, they proposed today to build a new factory to build the cars in Los Angeles County, providing jobs for a region deeply mired in recession and putting the county in direct competition with the Japanese.


Space Shuttle Is Set For Blastoff Today On Science Mission
Preparations to launch the space shuttle Discovery and a menagerie of roundworms, fruit flies, yeast, bacteria, slime mold, frog eggs and astronauts went almost flawlessly today, leaving unusually cool weather the only major concern.
Officials at the Kennedy Space Center said they were concerned about the low temperatures predicted for early Wednesday.


Lukens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


John Everett, CUNY Chancellor And New School Head, Dies at 73
John R. Everett, the first Chancellor of the City University of New York and the president emeritus of the New School for Social Research, died yesterday at Cabrini Medical Center.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan and Pawling, N.Y.
He died of pancreatic cancer, the New School said.


Old Is New in the Treatment of Hypertension
To the Editor:
Your article on the role of dietary salt and other mineral elements in hypertension (Science Times, Dec. 31) goes a long way toward dispelling the misconceptions about salt that have plagued public perception, and in broadening our vision to include other mineral elements like calcium and magnesium.
Three other points deserve attention as well:
(1) As is so often true, we've really just rediscovered the wheel.
A Toronto physician, W. L. T. Addison, in articles written between 1924 and 1928, first documented the antihypertensive actions of both calcium and potassium supplementation in patients suffering from essential hypertension.
He further suggested that these minerals worked by offsetting the effects of salt.
His work was forgotten for more than 50 years, but his insights deserve to be remembered.


Cardinal Distribution Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dreams Not Enough to Get Rose Reinstated
If you hear the clank of a lawsuit dropping today or the next, then you will have the clearest signals that George Steinbrenner has begun what he hopes to be a journey back into baseball.
And aside from Steinbrenner's immediate family, no one can be more interested how the Yankees' principal owner fares in his attempt at reinstatement than Pete Rose.
"I don't know if it necessarily has an effect on Pete, but you have to be curious about everything the commissioner does in such circumstances," Rose's lawyer and spokesman, Reuven Katz of Cincinnati, said.


Former Officer Stands Trial in Bank Fraud Cause
Robert Fioretti was a New York City police officer when his first wife disappeared in 1986.
Almost from the first the authorities called him a suspect.
But when he appeared in court today, the only charge he faced was bank fraud.


An Epidemic of Genital Warts Raises Concern but Not Alarm
ALTHOUGH 20 to 30 percent of sexually active Americans are infected with the virus that causes genital warts and though it is found in 85 percent or more of cancers of the cervix, doctors say the wart epidemic is cause for concern but not alarm.
Most abnormalities tied to the warts can be detected by routine Pap smears and removed, researchers say, and they are learning more and more about risk factors for developing cervical cancer and how to avoid them.


Gesture of Fiscal Conciliation
In promoting his budget as a vehicle for a quick deal with State Senate Republicans, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo armed himself today with political ammunition to assail the Legislature if it fails again to pass a timely budget.
Mr.
Cuomo could have used his budget to present a stridently Democratic response to the recession, which has helped generate a $4.8 billion gap in the state's $30 billion budget.


United Technologies Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Book Notes
Endowing Free Speech
Thomas J. Peters, the author of three best-selling books about business, and his wife, Catherine S. Abbe, have donated a million dollars to the American Civil Liberties Union, to establish a fellowship to study and support the First Amendment.
The gift, which people in publishing and First Amendment advocacy said was one of the largest donations in support of the right to free speech, will be announced tonight at a reception at the Harvard Club in Manhattan.
The fellowship is named after William J. Brennan, the former Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, because, said Mr.
Peters in a telephone interview, "No one in my lifetime has protected the precious and often precarious right to free speech in this country as vigorously as Justice Brennan."
In December, at a dinner given by the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism to honor Justice Brennan's commitment to the First Amendment, Salman Rushdie made an unannounced appearance, the first time he had traveled abroad or given a public speech since the Ayatollah Khomeini called his book "The Satanic Verses" blasphemous to Islam and ordered the writer's assassination.
The experience of Mr.
Rushdie, and the numerous attempts to suppress free speech that Mr.
Peters says he has seen in his travels around the world, which include stays in Argentina and China, prompted him and his wife to establish the million-dollar fellowship.
"It made me very aware of a right we so often take for granted, the right to speak and write freely, and that all the textbook reading doesn't bring home," said Mr.
Peters, who had previously donated 5 percent of the royalties from his most recent book, "Thriving on Chaos" (Alfred A. Knopf), to the A.C.L.U. for First Amendment projects.
He is also co-author of "In Search of Excellence" (Harper &amp; Row) and "Passion for Excellence" (Random House).
Tonight's reception is being jointly sponsored by Ira Glasser, executive director of the A.C.L.U.; Alberto Vitale, chairman, president and chief executive officer of Random House, and Sonny Mehta, president and editor in chief of Knopf.
Mr.
Peters acknowledged that books like his, about business and organization, do not usually test people's tolerance.
But he said he thought the fellowship was needed because "free speech is only innocent when we zealously protect not only stuff that is not controversial but stuff we may find offensive." The Power of the Airwaves
It looked like the season was almost over for Brendan Boyd, whose first novel, "Blue Ruin," was published in September by W. W. Norton.
The book, a fictitious account of the motivations behind the actual fixing of the 1919 World Series between the Chicago White Sox and the Cincinnati Reds, had done modestly at the book stores.
It's your first time at bat, the publisher told the writer.
It's a solid single.
You'll do better next time.
Then Mr.
Boyd did an interview on National Public Radio's "Morning Edition," and suddenly the game wasn't quite over.
Sales of the book started picking up across the country.
Bookstore owners started calling wholesale distributors for refills and the book popped onto the best-seller lists of Ingram and of Baker &amp; Taylor, two of the biggest wholesalers in the country.
NPR has apparently become a priceless promotional opportunity for authors.
An interview or a review on any of the three main programs -- "Morning Edition," "All Things Considered" and "Weekend Edition" -- practically assures a rise in sales.
Mr.
Boyd was interviewed and given a rave review by Bill Littlefield, a sports commentator, on "Morning Edition" on Dec. 19, "and within two days, the book was zooming, after it had basically been doing modestly until then," said Bill Rusin, director of sales and marketing for Norton.
"That interview pretty much doubled the rate of sales."
John Cunningham, Baker &amp; Taylor's director of merchandising for juvenile and trade books, said "Blue Ruin" was registering quiet sales, many of them to libraries, when "suddenly it went berserk," going from unranked to the No. 7 fiction best seller.
"No doubt about it, NPR has become a real force for selling books," Mr.
Cunningham said.
"We see it all the time. They have the demographics in their audience and they have serious book buyers who listen to them."
People who work for the three shows say that given the deluge of books they receive each day, the power of the shows is obviously no longer an inside secret shared by few.
The decision to interview an author or review a book is made mostly by the various hosts and commentators, whose tastes are described by members of their staff as "wildly eclectic."
"I can't say there are particular criteria for getting a book on," said Brigid McCarthy, editorial assistant for "Morning Edition." "It's whatever seems to give an added dimension to a news event, or something completely off the news, or a new writer, or an established writer. There's no way to know what will get chosen."
An author who can't get on NPR, however, need not despair.
Mr.
Cunningham of Baker &amp; Taylor said there was one other show that he had seen push sales of a book: the morning television program "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."


Pilgrim's Pride reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Chrysler Raises Prices by 0.6%
The Chrysler Corporation increased car and truck prices by six-tenths of 1 percent today and announced that the price of its much-awaited Grand Cherokee utility vehicle would start at more than $20,000.
The four-wheel-drive Grand Cherokee's base price of $19,857, plus a $485 destination charge, reflects a two-tier pricing strategy aimed at luring customers away from the Ford Motor Company's popular Explorer utility vehicle, which starts at $19,395, plus a $485 destination charge.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
The Apparel Group Ltd., New York, named Charles McConnell president of its B.D.
Baggies division. *
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., New York, announced three new appointments: Wesley M. Thompson president of its international consumer products businesses, George L. Fotiades president of its consumer products unit in Japan and Richard H. Malyan senior vice president-international business development.


Will Women Runners Overtake Men?
To the Editor:
The recent study by University of California researcher predicting that female runners may one day run faster than the best male runners ("2 Experts Say Women Who Run May Overtake Men," Science Times, Jan. 7) is limited by its reliance on linear extrapolation in the prediction of future performance.
While the rate of improvement in women's performance has exceeded that of men since the 1920's, little evidence suggests that this trend would continue to the point where women overtake men.
Taken alone, linear extrapolation of past trends can give unrealistic results.
For example, based on an extrapolation of its population growth from 1940 to 1990, California would in the year 2040 have a population comparable to present-day France.


Stronger Family Tie Seen in Suicide
ONE out of every four people who attempt suicide has a family member who also tried to commit suicide, a study sponsored by the National Institute of Mental Health has found.
The number is higher than previous estimates.
In previous studies, about one in 14 people who attempted suicide had relatives who had also tried to kill themselves.
The new study involved 2,304 Los Angeles residents; the earlier estimates were based on interviews with mental patients and their families.


BRIEFS
*
Allied-Signal Inc., Morristown, N.J., received a contract valued at $447.9 million to continue its service operations at the NASA Space Center in Houston through the year 2000. *
Amoco Oil Co., Chicago, a unit of Amoco Corp., said it was exploring the sale of its Salt Lake City refinery and related marketing operations.


Thiokol Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Drama That Will Rival the Ring When Tyson Faces His Accuser
No fighter since the days of Muhammad Ali has been dissected and inspected quite the way Mike Tyson has.
At age 25 he has been one of those public figures who fascinate the masses and command constant attention.
While some of that has had to do with the primal aggression Tyson showed in becoming the youngest heavyweight champion ever, as much curiosity has focused on Tyson's personal life and problems outside the ring.
There, as his own worst enemy, Tyson has sometimes seemed on the verge of short-circuiting that glorious career as a fighter.


Japan Tries Damage Control
The Government today raced to contain the damage in the United States after one of Japan's top politicians called American workers illiterate and lazy, saying the Government did not share his views and then contending that he had been misinterpreted.
The effort to counteract the comments by Yoshio Sakurauchi, the Speaker of the lower house of Parliament, came amid growing Japanese fears of a backlash in the American Congress.
Several officials said Mr.
Sakurauchi's comments could not have come at a worse time, adding to the arguments over access to Japanese markets and the causes of America's industrial woes.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  LIBYA SAID TO ADD CHEMICAL ARMS
Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi's Government is expanding Libya's chemical weapons program and is dispersing chemical stockpiles around the country to avoid detection, United States intelligence officials say.
A1  RESPONSE TO U.N.
ACTION UNKNOWN
Libya gave no indication that it would comply with the unanimous U.N.
Security Council resolution calling on it to turn over two of its citizens accused of blowing up two civilian passenger planes.
A8  WHY RUSSIANS LINE UP FOR BREAD
The bottlenecks that make Russians anxious about bread shortages are not, so far, in the supplies of grain and flour, but in the methods used by the state-owned industry to make and distribute bread.
A1  COUP PROBERS CLEAR GORBACHEV
Although the leaders of the Soviet coup attempt last August assumed that Mikhail S. Gorbachev would eventually join their conspiracy, he gave the plotters no encouragement, Russian prosecutors said.
A6  DISCORD OVER AID TO RUSSIA
The conference for coordinating aid to the former Soviet Union opens today, with tensions bubbling between the United States and its allies over how best to help Russia and the other republics, officials say.
A7  SOVIET DOCUMENTS TO BE RELEASED
The first batch of millions of secret documents from the Communist Party's archives in Moscow will be released this fall, starting with files on major Bolshevik leaders, a British publishing company said.
A5  Hanoi admitted turning over an American captive to the K.G.B.
A2  Communist leaders mocked Khrushchev after the missile crisis.
A3  The Institute for Marxism-Leninism has changed its slant.
A4  A SOUTH AFRICAN PARADOX
A quandary bedevils South Africa's armed forces: When young whites were summoned in the latest draft, some asked why they should comply when the law that declared them white no longer existed.
A3  SAUDI OFFICIAL SEES JEWISH GROUP
Leaders of an American Jewish group met with the Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia in Riyadh and discussed the stalled Middle East peace talks.
A3  National A10-17, A22  JUSTICES TAKE ABORTION CASE
The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether a Pennsylvania law that restricts access to abortion is constitutional.
The Court's action virtually insured a ruling by early summer of this Presidential election year.
A1  News analysis: Another worrisome variable for the President.
A17  THE ECONOMY AND THE VOTE
The Congressional Budget Office predicted that the economy would begin a weak recovery by the middle of the year and warned lawmakers that they might endanger it if they resorted to radical economic policy changes before the November elections.
A1  Washington Memo: The campaign arrived on Capitol Hill.
A16  On the stump, Mr.
Bush announced an expansion of Head Start.
A16  Governor Clinton is trying to sew up the Southern primaries.
A16  BIG EMPLOYER CUTS BACK
United Technologies announced a series of plant closings and cutbacks that will eliminate 13,900 jobs, or 7 percent of its worldwide work force, by 1995.
A1  REVERSAL ON JAPANESE CONTRACT
Prodded by American resentment against Japan, Los Angeles County appears to be on the verge of canceling a $122 million contract awarded to a Japanese company to build mass transit rail cars.
A10  SHIFT ON ASSASSINATION FILES
The chairman of the House committee that studied the assassination of President Kennedy said Government files on the case should be opened.
It would take a House vote to unseal the files, but documents held by other agencies could not be made public without agreement of the Senate and the President.
A1  HAS HE BEEN PUNISHED ENOUGH?
A Mexican immigrant whose 4-year-old grandchild shot himself to death on Jan. 1 has become the first person charged under a new California law that makes adults who store loaded weapons within the reach of children criminally liable.
A10  NO MORE MRS.NICE GUY
Mayor Sophie Masloff of Pittsburgh, facing a deficit of $35 million in a $340 million budget, is trying to shed her grandmotherly image for something closer to that of a hotshot politician.
A12  Grand Forks Journal: The rusty front gates of the cold war.
A10  The Justice Department rejected Georgia's redistricting plan.
A12  Education Page A18  A Wisconsin district will use family income to assign students to schools.
Decline in graduate school enrollment may foretell faculty shortage.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 A BUDGET AND A PLEA
Governor Cuomo presented a 1992-93 state budget that would pare spending in almost all state and local aid programs, and pleaded with lawmakers to pass the budget by April 1, the statutory deadline.
A1  GAY GROUP BANNED AGAIN
Mayor Dinkins's attempt to assure a gay organization the right to march in the St.
Patrick's Day Parade hit a snag when the sponsors the Mayor had recently turned the parade over to said that they, too, planned to bar the group.
A1  Neediest Cases B3  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-10  Those little local haunts.
C1  Longing for cave-man food.
C1  Wine Talk C1  The return of musk C10  Health Page C12  Personal Health: Help for the side effects of chemotherapy.
Avoiding cancer after infection with the genital wart virus.
Arts/Entertainment C13-20  "Falsettos" headed for Broadway.
C13  Philharmonic and musicians reach a tentative contract.
C13  Word and Image: "Surviving Desire," on TV.
C13  Obituaries A19  John R. Everett, CUNY Chancellor and New School head.
Sports B7-14  Column: Vecsey on Super Bowl failures.
B7 Football: Desmond Howard to enter pro draft.
B7  Monk and his mentors.
B7  Tennis: Capriati loses to Sabatini.
B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  EditorialsA20  Japan's America-bashing.
Who should liberate Iraq?
Women's liberty, on the line.
Don't be stingy with Russia.
Letters A20  Anna Quindlen: The $64 question.
A21  Joseph I. Lieberman: Here's a way to fight Japan.
A21  Benjamin J. Stein: Our man in Nirvana.
A21  Judy Shelton: What free market?
A21


U.S. IS CRITICIZED ON AID TO RUSSIA
The 47-nation conference on coordinating aid to the former Soviet Union opens at the State Department on Wednesday, with a host of tensions between the United States and its allies bubbling just beneath the surface over how best to help Russia and the other republics, officials and experts involved say.
At issue are both clashing egos and clashing policies.
Many European officials, who were not consulted about the conference before it was announced, say they resent the leadership role being taken by the United States, which some of them argue is an effort to disguise how little Washington is actually doing.
No longer feeling the need for Washington's security umbrella after the demise of the Soviet Union, the Europeans are increasingly speaking their mind.


Riley Fined For Comments On Officiating
Knicks Coach Pat Riley has been fined $2,500 for criticizing the officiating after last Saturday night's game, the National Basketball Association announced yesterday.
After New York's 108-106 loss to the Cleveland Cavaliers, Riley was very angry about the officiating, not only in that game but also in Knicks' games during the last three weeks as well.


Review/Music; Bilson and Bylsma In a Lighthearted Mood
Before beginning to play a sonata with the cellist Anner Bylsma at Merkin Concert Hall on Monday night, Malcolm Bilson spoke briefly about his instrument, a fortepiano built by Alois Graff in Vienna in 1825.
It had six pedals.
Three were unremarkable: one raised the dampers, allowing sustained tones; one resembled the una corda pedal on the modern piano, allowing a softer sound and different timbre; another inserted a piece of cloth between hammer and strings, muting the impact.
The others, Mr.
Bilson explained, were "noisemakers." He pressed one: it sounded as if a drum were being struck with a great stick, accompanied by the jangling of strings.
"I have not yet found a piece," he commented, "in which it is particularly appropriate."


An Epidemic of Genital Warts Raises Concern but Not Alarm
ALTHOUGH 20 to 30 percent of sexually active Americans are infected with the virus that causes genital warts and though it is found in 85 percent or more of cancers of the cervix, doctors say the wart epidemic is cause for concern but not alarm.
Most abnormalities tied to the warts can be detected by routine Pap smears and removed, researchers say, and they are learning more and more about risk factors for developing cervical cancer and how to avoid them.


Whites Defy Pretoria's 'White' Draft
The repeal last year of South Africa's bedrock laws enforcing apartheid has left the Government with a quandary bedeviling its armed forces.
Military conscription has long been compulsory for young white men, who under the Defense Act must serve a year on active duty followed by reserve call-ups.
President F. W. de Klerk cut the initial tour in half, from two years, in December 1989.


Japanese Trade Surplus Surged Last Year
Japan's trade surplus has reversed course after a three-year decline, surging by 50 percent in 1991, the Government said today.
The announcement is likely to fan increasing resentment in the United States and other nations upset because the surplus, they say, stems from Japan's adherence to unfair trade policies.
The Finance Ministry said that for the year, Japan sold $78.23 billion more goods overseas than it imported, compared with a $52.15 billion surplus in 1990.
These preliminary figures were for what is called the customs-cleared trade surplus.
The Government will later announce broader figures that include a variety of other costs of conducting trade, like transportation and insurance.
Those inclusive figures are generally cited by economists when they discuss trade imbalances.


Correction
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday misidentified the parent company of the Sherwood Securities Corporation.
It is the Sherwood Group Inc., a public holding company.


Files to Be Opened, From Lenin to Gorbachev
The first batch of millions of secret documents culled from the Communist Party's archives in Moscow are to be released this fall, beginning with the files collected by the party on major leaders of the Bolshevik Revolution, a British publishing company said today.
Among the reams of material, to be made available on microfilm, are personal correspondence, police reports and biographical details meticulously collected by party archivists on Leon Trotsky, Vyacheslav M. Molotov, Andrei A. Zhdanov and other key members of Lenin's inner circle, said officials of Chadwyck-Healey of Cambridge, England, a publisher of university and research databases.


G.E. Net Up by 2% In Quarter
Helped by continued strength in financial services, the General Electric Company said yesterday that profits in the last three months of 1991 edged up 2 percent, to more than $1.26 billion.
It also cited growth in businesses where products are ordered many months or even years in advance, like medical equipment, power systems and aircraft engines.
The double-digit profits in these businesses compensated for sharp declines at the company's NBC broadcasting subsidiary and in the economically sensitive materials group, which supplies products like plastics to a wide range of industries.


Riley Says Things Will Get Better
Asked today if the Knicks had overachieved in winning 17 of their first 27 games, Pat Riley did not evade the question.
"We probably were overachieving," the Knicks' coach said.
"We were winning on a lot on emotion and hard work. Now the freshness has worn off and the routine sets in, so you have to deal with that.


Culbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Charges Against Hurdle
CLINT HURDLE, a former major league player and the manager of the Mets' top farm team at Tidewater, has been charged with stealing some Valentine's Day items worth $1.79 from a grocery store, the police in Williamsport, Pa., said.
The 34-year-old Hurdle was arraigned on a charge of retail theft and released on $200 bail after his arrest Monday.
He retired from the Mets in 1987 after a 12-year career that included stints with the St.
Louis Cardinals, the Kansas City Royals and the Cincinnati Reds. (AP)


Theater in Review
Invention for Fathers and Sons  American Jewish Theater 307 West 26th Street Manhattan By Alan Brody; directed by Jay E. Raphael; set design, Bill Clarke; costumes, Elizabeth Covey; lighting, Kirk Bookman; sound, David Smith; production stage manager, Gail Eve Malatesta.
Presented by American Jewish Theater, Stanley Brechner, artistic director; Lonny Price, associate artistic director; Richard Sabellico, resident director.
WITH: Glynis Bell, Monica Bell, Elaine Grollman, Ben Hammer, Gordon MacDonald, Len Stanger and William Verderber.


Uncovered Short Sales Decline 0.7% on Big Board
The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that the number of shares sold short and not yet covered fell for monthlong period ended Jan. 15 by 55 million, or seven-tenths of 1 percent, to 729.4 million.
The new total is equal to about seven-tenths of 1 percent of all shares listed on the Big Board.
The decline reversed December's slight increase in uncovered short positions.


Bankers Trust Names Three to Top Positions
The Bankers Trust New York Corporation yesterday named a president and two vice chairmen and announced the resignation of Ralph L. MacDonald, one of its top officers and corporate finance specialists over the last decade.
Mr.
MacDonald, who is 50 years old, was in charge of the Bankers Trust corporate finance unit during the wave of corporate takeovers of the 1980's and is currently co-head of the global corporate finance group and a member of the bank's five-person management committee.


Jostens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Television; Some Loners Struggle With Love and Survival
The small circle of truly significant American film makers, among them Martin Scorsese and Woody Allen, may be gearing up to admit some new members.
One candidate is Gus Van Zant ("Drugstore Cowboy").
Another is Hal Hartley, whose "Surviving Desire," his first work done expressly for television, is being broadcast tonight on "American Playhouse" (Channel 13 at 9).
As an independent director and writer, the 31-year-old Mr.
Hartley has been steadily refining his distinctive imprint, most notably in the feature films "The Unbelievable Truth" (1989) and "Trust" (1991).
Coming out of Lindenhurst, L. I., he is a graduate of the State University College at Purchase, where he developed a mania for reading movie scripts.
The urge to write and film his own became only a matter of time.


Williams Discharged
TED WILLIAMS, 73 years old, has been released in good condition from Shands Hospital in Gainesville, Fla., a week after undergoing neck surgery aimed at preventing future strokes.
The surgery was related to a mild stroke the Hall of Fame outfielder suffered in November.
The stroke is said to have left no permanent damage. (AP)


Union Camp Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Embattled Italian Financier Vows to Regain MGM-Pathe
In a rare public appearance today, Giancarlo Parretti, the indebted Italian financier who briefly controlled the MGM-Pathe Communications Company last year, swore that he would battle to win the movie studio back.
"Since I am not ready to surrender everything for peace, I prefer going to war and losing everything," he said at a news conference here.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.50
3.80
6.05
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.78
3.76
6.14
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.84
3.87
6.21
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.69
6.75
7.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.57
7.58
8.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.74
8.80
9.46
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.65
6.66
7.44
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


1992 CAMPAIGN: Washington Memo; Senate Jousting Is a Lesson in 'Bipartisan' Debate
The 1992 election campaign arrived on Capitol Hill today, as senators called for bipartisan efforts to solve national problems and then split on party lines over education legislation.
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, said, "The needs of the nation are not partisan." Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, said Americans would reject "the same old partisan posturing, political games and Congressional gridlock."


Bombay Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


CHRONICLE
You
can
go home again if you are a Supreme Court justice.
THURGOOD MARSHALL, the 83-year-old former Associate Justice, returned yesterday to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan, where he had served in the 1960's.
Along with Judge JON O. NEWMAN and Judge AMALYA L. KEARSE, Justice Marshall heard arguments in four cases.
He is expected to sit on the court again tomorrow, when a case involving the Rev.
AL SHARPTON is on the docket.
Why is the Justice serving on the appeals court?
He refused to say, and no one else seemed to know.
"I'm not sure I know how this happened," said Judge Newman, who welcomed Justice Marshall back "from extended service elsewhere." Justice Marshall served 24 years on the Supreme Court after his appointment in 1967.
He said that New York had gone "straight down the hill," but defended Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS with the observation that "every city is in trouble and nobody's got any answers yet."


Personal Health
THE side effects of chemotherapy have become a fact of life for millions of Americans as cancer researchers continue to demonstrate the life-saving potential of an ever-growing list of cell-killing drugs.
For many cancer patients who feel relatively well at the time their disease is discovered, the nausea and vomiting, hair loss, fatigue and other debilitating symptoms often associated with chemotherapy can make the treatment seem far worse than the disease, at least in cancer's early stages.
For some, the side effects of cancer-fighting drugs are so distressing that they abandon the therapy and, in doing so, often sacrifice their only chance for a lasting cure.


Women's Liberty, on the Line
"Has the Supreme Court overruled Roe v. Wade, holding that a woman's right to choose abortion is a fundamental right protected by the United States Constitution?" Abortion rights advocates put that question to the Court in seeking review of Pennsylvania's anti-abortion laws.
In granting review yesterday, the justices rephrased the question in less dramatic terms, but the liberty of women is on the line just the same.
The Court has agreed to consider whether states may force a woman, on pain of prosecution for lying, to sign a statement that she has notified her husband of her decision to seek an abortion.
And whether states may require doctors to issue discouraging warnings to women considering abortion, force them to undergo special waiting periods and require minors to obtain a parent's consent or a court order before terminating a pregnancy.


Wisconsin District to Assign Pupils On Basis of Income to Disperse Poor
Amid much debate, the La Crosse school district next fall will become the first in the nation to use family income as the criterion for assigning elementary students to schools.
The plan is designed to break up a large concentration of poor students in just two of the district's nine elementary schools.
By dispersing both poor and affluent students more evenly, administrators said they hoped to address several issues, including reducing the stress of teachers who work primarily with the poor, enhancing the education of poor children and exposing all students to a greater cross section of classmates.


Market Place; Bulls vs. Bears: The Super Bowl
CAN the Super Bowl forecast the stock market?
Can the stock market forecast the Super Bowl?
Anyone who seriously thinks the answer to either question might be yes should probably find someone else to make investment decisions.
Nonetheless, the Super Bowl has become one of Wall Street's best known, if least respected, market indicators.


Real Estate; Girl Scouts Come to Aid Of Developer
BEATEN UP and scarred, in the words of its own consultant, the Hammerson Property Investment and Development Corporation was on the verge of quitting New York City when it was rescued by the Girl Scouts.
On Dec. 31, the Girl Scouts of the U.S.A. paid $24 million for a 171,000-square-foot office condominium and a 3,800-square-foot retail condominium in Hammerson's 420 Fifth Avenue tower, between 37th and 38th Streets.
This is to become the national headquarters of the Girl Scouts by July.


Here's a Way To Fight Japan
The Congress will soon be asked to cut taxes to combat the recession.
Cuts for the middle class would be fair and might encourage more consumer spending.
But the economy needs more than a quick fix -- an extra $300 in every middle class family's bank account.
It needs a large-scale, aggressive, long-term Government-business partnership for growth.
People worry that the recession is not just another cyclical slide from which we will bounce back.
They fear, correctly, that unless America takes fundamental action, we will never improve our living standard.
We will keep slipping because of our social and economic weaknesses and the strengths of our European and Asian competitors.


Goalie Moves for Bruins
The Boston Bruins made two moves in two days to strengthen their stability in goal.
They signed ANDY MOOG to a new three-year contract yesterday after a year of negotiations.
Financial terms were not released.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
Some of the most remarkable comments on life as it is lived in New York, I have found, can be tuned in on subway station elevators.
Consider the conversation overheard while ascending to the IRT line at the Park Place station one recent Monday morning.
My brain still not unclogged from the weekend, I heard a young man and woman sharing their experiences of chatty "morning" people.
It was obvious that, along with me, they dislike those who wake up with hearts and voices aflutter.
So I had to smile when the fellow said: "You know, I really
am
lucky. I'm terribly sullen in the morning and my wife is very sullen, too."


Broad Outline Described For a Milken Settlement
Michael R. Milken and other former officials of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. are negotiating a broad outline of a settlement of civil claims under which they would pay government and other claimants between $800 million and $900 million, people involved in the case said yesterday.
If successful, the negotiations would settle billions of dollars of claims filed against Mr.
Milken and his former colleagues by savings and loan regulatory agencies, by some states and by many institutional and individual investors.


Brooktree Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Review/Film; Spoofing the Horror Genre
Mike (Craig Peck), the main character in Rolfe Kanefsky's "There's Nothing Out There," which opens today at the Eighth Street Playhouse, has seen too many horror movies.
He's seen so many that he can barely go on a weekend trip to a remote house in a lonely wooded setting without getting very, very nervous.
Vacationing with three nubile young couples (among whom skinnydipping is the sport of choice), Mike complains constantly about the sheer "Friday the 13th"-ness of the whole enterprise.
"I have rented out every single horror film on videotape, and what we've just gone through is called a warning stage," he insists, when the group finds an abandoned car in the woods.


Ameritech reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Compaq And Silicon Cancel Pact
Less than a year after forming a strategic alliance, Compaq Computer and Silicon Graphics have parted ways.
The alliance was expected to speed Compaq's entry in the work stations market dominated by Sun Microsystems.
The Compag Computer Corporation and Silicon Graphics Inc. said today that they had stopped joint technology development, entered into a cross-license agreeement for previously exchanged technology and reached an agreement for Silicon reacquire Compaq's equity in Silicon.


HIGH COURT TAKES PENNSYLVANIA CASE ON ABORTION RIGHT
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether a Pennsylvania law that restricts access to abortion is constitutional, an action that virtually insures a ruling on the politically explosive abortion issue by early summer of this Presidential election year.
It is by no means certain that the Justices will use the case as a vehicle for overruling Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 decision that established a constitutional right to abortion.
That step is among several options available to the Court, whose support for Roe v.
Wade was already paper thin even before President Bush's two Supreme Court appointees replaced two of the Court's strongest supporters of abortion rights.
One More Worry for Bush
Leaders of abortion rights groups had sought an early ruling from the Court in the belief that the case could prove a political liability for Mr.
Bush.
The prospect of a decision this term does provide one more worrisome variable for the President's re-election campaign.  [ News analysis, page A17. ]
"The Court has helped us today by intensifying the threat and making the issue real for people," said Kate Michelman, director of the National Abortion Rights Action League.
"There's no question that abortion will be a major issue in the election."
Several Republican strategists agreed privately today that the case handed the Bush Administration a political problem.
One said a Supreme Court ruling cutting back on the right to abortion would insure a divisive fight at the Republican National Convention over the party platform, which now has a strong anti-abortion plank. 19th Anniversary of Ruling
Publicly, Republican advisers sought to minimize the impact of the case.
Abortion "is never going to be a decisive issue in a Presidential campaign," said Charles Black, a senior adviser to the Bush campaign.
The Court's action came on the eve of the 19th anniversary of the Roe v.
Wade decision, and events outside the Court underscored the ferocity of the emotions the decision still engenders.
More than 350 anti-abortion protesters were arrested in Washington today for trying to block patients' access to two downtown abortion clinics.
On Wednesday, the actual anniversary, abortion opponents will hold their annual march, and advocates of the right to choose abortion will hold a rally.
The Pennsylvania case presents a constitutional challenge to a state law that, while not prohibiting abortion, seeks to limit access to the procedure through a variety of regulations.
These include a 24-hour waiting period and a requirement that married women notify their husbands if they are planning to have an abortion.
The Court is likely to uphold some or all of the regulations, several of which are nearly identical to those the Court has struck down in other cases in the last decade.
The result of such a ruling would be to leave Roe v.
Wade substantially weakened, and would give states increased latitude to regulate abortions in ways that make the procedure difficult to obtain for women lacking in financial or emotional resources.
But the decision, which is expected by late June or early July, will not necessarily indicate how the Court would rule on a law that makes abortion a crime.
Legal challenges to abortion prohibitions recently enacted in Louisiana, Utah and the territory of Guam are now in the lower Federal courts, and will probably reach the Supreme Court within the next year.
Because the Pennsylvania case appeared likely to reach the Supreme Court first, it has been closely monitored by all sides in the abortion debate.
The state regulations, adopted in 1988 and 1989, were challenged by the American Civil Liberties Union and the Planned Parenthood Federation of America on behalf of several abortion clinics in the state.
Federal District Judge Daniel H. Huyett 3d, who was named to the bench by President Richard M. Nixon in 1970, declared the regulations unconstitutional in a 1990 opinion that was largely overturned last Oct. 21 by a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in Philadelphia.
The appellate court upheld most of the regulations, including an "informed consent" provision that requires doctors to wait 24 hours before performing abortions on women, to whom they must first provide information intended to discourage them from going through with the procedure.
Although the Supreme Court has twice struck down a similar regulation, the appellate court interpreted more recent High Court rulings, specifically the 1989 decision in a Missouri case, Webster v.
Reproductive Health Services, as a substantial retreat from the searching scrutiny to which the Court had previously subjected all abortion regulations.
In the Webster case, the Court upheld state regulations that included a ban on abortions in public hospitals.
But the appellate court struck down a provision of the Pennsylvania law requiring married women to notify their husbands of their decision to get an abortion.
Under the law, women who falsely certify that they have provided the required notice face a penalty of up to a year in jail.
The appeals court ruled that this provision was the type of "undue burden" on the right to abortion that the Webster decision indicated the Supreme Court would find unacceptable.
Even if the Third Circuit's interpretation of the Webster decision was correct, that decision may no longer reflect the Supreme Court's view.
The Webster ruling was a split decision in which four Justices -- Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Byron R. White, Antonin Scalia and Anthony M. Kennedy -- indicated they were prepared to overturn Roe v.
Wade.
Four others -- Justices William J. Brennan Jr., Thurgood Marshall, John Paul Stevens and Harry A. Blackmun -- indicated their strong continued support for Roe v.
Wade.
In the middle was Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who put forward her own analysis calling for abortion regulations to be scrutinized on a kind of sliding scale, depending on the degree of burden they placed on access to abortion.
Only those regulations creating an "undue burden" would be subject to the strictest constitutional scrutiny, requiring the state to justify them by demonstrating a "compelling state interest."  New Faces on the Court
In its decision last October the Third Circuit declared that Justice O'Connor's analysis was "the law of the land." Since the Webster decision, however, Justices Brennan and Marshall have retired and the balance may well have shifted.
Neither of their replacements, Justices David H. Souter and Clarence Thomas, has yet voted in an abortion case.
The vote of either could determine the outcome in this case.
Both sides in the case sought a quick Supreme Court review of the Third Circuit's decision.
There was little doubt that the Court would agree to hear the case; the only question was whether they would do so on a schedule that permitted a decision before the Presidential election next November.
That result is highly likely.
The case will be argued in April.
Only in the event that the Court reaches a deadlock and needs to hear further argument next fall would the Justices not decide the case by the time the current term ends in late June or early July.
Lawyers for the abortion rights groups who appealed the Pennsylvania case to the Supreme Court have sought to use the case as ammunition in a wider political war.
Expecting to lose in the Court in any event, the abortion rights groups want to use a defeat to mobilize public support for passage of Federal legislation that would guarantee the right to abortion and prohibit the states from imposing restrictions.
Hundreds Cross Police Lines
The Supreme Court's announcement that it would hear the Pennsylvania case came as hundreds of chanting, hymn-singing anti-abortion demonstrators were arrested after crossing police barriers that cordoned off the entrances to the Washington Surgi-Clinic and the nearby Capitol Women's Center in downtown Washington.
At each clinic, hundreds of abortion rights advocates linked arms in a counterprotest, forming a human chain to prevent anti-abortion demonstrators from approaching the building.
Randall A. Terry, who led the Operation Rescue blockades in Wichita, Kan., last summer, said in a telephone interview that he was pleased with today's results.
"We were able to close down the abortion facilities for several hours," he said, "and hopefully, we saved some childrens' lives."
Leaders of the Washington Area Clinic Defense Task Force, which organized the counterprotest, also declared their actions successful.
"As far as I know, no patients were turned away," said Gina Roccanova, a spokeswoman for the the group.


3 Students Are Stabbed In Brooklyn
Three students were stabbed yesterday outside their Brooklyn high school, leaving one of them in critical condition, the police said.
The stabbings occurred as students were leaving Thomas Jefferson High School in the East New York section about 2:35 yesterday afternoon.
A "large group, not a gang," comprising "a couple dozen" youths who did not attend the school, had gathered near the main entrance at 400 Pennsylvania Avenue, said Lieut.
Kevin Perham, commander of the 75th Precinct Detective Squad.


Review/Television; About Canada, 5 Programs' Worth
Given the standard American attitude toward Canada, something between indifference and unconsciousness, it is an act of daring for "Firing Line" to devote five programs to the country.
The first two offerings of "Canada on the Firing Line" -- one on the environment and one on the condition of women -- have already demonstrated their relevance to concerns south of the Canadian border.
And tonight, at 10 on Channel 31, and Saturday at 10 A.M. on Channel 13, William F. Buckley Jr., conservative, takes on Bob Rae, the socialist Premier of Ontario, in an amiable debate.
Pressed by Mr.
Buckley to explain how the Canadian version of socialism differs from other brands, Mr.
Rae emphasizes what he calls communitarian values and a commitment to democracy.
Mr.
Buckley, in a twitting mood, observes that the explanation seems like "more Raeism than socialism."


SPENDING CUTBACKS OUTLINED BY CUOMO TO BALANCE BUDGET
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, rebuffed in bids to forge a long-term solution to New York State's chronic fiscal ills, presented the Legislature today with a more traditional approach that would pare spending on nearly all local-aid and state programs in his 1992-93 state budget.
He pleaded with lawmakers to pass the budget by April 1, the statutory deadline that he and they have failed to meet in each of the last seven years.


A Drama That Will Rival the Ring When Tyson Faces His Accuser
No fighter since the days of Muhammad Ali has been dissected and inspected quite the way Mike Tyson has.
At age 25 he has been one of those public figures who fascinate the masses and command constant attention.
While some of that has had to do with the primal aggression Tyson showed in becoming the youngest heavyweight champion ever, as much curiosity has focused on Tyson's personal life and problems outside the ring.
There, as his own worst enemy, Tyson has sometimes seemed on the verge of short-circuiting that glorious career as a fighter.


Cuomo Budget Cuts May Open New Gaps for Municipalities
New York City officials said today that the cuts Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed in his budget would create a city budget shortfall of between $100 million and $120 million in 1992, costing the city hundreds of millions of dollars in aid to schools, health care and other social services over the next two years.
The city has already closed a $210 million gap in the fiscal 1992 budget of $29 billion.
For the 1993 fiscal year, which begins this July, the state cuts would increase the city's budget gap, already estimated at $1.6 billion, by between $300 million and $350 million, city officials said.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 17
Jan. 10
Jan. 18
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.1
6.5
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.9
2.8
Gasoline stocks
228.5
224.6
217.7
Distillate stocks
139.7
142.1
119.0
Crude imports, daily
5.8
6.7
4.9
Product imports, daily
1.5
1.3
1.3
Crude stocks
333.0
334.8
321.3
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
85.0
86.4
81.6
Source: American Petroleum Institute


I.R.S. Drops LYON Case
The Internal Revenue Service has abandoned its effort to block companies from using the tax advantages of a popular financing tool, zero-coupon convertible bonds, which companies have used to raise more than $11.5 billion in capital.
The I.R.S. challenge to the tax status of the securities, most commonly known as liquid-yield option notes, or LYON's, became public in late November when Tate &amp; Lyle P.L.C. filed an appeal in the Tax Court.
The I.R.S. claimed that because companies might never pay the interest on such notes in cash, they could not deduct the interest expense from taxes until it was actually paid.


No Time to Be Stingy With Russia
Western Foreign Ministers gathering today in Washington need to concentrate on one urgent task: arranging a substantial transfusion of aid to Russia and a beleaguered Boris Yeltsin.
Europeans, especially Germany, have been quick to act.
The U.S. by contrast has been slow and stingy, in part because foreign aid is politically unpopular.
But without more aid, Russia could slip back into autocracy.


Alcan Aluminium Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jews and Saudis Hold First Talks in Saudi Arabia
Leaders of an American Jewish group held talks yesterday with the Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia in Riyadh in what was apparently the first such meeting ever on Saudi soil.
Seven executives of the group, the American Jewish Congress, spent nearly an hour with the Foreign Minister, Prince Saud, during which they discussed the stalled Middle East peace talks, which are to resume in Moscow at the end of this month.


Sports of The Times; Old Vikings Remember The 4 Losses
THERE is a school of thought that the Giants won their two Super Bowls and the Jets won their only Super Bowl out of a cynical insight into the unforgiving and unforgetting mind of New York football fans, who boo the first time their team goes third-and-long.
The Giants and the Jets did not dare lose.
By the same token, the polite stoicism of the Upper Midwest, where people understand they will pay for a few days of sunshine with a month of harsh weather, helped people deal with the Vikings losing all four of their Super Bowls.


Ruling Favors Taxes In Indian Properties
New York State won a victory in the Supreme Court today in its long-running effort to collect taxes on cigarettes and other goods sold on Indian reservations to non-Indian customers.
In a unanimous order, the Justices set aside a state appellate court decision invalidating a state plan to collect cigarette taxes from the non-Indian wholesalers who provide cigarettes to the Indian retailers.
While the state court could reinstate its ruling after the reconsideration that the Justices ordered today, that result is unlikely.


INSIDE
Reversal for Japanese Pact
Prodded by American resentment, Los Angeles County is on the verge of canceling a $122 million contract with a Japanese rail-car maker.
Page A10.
Action: Gotti on Trial
On the first day of his racketeering trial in Brooklyn, John Gotti, the reputed crime family boss, drew fans and the theatrics of movies.
Page B1.


A Beguiling Master of Food, Wine and Words
The first thing A. J. Liebling did on arriving in Paris in 1939 was to have lunch.
"A wartime lunch," he reported dismissively, "just marennes, Pouilly-Fuisse, caille vendangeuse, and Grands-Echezeaux."
Oysters, quail and two Burgundies; not a bad way to get started on a war.


Pet Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Soviet Myths Die Hard: Bolsheviks Didn't Overthrow the Czar; Stalin's Leninism
To the Editor:
Mary Ann Curtis decries your "rhetoric about the failure of Soviet socialism" and asks: "How about facts?" ("Wait Until the Soviet People Have Spoken," letter, Jan. 8).
She then reels off a series of historical fictions.
She writes: "The 1917 Bolshevik revolution that threw off the Czar . . . was a necessary revolt of workers and peasants led by women in bread lines." Ms.
Curtis is badly confused.


Books of The Times; A Personal Approach To Cold War History
The Cruel Peace  Everyday Life in the Cold War  By Fred Inglis  492 pages.
Illustrated.
Basic Books. $28.


Paine Webber Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Attica Judge to Trim Vacation
The judge in the Attica trial yesterday bowed to the wishes of his judicial superior and agreed to cut short his Caribbean vacation to preside over jury deliberations in Buffalo.
The judge, John T. Elfvin, had said last Wednesday before flying to Barbados that the nine-member jury could deliver its verdicts to a magistrate presiding in his absence.
But yesterday he agreed to return to his Buffalo courtroom two and a half weeks early after several conversations with Michael A. Telesca, the Chief Judge for the Western District of New York, Judge Telesca said.


Incentives for Research On Drugs Are Debated
A proposal to limit Federal incentives for companies to develop drugs for people with rare disorders touched off intense debate today among patients and drug companies at a Congressional hearing.
Under the proposal, drug manufacturers would lose exclusive marketing rights they now hold under the Orphan Drug Act, once sales of the drugs surpassed $200 million.
Proponents of change said big drug companies were charging high prices and reaping unjustified profits for drugs they sold under provisions of a law intended to encourage development of drugs with little commercial value.
Defenders of the system set up under the law said that without it dozens of pharmaceutical breakthroughs would never have occurred and that the companies would be discouraged from conducting important research if the law were rewritten.


Howard To Leave Michigan For Pros
Desmond Howard ran his first predictable reverse yesterday.
After maneuvering through weeks of questions as if he were running through a punt-coverage team, Howard, the Heisman Award winner from the University of Michigan, said he would give up his one remaining year of eligibility to enter the National Football League draft.


Teacher Going on Trial Again in Love-Triangle Murder
The love-triangle murder trial that turned the image of the quiet, colorless suburbs on its ear with tales of infidelity, conspiracy, romantic obsession and the shadowy world of private detectives is about to start all over again.
Carolyn Warmus, a 28-year-old Westchester teacher, is being retried on charges of killing her former lover's wife.
Her first trial ended in April in a hung jury, and jurors said later that they were deadlocked 8 to 4 in favor of conviction.


McKesson Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Worry for Bush; Possibility of Supreme Court Decision On Abortion Poses Campaign Risk
The Supreme Court's action today on abortion activates an extraordinarily divisive issue in the 1992 Presidential election and becomes one more worrisome variable for President Bush's re-election campaign.
Since the Supreme Court began restricting abortion rights, most notably in 1989, Democrats have grown increasingly convinced that their support for the constitutional right to choose abortion is a major political plus.


Behind Deadly Rush at City College
It was a ghastly scene on the stairwell.
People crying out, gasping for air and fainting, a fearful sense of being under water, arms pinned and fighting for life.
Three weeks after nine young people were crushed to death by the crowd at a heavily promoted basketball game featuring rap stars and other celebrities, the Dinkins administration has faulted the police, medical and security personnel, college officials, a rap promoter and spectators.
But it has not determined what caused the deadly surge in a stairwell at Nat Holman Gymnasium.


Essef Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Music; Melodies of Jerome Kern
As the production of new Broadway musicals slows to a trickle, increasingly the only way to enjoy the musical theater is by rummaging through its past.
That is exactly what the 92d Street Y's Lyrics and Lyricists series has been doing ever since it exhausted the supply of eminent living songwriters willing to talk about their work.
Since 1988, the series, which is written and directed by Maurice Levine, has devoted a season each to the careers of Irving Berlin, the Gershwins, Cole Porter and Richard Rodgers.
This year, the series, which opened its 22d season on Sunday, is devoting all five of its programs to Jerome Kern.
After Rodgers, Kern, who died in 1945 at the age of 60, may well be the most consistent melodist to have written for the stage during Broadway's golden age.
Appropriately, Sunday evening's program opened with Ann Hampton Callaway's glowing interpretation of "All the Things You Are," a composition that Arthur Schwartz once pronounced to be "the perfect song."


Dow Chemical To Report a Loss
The Dow Chemical Company said it would report a loss for the fourth quarter of 1991 because of a $370 million pretax charge against earnings, related to plant closings.
Enrique C. Falla, Dow's chief financial officer, said earnings from continuing operations in the quarter would exceed 35 cents a share, as many analysts have predicted.
The results will be announced Jan. 30.


From Cruel to Cool, Singer Recalls Roots of Hate
THERE is a snapshot of the singer Garland Jeffreys that grabs you like a summer afternoon and won't let go.
He is 4 or 5 years old and going to his first baseball game.
Behind him is the late, great Ebbets Field.
He wears a Dodgers uniform, high black shoes, a Jackie Robinson button.
His open face holds no secrets.
"This kid's ready," said the man the boy became.
"He's not afraid."


Stocks Rise in Japan
Stock prices surged in Tokyo today after four days of losses, with a rally heating up in the afternoon.
The Nikkei index of 225 shares finished up 675.82 points, or 3.24 percent, to end the trading session at 21,534.12.
The Nikkei lost 55.52 points on Tuesday.


Saudis Say They'll Trim Oil Output
Yielding to increasing pressure from other OPEC members, Saudi Arabia said today that it would cut oil production by about 100,000 barrels a day.
The reduction by Saudi Arabia, the world's largest exporter of crude, amounts to a modest 1.2 percent of its daily output, but some analysts said that in coming months, in cooperation with other members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, the Saudis could make further cuts.


Art Gallery At Yale Gets
The Yale University Art Gallery has received $10 million from Teresa Heinz in memory of her husband, Senator John Heinz 3d of Pennsylvania.
It is the largest gift in the gallery's 160-year history.
Senator Heinz graduated from Yale College in 1960 and was a member of the gallery's governing board before his death last April in a plane crash.
His father, Henry J. Heinz 2d, a member of the Class of 1931 and longtime chairman of the H. J. Heinz Corporation, permanently endowed the directorship of the gallery in 1982.


In Russia, Long Lines for Plentiful Bread
Few bread stores anywhere are as well-equipped as the Australia Shop on Piatnitskaya Street in downtown Moscow.
Automated equipment, a recent gift from Australia, mixes dough and bakes bread 18 hours a day, and as fresh loaves come out of the stainless-steel ovens, they are stacked in wire-mesh trays, waiting to be sold.
But despite this abundance, anxious customers form a line half a block long outside the shop.
Lines like these, televised abroad, give the impression of a bread shortage in Moscow, an impression that by all accounts is erroneous.
Bread sales have risen to record levels in recent months, as people substitute bread for meat, cheese, milk and eggs, all of which have grown much too expensive for many consumers.


Fannie Mae Payment
The Federal National Mortgage Association said today that its former chairman, David Maxwell, had relinquished his right to a final retirement payment of $5.5 million.


U.S. Agents Say Libya Is Adding And Hiding Chemical Weapons
Libya is expanding its chemical weapons program, and is dispersing chemical stockpiles to avoid detection, United States intelligence officials say.
After the indictments last November by the United States and Britain of two Libyan agents for the bombing of Pan American flight 103 over Scotland in 1988, the Government of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi has trucked large quantities of chemicals from its chemical weapons complex at Rabta to isolated sites throughout the country.


Exabyte Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


I.B.M. Introduces Low-End Work Station
I.B.M. introduced its least expensive work station and other new products yesterday in an effort to move more aggressively into the rapidly growing market for network computing systems for scientific and commercial users.
With its new Powerstation 220 machine, the world's largest computer maker is playing catch-up at the low end of the work station market, analysts said.
The low-cost, single-chip version of the RS/6000 work station family had been delayed for technical reasons and is still more expensive than similar machines from Sun Microsystems, Digital Equipment and Hewlett-Packard.
Indeed, a black-and-white version of the machine without a disk drive is priced starting at $6,345.
Similar low-end machines from Sun, Digital and Hewlett-Packard cost less than $5,000.


Executive Stock Rule Considered
The group that makes most of the nation's accounting rules is about to revive a long-dormant project that would require companies to deduct from their income the cost of granting stock options to their top executives.
The group, the Financial Accounting Standards Board, seems eager to correct a situation that has allowed corporations to play down their executive pay and to protect their earnings.
With the issue of executive compensation heating up nationally, the board apparently feels it can no longer afford to ignore the situation.
That is especially so now that the Securities and Exchange Commission, which oversees the board, has shown an increasingly keen interest in improving financial reporting.
A Possible Showdown
But at the same time, the group is aware it is hurtling toward a big showdown with the executives whose companies are among its biggest financial backers.


Soviet Myths Die Hard: Bolsheviks Didn't Overthrow the Czar
To the Editor:
Just when the Russian people themselves have at last seen through the false claims of Bolshevism, have removed the portraits and statues of Lenin, and have restored St.
Petersburg to its historic name, up pops Mary Ann Curtis to repeat some Soviet myths as facts ("Wait Until the Soviet People Have Spoken," letter, Jan. 8).
Let us in the first place address Ms.
Curtis's first so-called fact: that the Bolshevik revolution of 1917 threw off the Czar.


Northern Telecom Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Rap; Big Biceps, Bare Chest, No Blushing
Marky Mark, leading an outfit called the Funky Bunch, kept his pants on at the Ritz on Friday night, but barely.
A soft-core rapper and brother of Donnie Wahlberg of New Kids on the Block, Marky Mark has all the requisites for being a teen-age idol: a handsome face, bulging biceps and a shameless attitude.
Bare-chested, wearing baggy boxer shorts over briefs, he strutted back and forth across the stage while the almost exclusively female teen-age audience threw flowers, stuffed animals and condoms at him.
He was a rapping Atlas, a few steps shy of a Chippendales dancer.
He was an R-rated New Kid.
In between his preening and mugging, he performed most of the songs from his debut album, "Music for the People," on Interscope Records (the label responsible for another rapping pectoral wonder, Gerardo).
Marky Mark is not a bad rapper, and he is less obnoxiously egomaniacal than Vanilla Ice.
"Good Vibrations," the album's first and biggest single, is a catchy, melodic blend of house-style keyboards with Marky Mark's dry faux-Bronx accented vocals; "Wildside" is a well-intentioned remake of Lou Reed's 1973 hit "Walk on the Wild Side," updated to include crack addicts and gangland victims.


2d Suspect Arrested In Teacher Shooting
A man wanted in connection with the shooting of New York City schoolteacher left critically wounded when her car was caught in the midst of a gun battle in the Bronx was arrested by the San Diego police on Jan. 18 and brought back to New York City last night, a New York City police spokesman said.
The teacher, Audrey Chassen, was shot on Jan. 9 and remains hospitalized in critical condition.


Saatchi Advertising Tightens Command
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide, New York, is tightening its chain of command, almost six months after an elaborate restructuring left some doubts as to who was in charge.
Saatchi announced yesterday that Richard Humphreys, who had been appointed president in August, would be leaving the agency.
Mr.
Humphreys had also been serving in a four-person office of the chief executive, which is being disbanded upon his departure.


Supreme Court in Trenton Considers Death Sentence
The New Jersey Supreme Court, which has upheld the death sentence given Robert O. Marshall for ordering his wife's murder, began deliberating today over whether carrying it out would be fair.
Under state law, each death sentence must be compared with the sentences in other similar cases to make sure a defendant is not executed for a crime that is usually punished with a prison sentence.


Elderly Can Get Help With Their Utility Bills
To the Editor:
"The Difference a Few Blocks Can Make" (Metropolitan News, Jan. 6) accurately points out that in New York City people are often reluctant to go to a different neighborhood even to apply for a helpful benefit such as the Home Energy Assistance Program.
However, the real problem is that low-income people who need this grant to pay for their fuel and utility bills will be deprived of it because the Federal Government has allocated less money for HEAP, made the eligibility requirements tougher, and thus gives less money to fewer people.
The Department for the Aging is making it simple for the needy elderly to apply.
Recognizing that applying in person may be especially difficult, the department does not require them to do that.
New Yorkers age 60 and older may mail their applications to the department; they may also pick up an application at many neighborhood senior centers or call the department at 212-577-0276.


No Barcelona Hotel Crush
After months of talk about a severe housing shortage for the 1992 Summer Olympics, it now appears there could be a housing surplus as organizers here have canceled 400 first-class hotel reservations, many of which were set aside for use by corporate sponsors.
Pedro Fontana, director eneral of the Barcelona Olympic Organizing Committee, blamed high prices and a worldwide recession for the cancellations.
Fontana said further cuts in room reservations may be forthcoming if sponsors continue to scale back their Olympic plans.


Some Neighborhood Haunts Go Back 120 Years, Some Only 40
THEY are harbors of serenity in the feverish metropolis.
You won't find them in the trend-tracking urban magazines, nor will their chefs be lionized in lists of up-and-coming stars.
And the chances of spotting Warren Beatty or Michelle Pfeiffer chewing the fat at the bar are about equal to encountering Saddam Hussein on the IRT.
These are the original neighborhood haunts.
They are steady, family- owned, economical pub-style restaurants.
The clientele is so loyal that if someone does not show up at the appointed hour, the owner calls to see if anything is wrong.


47th St. Photo in Bankruptcy
Embroiled in legal squabbles, the chain, which epitomizes the feisty world of electronics retailing, filed for bankruptcy protection.
Page D1.


Washington Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Richfood Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 4


In Letter, Khrushchev Tells Of Mockery Over Cuba Crisis
Among the most embarrassing aspects of the conclusion of the 1962 missile crisis for Nikita S. Khrushchev was the mockery it exposed him to from China and other Communist countries, according to a document made public today.
In a rambling letter dated Jan. 31, 1963, to Fidel Castro explaining why he had backed down in the face of United States pressure and withdrawn nuclear missiles from Cuba, the Soviet leader complained of "representatives of some Socialist states" who were "distorting," and "criticizing" his actions.


Critic's Notebook; Making a Movie Take the Rap For the Violence That It Attracts
The type of individual who would brandish a semi-automatic weapon at a movie theater where Ernest Dickerson's "Juice" is playing (as someone did in Commack, L.I., the other evening) is the best argument for the reasonableness of what Mr.
Dickerson has to say.
His film addresses the peer pressures at work on a group of Harlem high school students, one of whom eventually develops a taste for murderous mayhem and viciously attacks his friends.
The irrational bravado and macho posturing displayed by Bishop (Tupac Shakur), the film's bad-boy character, are undoubtedly shared by those gun-toting, knife-wielding moviegoers who have put "Juice" in the news.
In the wake of similar violent outbreaks surrounding the openings of Mario Van Peebles's "New Jack City" and John Singleton's "Boyz N the Hood," it's not surprising to find this happening again.
All these films address the frustration faced by young urban black men, and all have become lightning rods for that frustration.
So bad news is being delivered, both in the lobby and on the screen.


1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Bush Urges Head Start Increase, And Debate on Its Impact Follows
President Bush flew to Baltimore today to announce his proposal for a vast increase in Federal spending for Head Start, the program for preschool children from low-income families.
The President's trip was largely intended to help right his listing re-election campaign after a string of ill-fated appearances.
But his announcement quickly became caught up in differences between the Administration and outside experts over whether, as the White House repeatedly asserted today, the increase would insure that the widely praised program is available to every 4-year-old eligible for it.


A Drama That Will Rival the Ring When Tyson Faces His Accuser
No fighter since the days of Muhammad Ali has been dissected and inspected quite the way Mike Tyson has.
At age 25 he has been one of those public figures who fascinate the masses and command constant attention.
While some of that has had to do with the primal aggression Tyson showed in becoming the youngest heavyweight champion ever, as much curiosity has focused on Tyson's personal life and problems outside the ring.
There, as his own worst enemy, Tyson has sometimes seemed on the verge of short-circuiting that glorious career as a fighter.


Georgia Redistrict Plan Rejected; Black-White Battle Seen as Likely
The United States Justice Department today rejected as racially discriminatory a redistricting plan approved last year by the Georgia Legislature.
The move raised the possibility of a battle between black and white legislators over how to draft a new plan.
Today's decision was hailed by black legislators who had criticized the earlier plan, which redrew Congressional and state legislative districts to take account of the 1990 census.


Deluxe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Georgia Gulf reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Judge Wraps Jury in Secrecy and Bars a Lawyer as Gotti Trial Opens
Wrapping prospective jurors in extraordinary secrecy and security, the judge conducting John Gotti's latest trial yesterday began a process of picking people who will remain nameless, who will be hidden in a hotel and whose faces cannot even be drawn by sketch artists in the courtroom.
The judge, I. Leo Glasser, also disqualified the main lawyer for Mr.
Gotti's co-defendant, the fourth lawyer he has rejected from the defense team.
"That's the American flag there -- not a swastika!" the irate defendant, Frank Locascio, said, gesturing at the flag behind the judge's bench.


Quote of the Day
"Let's get everything out that is sealed anywhere." -- REPRESENTATIVE LOUIS STOKES, calling for the release of documents relating to President John F. Kennedy's assassination.  [ A14:4. ]


CHRONICLE
The switchboard at the offices of the National Abortion Rights Action League was deluged with calls yesterday from supporters of abortion rights who wanted reservations for the organzation's fund-raising dinner, to be held tonight in Washington.
KATE MICHELMAN, executive director of the organization, said she did not know if she could accommodate everyone who asked at the last minute to attend the event in the Mayflower Hotel.
"We already had 600 signed up, but so many people told us, 'I need to come, need to be there,' that I decided we will just put up extra chairs," she said.


Massachusetts Acts on Workers' Comp Fraud
To the Editor:
It was with great interest that I read your news articles regarding the terrible problem of workers' compensation fraud across the country (front page, Dec. 29; Business Day, Dec. 30).
On Dec. 23, 1991, I signed into law a reform of the Massachusetts workers' compensation system.
The elimination of fraud received the highest priority in the reform package.
The new Massachusetts legislation creates a privately operated and financed insurance fraud bureau that will conduct fraud surveillance and investigations.
The insurance fraud bureau is entirely financed through an assessment on all insurance companies writing workers' compensation business in Massachusetts and is overseen by the Massachusetts Division of Insurance, which has the authority to affect insurers' rates if the fraud bureau does not substantially reduce fraudulent workers' compensation costs.
The insurance fraud bureau is thereby free of the bureaucratic entanglements associated with a state-operated fraud unit, and has significant financial incentives for effective performance.


Benjamin Gilbert, 84, Private Investor, Dies
Benjamin Davis Gilbert, a private investor who was involved in widely divergent enterprises, died suddenly on Jan. 15 at his home in Darien, Conn.
He was 84 years old.
He died of circulatory problems in his sleep, his family said.


New San Jose Coach
RON TURNER, the offensive coordinator at Stanford for the last three seasons, has gone to San Jose State as the school's new head football coach.
The man he succeeded, TERRY SHEA, left San Jose to go to Stanford as an assistant to the new head coach, BILL WALSH.


Champion Jack Dupree, Jazz Pianist, 82
Champion Jack Dupree, a New Orleans-born jazz pianist whose barrelhouse style influenced rock musicians like Eric Clapton and John Mayall, died of cancer on Tuesday at his home in Hanover, Germany.
He was 82 years old and had lived in Hanover since 1975.
He had been living in Europe since 1958, said Karsten Jahnke, his agent.
He often performed in clubs in Britain, where Mr.
Clapton and other young musicians learned from his rollicking blues styling.


Accounts
*
M&amp;M/Mars division of Mars Inc., Hackettstown, N.J., to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, to advertise the new Milky Way II chocolate bar announced last week.
A campaign from the agency, which also handles other M&amp;M/Mars brands like Milky Way and Mars, will coincide with the candy's introduction into seven Western states in April.


Pittsburgh Mayor Seeks New Image: From Grandmother to Tough Leader
Mayor Sophie Masloff was in her elegantly appointed office talking to a reporter when her chief of staff stepped up to her desk and interrupted.
"Sophie," he said, "I popped a button off my jacket and I was looking for you to sew it on for me."
The aide, Joseph Sabino Mistick, was poking fun at the image of Pittsburgh's first female Mayor as a soft and nurturing grandmother.
It is an image she encouraged at first, often calling herself "an old Jewish grandmother" and saying she wanted to be known as Sophie to everyone in this city of 370,000 people, which has a large elderly population and about 80 ethnic neighborhoods.


Pacts for Outfielders
Outfielders DAVE MARTINEZ and BRADY ANDERSON, both of whom had filed for arbitration, reached agreement with their teams yesterday.
Martinez signed with the Cincinnati Reds for $1.3 million and Anderson with the Baltimore Orioles for $345,000.


Remember Red-Meat Orgies In the Cave? Your Taste Buds Do
Talk about nostalgia for old-fashioned food.
While some people nurse memories of grandma's cooking, the anthropologist Lionel Tiger's fixation is caveman food -- Upper Paleolithic caveman food that is, from 10,000 or so years ago, the dawn of civilization.
And like it or not, he says it's what we long for, too.
We are drawn to the campfire and tempted by the "newly traditional barbecue, with its particular primordial attention to the taste of smoke -- always surrounded by the magnetic aroma of charring fat," he insists in his new book, "The Pursuit of Pleasure" (Little Brown; $22.95).


Mattel in Venture
Mattell Inc. said it would jointly develop a line of activity toys with Nickelodeon, a cable television station that produces children's television programming.
Nickelodeon is part of Viacom International Inc.


Bank Fund, C.D. Yields Down Again
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit dropped for the week that ended yesterday, but the pace of the decline slowed, according to figures released yesterday by The Bank Rate Monitor, a publication that follows bank rates.
The explanation, however, does not give much solace to savers hoping for an end to the rate declines.
Robert K. Heady, The Monitor's publisher, explained: "The modest decline in savings yield for the most recent week was caused partly by the Monday bank holiday" observing the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Some institutions that normally change rates effective on Wednesday, he said, will cut them on Thursday of this week instead.


Ernest Pendrell Dead; TV Producer Was 78
Ernest Pendrell, a producer of television documentaries and a playwright in television's early years, died yesterday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of throat cancer, said his wife, Dorothy.


Our Man in Nirvana
In the first week of August 1974, when I was a speechwriter for President Richard Nixon, I walked into the office of the White House physician, next door to the White House.
As I asked for some allergy medicine, I noticed a surgical-steel tray laden with filled syringes, their needles dripping.
Next to them was a vial of a potent chlorpromazine tranquilizer.
I knew the corpsman who was loading the tray and I asked him what it was all about.
He said it was for someone "over there," jerking his thumb toward the White House.
He would not tell me who was getting shots of tranquilizers in those final days of the Administration.
He said only that it was "someone who needs to have his head clear, and won't."


A Man Who Wants Respect For Lintas New York's Work
WHAT agency created "The Magic of Macy's" campaign?
If enough people in the advertising community can guess correctly, then F. Stone Roberts will have less work to do in his new post as president of Lintas New York.
But Mr.
Roberts suspects that he has a substantial task before him to publicize his agency's skills.
"My first obvious priority is to raise the company's profile," said the agency's 47-year-old chief operating officer, who was given the additional title of president yesterday.
"I believe that our product is much better today than it is perceived."


Assembly Plant For Ford Exports
The Ford Motor Company said it planned to export to Europe 6,000 Explorer utility vehicles assembled at its plant here, beginning next year.
The No. 2 United States auto maker -- which said it had total export orders for a record 51,500 vehicles in 1991 -- said Explorers intended for sale in Europe would be modified to meet European Community standards at a plant in which it was investing more than $500,000.


General Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dr. Joseph G. Allen Is Dead at 79; Professor and an Expert on Blood
Dr.
Joseph Garrott Allen, an expert on blood who was a professor emeritus and a former chairman of the department of surgery at Stanford University's School of Medicine, died on Jan. 10 at his home on the Stanford campus.
He was 79 years old.
A statement at Stanford said he died of complications from pneumonmia.


Bausch &amp; Lomb reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


America-Bashing, Not All False
First came President Bush's clumsy, embarrassing effort to bully the Japanese into buying unwanted autos and parts.
Now Yoshio Sakurauchi, Speaker of Japan's lower house, gratuitously and falsely berates U.S. workers as lazy and illiterate.
As apologetic Japanese officials realize, these views could not have spewed out at a worse time, with overtones of trade war already audible in the Presidential campaign. 'Sneak Attack!' yesterday's New York Post shouted, voicing the offense many Americans are apt to feel.
Both countries have an urgent interest in halting such bilateral blame-mongering quickly.
And it is in Americans' particular interest to recognize why Speaker Sakurauchi's comments sting.
However coarse, they come close to some truth.


Citicorp and 2 Other Banks Post Losses as Loans Sour
The decline in the California real estate market has caught up with some of the state's largest banks, and yesterday Wells Fargo &amp; Company and the Security Pacific Corporation announced large fourth-quarter losses as a result.
And Citicorp, as expected, posted losses for the fourth quarter and the year.
Wells and Security Pacific had also said earlier that they expected losses in the quarter that were close to the shortfalls announced yesterday of $231 million at Wells and $409.2 million at Security Pacific.
They also warned that severe problems could continue as long as the state's economy remained weak.


Bills Say Their Loss Could Be Colts' Gain
Win or lose on Sunday, the Buffalo Bills players feel certain that they will lose their offensive coordinator, Ted Marchibroda, after the Super Bowl game against Washington.
Marchibroda is among the leading candidates to become the Indianapolis Colts' head coach.
Fullback Caldwell Gardner said that although the Bills were leery of the offensive masterminding by Coach Joe Gibbs of the Redskins, Marchibroda, with the Bills' no-huddle offense, could match Gibbs in ingenuity.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
United Technologies announced a series of plant closings and cutbacks that will eliminate 13,900 jobs by 1995.
The cuts represent 7 percent of its 193,000 workers worldwide.  [ Page A1. ]


Moscow Journal; Temple to Lenin Opens Its Doors to Freethinkers
The Institute for Marxism-Leninism, once the inner sanctum of scholarly privilege for Communist ideologues, has changed its slant along with its name.
It is now called the Russian Center for the Study of the Documents of Modern History, a careful title with no ism or ax to grind.


Galileo Electro-Optics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Champion International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Grand Forks Journal; History's About-Face Felt on Plains
For the last quarter of a century, this quiet farming and university town high in the Dakota plains stood sentry at the front gates of the cold war.
Just outside of town, spread over an area the size of New Jersey, underground silos storing 150 long-range nuclear missiles puncture the wheat, potato and sugar beet fields, their deadly tips pointed north toward the former Soviet Union.
No one needs reminding that in a nuclear war, Grand Forks would be a bull's-eye at the top of Moscow's hit list.


Maxtor Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


By Any Other Word, Tasker Is Special as Bills Look for an Edge
Steve Tasker sat in the stands of the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome this morning, unnoticed and undisturbed, balancing a newspaper crossword puzzle on his left knee.
The scant attention paid to special-teams players leading up to Super Bowl Sunday leaves plenty of time to ponder "37 Across: Troglodytes' homes."


Watts Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reynolds &amp; Reynolds Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Text of U.N. Resolution Asking Libya's Help
Following is the text of Security Council Resolution 731, approved unanimously today, which calls on Libya to turn over two of its citizens to face trial in one airliner bombing and to cooperate in the investigation of another:


Building Filled With Chemicals Explodes in New Jersey


Wang Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Raymond James Financial (NX) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


The Pop Life
Heavy Metal Founder
Satanism, debauchery, cruelty to animals and general bad manners: If the subject is heavy metal, many of these ingredients come from the English singer Ozzie Osborne.
Mr.
Osborne, who with his band Black Sabbath helped found heavy metal over 20 years, is coming to town for a concert on Friday night.
He's 43 years old.
His fans are mostly teen-agers, and they've been listening to second-, third- and fourth-generation Black Sabbath rip-offs for years.
The genesis of the flamboyant genre is surprisingly prosaic.
"Me and my mates were living in Birmingham and we were going to a rehearsal and we saw a horror film playing at a cinema and we figured out that people were willing to pay for being scared," Mr.
Osborne said in an interview.
"At the time, 1969, we were four working-class guys in a polluted, gray, dismal city. We didn't have any dough or any hope, so we decided that we'd do a kind of horror show with dark satanic images. Looking back, it was all bull. But in a way it wasn't a joke, it was the way of life: no money, generation after generation of factory workers with no education, where the thing to do was go to the pub every Friday night and then die."


Massachusetts Acts on Workers' Comp Control; Employers Gain Control
To the Editor:
Certainly the lack of ethics behind fraudulent workers' compensation claims is alarming ("Vast Amounts of Fraud Discovered in Workers' Compensation System," front page, Dec. 29).
However, since widespread reform of the workers' compensation system is unlikely in the short term, what must be addressed are ways that employers can gain a measure of control rather quickly.
Workers' compensation programs have historically been exempt from significant cost-containment measures, resulting in compensation claims that at times vastly exceed the cost of identical procedures that are submitted as health benefits claims.


SUPER BOWL XXVI: Sports of The Times; The Kick Norwood Just Can't Forget
SCOTT NORWOOD remembers it
feels
it -- more than anyone else, surely, his 47-yard field-goal attempt with four seconds to go in the Super Bowl last year, a kick that sailed wide right by about six feet, and resulted in the Giants beating Buffalo, 20-19.
In the locker room afterward, stunned and shocked and deeply disappointed, Norwood was talking with a crush of reporters when Ralph Wilson, the owner of the Bills, broke through and grabbed his hand.
"It wasn't you, Scott, remember, you didn't lose the game," said an insistent Wilson.
"We had a lot of chances to win it."


Eating Well
IS it panic time in the fish department?
Sort of.
Sales are off, say some owners, but not the way they have been with past scares about fish or seafood.
This drop in sales followed the release of a Consumers Union study that found chemical contamination in fish and a lot of spoiled fish in markets throughout the Chicago and New York City areas.


Monument to the Battle for Power in a Former Soviet Republic


Victim Had Gun in Parka, Expert Tells Teaneck Jury
The converted starter's pistol found in Phillip Pannell's parka pocket after he was fatally shot by a Teaneck police officer in April 1990 had been there for "some time," a retired state police chemist testified today.
The chemist, George W. Neighbor, told the chief prosecutor, Glenn D. Goldberg, that he was unable to establish in his tests on the parka and the pistol exactly how long the weapon had been in the pocket.
But in response to Mr.
Goldberg's questions, Mr.
Neighbor said: "At one time this gun had spent some time in that pocket."  Matching Fibers and Coat
His tests on the weapon, Mr.
Neighbor said, turned up red fibers matching those in the coat.
He said the fibers were lodged beneath the grips of the pistol.
In addition, he said, he found in the parka pocket flakes of nickle identical to the plating on the gun and particles of zinc that matched the zinc in the weapon's barrel and cyclinder.


A MOVE TO UNSEAL THE KENNEDY FILES
The chairman of a Congressional committee that investigated the assassination of President John F. Kennedy said today that he would ask Congress to order the release of all Government documents on the slaying.
He said such a move would serve to relieve public suspicions that the Government had been involved in a conspiracy to kill the President.
But the chairman, Representative Louis Stokes, an Ohio Democrat, said the release of intelligence agency files and other documents could strengthen evidence that organized crime figures were involved in the assassination.


60-Minute Gourmet
THE combination of chicken and rice has always seemed especially soothing to me.
Perhaps it is something inherent in the textures and flavors of the two ingredients, or, more likely, it is my memory at work, recreating happy meals of my youth.
In traditional French cuisine there are several recipes based on chicken and rice.
One is poularde au riz sauce supreme, in which a trussed chicken is cooked in a white stock and combined with cooked rice.
A supreme sauce is essentially a white roux combined with reduced chicken stock and cream.


Packing Cable With Programs
Cable television companies and their equipment suppliers are on the verge of installing new technology that will pack many more channels into cable networks, creating a potential programming revolution with implications for broadcasters, telephone companies and the consumer electronics industry.
Some cable programmers are getting ready to take advantage of the technique, known as digital compression.
Home Box Office began market tests last year in which it is offering three programs at once.
Currently, this requires transmission on three separate channels, but with compression, all three programs could be transmitted in the future over a single channel.
MTV, the music video channel, has also announced that it will offer three separate programs, specializing in different types of music, starting next year.


Feeding Frenzy


Shuffle of Economists: Dean Witter Lands One
At a time when the stock market is bubbly and the economy is flat, chief economists at some of the nation's biggest banks and brokerages have been involved in a giant job shuffle.
The latest job hopper is Joseph G. Carson, 39, who will be chief economist at the Dean Witter Financial Services Group, a unit of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.
Until recently Chemical Bank's top forecaster, Mr.
Carson lost that post to Irwin Kellner, his counterpart at Manufacturers Hanover, after the two banks merged.


Treasuries Move Up in Price Again
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher and interest rates fell again yesterday, as the recovery from the sharp selloff of the last two weeks continued.
"Underwriting all the corporate paper issued during the early part of January made Treasuries cheap," one government securities trader said, since dealers had to sell Treasury issues to cover positions in unsold corporate issues.


Public &amp; Private; The $64 Question
It's hard to imagine, looking over New Jersey's new welfare legislation, that the people who designed it sought information or help from those who will be most affected by it.
Have they talked to the people who have pumped themselves up with job training programs and then been blindsided by the reality of the job market?
Have they talked to the women on welfare who fear that if they go to work they will lose their children's health care coverage?
Have they talked to those who have stayed on public assistance rather than take minimum wage jobs because they had no place to put their kids while they worked?


A Stick-to-the-Ribs Meal With a Light Exotic Touch
IN cold weather, I always long for something hearty and earthy -- substantial stick-to-the-ribs fare.
This menu satisfies this yearning, with three robust dishes seasoned in an Oriental way.
I serve my bread and onion pancakes as a first course, although they would be equally good as a main course for brunch or breakfast, or as a light lunch with a salad.
They are simple, delicious and filling, as well as thrifty, since you make them with leftover bread.


Ready for Prime Time in Moscow
For the first time, tens of millions of Russian television viewers will spend a week watching "Murphy Brown," "Life Goes On" and an array of American prime-time programs and movies dubbed in their language.
Michael Jay Solomon, president of Warner Brothers International Television Distribution, said today that the company would announce the move with Russian television officials next Monday at the United Nations.


Fed to Relax a Bank Rule
The Federal Reserve said yesterday that it would phase out by June 30 the requirement that banks disclose in their financial statements the total amount of loans to highly indebted leveraged companies.
The 7-to-0 decision eliminates the definition of certain loans now called highly leveraged transactions, which banks issued in the 1980's.


Crash of French Jetliner Being Investigated


The Mentors Behind Monk
Crowds of reporters gathered around Art Monk.
The Washington Redskins' 35-year-old receiver spoke deliberately, not expansively, explaining that he didn't like the limelight, preferred to keep his thoughts to himself, but would go along with the hoopla of the Super Bowl.
In fact, the 12-year veteran knows more than he can tell and can't tell all he knows.


Fortis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


It's Time to Come Home, Now: Those Little Local Spots Are Back
ROLL out the red-checked tablecloths.
The little place around the corner is back.
The neighborhood restaurant that isn't too fancy, isn't too expensive and isn't too far away.
There has never been a shortage of these places in New York City.
In 1925, George S. Chappell noted in "The Restaurants of New York" that every side street "bristles with small restaurants, neighborhood places which care for their particular section." Their mellow, side-street glow is eclipsed by the dazzle along the avenues whenever cash flows freely in the city and big restaurants boom.
But when the glitz dims, the local joints remain.
Or, they are reinvented.


Vietnam Admits K.G.B. Interrogated American
The Government of Vietnam has confirmed that it allowed at least one American prisoner of war to be questioned by the K.G.B.
In a radio announcement in Hanoi on Monday and a statement today by Vietnam's United Nations Mission in New York, the Vietnamese said the interrogation took place in January 1973.


Scents of 60's Wafting Again (No, Not That One. Musk.)
FOR the last few years, the 1960's have been rediscovered, re-invented and regurgitated.
Miniskirts and false eyelashes, LSD and the Grateful Dead have all enjoyed revisionist status.
It seems the only unexplored territory of that overworked decade is its smells: musk oil, patchouli and sandalwood.
And guess what?
They too are back.
Twenty-five years ago, certain fragrances -- like rock and roll -- represented yet another gesture of rebellion.
Mothers wore Chanel No. 5, an artificial aldehyde scent; their sons and daughters wore patchouli essence, plucked almost directly from the plant.
Now, a new generation, too young to remember the decade, has nevertheless embraced those same scents, perhaps taking its cue from a few pop-culture icons.


Willamette Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


General Public Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prosecutors Describe Kremlin Coup Plot
The men who organized the unsuccessful hard-line coup in Moscow last August had counted on the prospect that Mikhail S. Gorbachev would eventually join their conspiracy to put the country back under authoritarian rule, Russian prosecutors said today.
But after a four-and-a-half-month investigation, Deputy Chief Prosecutor Yevgeny Lisov said at a news conference, there was no evidence that Mr.
Gorbachev had done anything to encourage the conspirators in this belief.


Stein Starts Mayoral Bid With a Bash
New York City's 1993 mayoral campaign began haltingly 15 months ago when Andrew J. Stein and, a few months later, Rudolph W. Giuliani all but declared their candidacies -- then just as abruptly dismissed their candor as premature and retreated from the starting line.
With the election only a year away, the campaign has begun again.
It looms as long, costly and acrimonious.


1992 CAMPAIGN: Almanac; Air Time


Eastex Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Theater in Review
Iron Lung  La Mama E.T.C. 74A East Fourth Street Manhattan Through Sunday  Written, directed and designed by John Jesurun; lighting, Jeff Nash; stage manager, Mathew Buckingham; technical director, Jim Coleman.
Presented by La Mama E.T.C. and the Shatterhand Company.
WITH: Oscar De La Fe Colon, Rebecca Moore, Larry Tighe, Michael Tighe and Sanghi Wagner.


CHRONICLE
The National Arts Club will present its 93d annual Gold Medal of Honor tonight to CHRISTO, the Bulgarian- born artist, for his wrapping of the Pont Neuf in Paris in fabric and, later, several islands in Biscayne Bay in Florida.
His latest work, an installation of 1,760 huge yellow umbrellas in California and 1,340 umbrellas in Japan, was ended abruptly in October after a gust of wind uprooted an umbrella near Los Angeles and killed a spectator.
A worker dismantling the exhibit in Japan died when the crane he was operating touched a power line.


An Ad in Defense Of the Ad Deduction
Proposals to cut the Federal deficit by lowering the deductions on advertising as a business expense have not made much progress over the last five years.
But as President Bush's State of the Union address nears, the American Advertising Federation is not taking any chances.
In a pre-emptive strike against such a measure's inclusion in this year's budget package, the group has created an ad in the form of a letter to the President.
It describes advertising as an "engine of economic growth" and goes on to say: "Like you, Mr. President, we want to help get America's economy started again. Incentives to advertise are incentives for growth."


Libya Unyielding Despite U.N. Demand
The Security Council voted unanimously today to demand that Libya turn over for trial the agents accused of blowing up two civilian passenger aircraft and killing 440 people, but Libya indicated no willingness to comply.
The Council's resolution in effect tells Libya to cooperate with the investigation that Britain, France and the United States are conducting into the two bombings by surrendering two Libyans indicted for these acts.
Pan Am flight 103 was blown up over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988 and U.T.A. flight 772 over Niger, in Africa, a year later. 'Satisfaction' Among Families


Who Should Liberate Iraq?
Should America encourage Iraqis to overthrow Saddam Hussein?
Yes.
Should it advertise that any new Iraqi government could expect an early easing of the international economic embargo and generous reconstruction aid?
Yes again.
But should the U.S. commit itself in advance to give armed support to any group that challenges the Iraqi dictator, as Saudi Arabia now urges?
Under present circumstances, the best answer is no.
The world has every right to hold Saddam Hussein accountable to international law.
But replacing even the most obnoxious regimes, provided their cruelties are confined to their own territories, is best left to the people directly concerned.


Picturetel Deal Set With A.T. &amp;T.
The Picturetel Corporation said that the American Telephone and Telegraph Company had agreed to resell Picturetel's videoconferencing systems.
Videoconferencing systems, using television cameras and monitors, allow employees of several companies to hold meetings from their offices, with the video signals transmitted over telephone lines.


Food Notes
Super Bowl Tasting Menu
A typical menu for television viewers of the big game between Washington and Buffalo on Sunday consists of beer, chips and sandwiches.
Will anyone prepare pan-crisped lobster and semolina cakes with caviar and mascarpone?
Or Asian tuna tartare with cracker spears?
Or stuffed shrimp with oven-roasted tomato sauce?


Bridge
If one conducted a survey of bridge teachers around the world and asked them to estimate how many people have taken their lessons, a safe prediction is that the estimate by Bill Root of Boca Raton, Fla., would be far greater than any other, perhaps double the next number.
He is well into his fourth decade of teaching large groups, often 100 students or more, although he has abandoned his native New York and now confines himself to teaching in Florida.
For those who cannot attend his classes but would like the benefit of the bridge wisdom that has brought Root many national titles, the next-best thing is to hear him on videotape.
For three lessons on a two-hour tape, covering important topics like squeezes and throw-in plays, send $39.95 to Root-Hahn, P.O.
Box 7205, Heights Station, Concord, N.H. 03301.


Clarcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


David Distributing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Dow Loses 30.64 as Nasdaq Loses Track
Stock prices pulled back yesterday for the second day in a row, with investors apparently sounding a note of caution after a giddy ride in recent weeks.
Also weighing on the market was a computer problem that prevented the main Nasdaq indexes from being calculated for most of the day.
Traders knew there was weakness in smaller stocks -- it was determined late in the day that the Nasdaq composite dropped a hefty 14.51 points, or 2.3 percent, to 604.87 -- but the uncertainty was compounded by the absence of firm numbers.
Analysts said this added to the drop in other indexes, with the Dow Jones industrial average losing 30.64, or nearly 1 percent, to 3,223.39.
Trades Were Still Executed
A software problem that developed around 10:30 A.M. prevented the Nasdaq from calculating and posting changes on the composite, industrial and 100-stock indexes.


Economy Likely To Revive Soon, Congress Is Told
At the start of a Presidential election year in which the economy is a central issue, the Congressional Budget Office predicted today that the economy would begin a weak recovery by the middle of 1992 and warned lawmakers not to endanger the recovery by resorting to radical changes in economic policy before the November election.
In a report to Congress, the budget office said the recession was likely to end within six months.
But it offered no guidance as to whether Mr.
Bush and Congress would be able to withstand the mounting political pressure for steps to stimulate the economy.


Thieves Rob Police Officers In Queens
Two New York City police officers, one on duty, were robbed at gunpoint early yesterday morning in separate incidents by what the police believe was the same band of thieves in Queens.
In both cases, the suspects approached in the same stolen car and threatened the officers with the same silver gun, the police said.
One victim was an undercover officer wearing civilian clothes, while the uniform of the on-duty officer was hidden by his topcoat.


Optimism on Scott
St.
John's officials were more optimistic yesterday that SHAWNELLE SCOTT, the injured sophomore forward, would be able to play Saturday afternoon against Syracuse.
The team's trainer, RON LINFONTE, said that the strained tendon in Scott's right foot was responding to treatment and he listed Scott as a 50-50 possibility to play.
The availability of Scott, who was injured with 1 minute 30 seconds to go in the first half of the 75-60 loss to Seton Hall on Monday, is even more important with ROBERT WERDANN, the senior center, out for at least two more weeks with a sprained muscle in his right calf.


McEachern to Penguins
SHAWN McEACHERN, the leading scorer on Team USA, signed a multiyear contract yesterday with the Pittsburgh Penguins and will join them after the Winter Olympics next month.
McEachern, a left wing who played at Boston University for three seasons, was the Penguins' sixth-round draft choice in 1987.
He was a first-team all-American and the leading scorer on Boston University's team last season with 34 goals and 48 assists. (AP)


Saatchi Touch For a Cigarette
The Lorillard Inc. division of the Loews Corporation is introducing a brand, aimed at women, in the growing lower-priced segment of the cigarette market.
Style, as the 100-millimeter brand is called, is being advertised in a print campaign by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York, which also handles Lorillard's full-priced True brand.
The ads show a smiling woman next to a stylized, pastel-colored "S" and the words "super low priced."


Cuba Announces Crackdown On Dissident Organizations
The Cuban Government put dissidents on notice today that they faced an all-out security and political crackdown.
The warning came the day after the execution of a right-wing Cuban exile convicted of sabotage and terrorism.
A front-page editorial in the official Communist Party newspaper Granma defending the execution by firing squad of Eduardo Diaz Betancourt included a clear message to illegal dissident groups that they could expect no tolerance for their activities and no room for their opinions.


BMC Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


United Technologies To Cut 13,900 Jobs; Blow to Connecticut
The United Technologies Corporation, the largest private employer in Connecticut, announced a series of plant closings and cutbacks yesterday that would eliminate 13,900 jobs, including 6,412 in the state, by 1995.
The cuts represent 7 percent of the 193,000 workers employed worldwide by the sprawling company, whose businesses include Pratt &amp; Whitney jet engines and Otis elevators.
The largest job losses will be at the Pratt &amp; Whitney division, based in East Hartford, Conn., and are a result of declining military spending, company officials said.
But virtually all parts of the company will be affected.


Harris Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Douglas Aircraft Co., Long Beach, Calif., a division of McDonnell Douglas Corp., named Ronald L. O'Kelley vice president and chief financial officer. *
GE Capital, Stamford, Conn., the financial services unit of General Electric Co., promoted Stephen Berger to executive vice president from president of its unit, Financial Guaranty Insurance Corp.
He will be succeeded by Ann C. Stern.


14 on Council Propose Removing Review Board From Police Dept.
Guaranteeing attention for an old, sensitive issue, 14 New York City Council members, most of them newly elected, declared support yesterday for legislation to make the Civilian Complaint Review Board independent of the Police Department.
The board, which investigates most complaints by civilians against police officers, has six civilians appointed by the Mayor and six civilian employees of the Police Department appointed by the Police Commissioner.
The proposal calls for eight members appointed by the Mayor, four by the City Council President and four by the Comptroller.
No Police Department employee could be on the board; former employees could be appointed.


There! On Your Sweater! It's a Gas Station!
HARVEY M. KAPLAN may be designing the world's first preservation propaganda jewelry.
Two years ago, the Troy, N.Y., architect gave up his job with the New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation.
"I got sick of being a bureaucrat," he said.
"I was sitting at a desk reviewing plans and wishing I was a designer again."


Beyond Volunteerism
To the Editor:
In your front-page news article of Jan. 6, you correctly laud the efforts of increasing numbers of American volunteers.
But the article misses a beat: lasting solutions to our country's problems can only be found through actions that combine service provision with advocacy efforts.
Advocacy means influencing the way society understands an issue, and affecting how our public and private institutions -- schools, corporations or the government -- respond to it.


Computer Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Miscellany
*
Bozell France, Paris, has acquired Marketing Art Division, a Paris agency that primarily creates advertising for luxury goods.
Eric Allovche, who founded Marketing Art in 1985, will become a creative director at Bozell France. *
Greenstone Roberts Advertising Florida, a unit of Greenstone Roberts Advertising Inc., Melville, L.I., has acquired the assets of Sandhaus International, Orlando, an agency that specializes in travel advertising.
Sandhaus will be consolidated with Greenstone's Orlando office, which will be renamed Greenstone Roberts/ Sandhaus.


Dr. Eileen Halsey Pike, Professor Emeritus, 73
Dr.
Eileen Halsey Pike, a professor emeritus of microbiology at New York Medical College in Valhalla, N.Y., died on Jan. 7 at the Ruth Taylor Institute, a nursing home in Mount Pleasant, N.Y.
She was 73 years old and lived in White Plains.
The cause of death was listed as emphysema, said Penelope W. Morgan, her executor.


Japan Seeks Ways to Tame Stock Market
Financial industry executives and officials, alarmed about the Japanese stock markets entering its its third year of a deep slump, are contemplating emergency measures that could reverse several years of liberalization and make it harder for foreign brokers to do business in Japan.
The measures under discussion range from introducing new restrictions on trading in stock index futures -- the principal source of profits for many foreign brokers in Japan -- to forming a huge fund with contributions from banks and securities houses to inflate share prices with concerted buying, a method last attempted tried here in the 1960's.


Music Notes
Philharmonic Contract
The musicians of the New York Philharmonic have ratified a four-year contract between their union, Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians, and the orchestra's management, the Philharmonic-Symphony Society of New York Inc.
The agreement was reached on Monday, and yesterday the musicians accepted it, voting 81 to 23, spokeswomen for both sides said.


BCE Mobile reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Federal Screw Works reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Loral Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vigoro Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Could it be that the son of James Bond is a coward?
Certainly not, a jury in London ruled on Monday, awarding JASON CONNERY, son of SEAN CONNERY and the actress DIANE CILENTO, $:35,000 (about $63,000) in a libel suit he had brought against The Sun, a London tabloid, for branding him a coward.
An article in the newspaper that was published on the actor's 28th birthday, Jan. 11, 1991, shortly before the Persian Gulf war, quoted Mr.
Connery as having said: "I would sooner bury myself alive than go to war for my country. I'm a bit of a wimp on the quiet, and this whole gulf situation scares me absolutely to death."


LXE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Buckeye Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cullen/Frost Bankers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Consumers Need Rules, Not Stunts
President Bush is about to declare a three-month halt to new Federal regulations, according to White House sources who choose to remain anonymous.
And well they might.
This idea is the purest campaign prattle.
The moratorium is said to be part of the President's economic revival plan, which he will outline in his State of the Union address next week.
The underlying idea is that excessive regulation hampers growth.


Uni-Marts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Montreal Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cytogen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


A.J. Antoon, Stage Director, 47; Presented Classics and New Plays
A.
J.
Antoon, the stage director who won a Tony Award for "That Championship Season," died yesterday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 47 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, said Lisa Juliano, his assistant on the long-running Off Broadway musical "Song of Singapore," which he directed.


Sculptor Prepares for a Super Meltdown
The mercury was above freezing and Tom Doyle's grand ice sculpture in front of the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Minneapolis was melting ever so slightly, but forecasts of falling temperatures cheered the sculptor.
"I'm just glad it didn't rain," he said.


BPI Environmental Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


II-VI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Genus Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Plan by U.S. Reignites the Debate That Started With the Salomon Scandal
The far-reaching changes outlined today for the vast Treasury securities market have reignited debate over how to police this crucial marketplace, which is where the Government finances its debt and where investors around the world transact billions of dollars of business each day.
One influential lawmaker denounced the regulators' revisions as inadequate, and called for tougher measures.
Many of those who participate in the market expressed intense concern that the changes, if put in place clumsily, could backfire and drive up the Government's borrowing costs.


Longer Savings Rescue Plan Sought
Albert V. Casey, chief executive of the Resolution Trust Corporation, told Congress today that more time would be needed than Congress has allowed for the savings and loan rescue, and he asked the lawmakers to extend the deadline by which the agency must spend or forfeit the $25 billion approved by Congress last fall.
Mr.
Casey said that unless the agency was given until October to use the latest installment of taxpayer money appropriated for the bailout, instead of April, as the lawmakers stipulated, the Government would spend between $3 million and $4 million a day needlessly, holding onto assets of failed institutions that could otherwise be disposed of.


Sumitomo Bank of Calif.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Another Tale from Bench: Resurgent Nets Stop Suns
The surging Nets got one more assist from their bench tonight as they continued to open eyes while closing in on the .500 mark and the midpoint of the season.
This time Rafael Addison was the reserve to the rescue, playing 28 minutes and scoring 11 of his 19 points in the second half as New Jersey rallied for a 106-104 victory over the Phoenix Suns at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Thomaston Mills Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Crown Crafts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Bridge
The past two decades have seen a revolution in the attitude of tournament players and organizers toward smoking.
In earlier years a majority of bridge players smoked cigarettes, cigars or pipes, and the nonsmokers were a neglected minority.
But the realization that smoking can be highly hazardous to the smoker and to a lesser extent a danger to those around him has changed that.
In nearly all American competititions today, whether in tournaments or clubs, smoking is banned in playing areas.
This is largely because the nonsmoking majority resents the discomfort of smoke and the health danger it represents but there is an altruistic component: By making smoking difficult, there is a chance that some smokers will abandon their habit.


Santa Fe Pacific Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Woman's Drug Case Reinstated Despite Burden on Her Husband
An appeals court yesterday reinstated drug and gun charges against a New York City woman, saying that a lower court erred when it dismissed the case because it would cause the woman's husband "unbearable" problems.
The appeals court said that by dismissing an indictment against Maria Reyes in 1989, Acting Justice Edward McLaughlin of State Supreme Court in Manhattan had undermined "public confidence in the criminal-justice system."


Schlumberger Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. CONSIDERS MOVE TO CUT MULTIPLE-WARHEAD MISSILES, CORE OF THE NUCLEAR FORCE
In preparation for President Bush's State of the Union address next week, the White House and the Pentagon are considering plans to sharply reduce or eliminate long-range nuclear missiles with more than one warhead, Administration officials said today.
Some of the cuts, most likely in American land-based multiple-warhead missiles, would be made without conditions, while others would hinge on the response of the four former Soviet republics with long-range nuclear weapons.
These republics, which operate under a unified command, are Russia, Belarus, Ukraine and Kazakhstan.


Shawmut National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Elsie Gross Herzog, An Interior Designer
Elsie May Gross Herzog, an interior designer for more than 50 years, died yesterday at her home in Larchmont, N.Y.
She died of cancer, her family said. Her age was not given.


Cray Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Image Retailing Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


At the Sundance Film Festival, Art and Commerce Square Off
High-stakes Hollywood games have been played here at the Sundance Film Festival since Steven Soderbergh's "Sex, Lies and Videotape" went straight from Park City to win the grand prize at the Cannes International Film Festival three years ago.
Now art and commerce battle each other here as if they were good and evil twins in a B movie.
The good twin wants a happy truce, maybe some money.
The bad twin wants to sell its soul and perhaps still be an artist.
For film makers and others with business to do, Sundance can be nerve-racking.
But for a critic, this is partly avant-garde heaven, partly a voyeuristic peek into Hollywood deal-making.
This festival of independent films, which began last Thursday, will end on Saturday with the announcement of awards for dramatic and documentary films (they must be American and are usually by unknown directors).
Foreign films and those by better-known directors are shown out of competition, and they are some of the most startling.
Peter Sellars's brilliant and relentlessly uncommercial silent movie, "The Cabinet of Dr. Ramirez," is a reworked version of a film that was universally loathed when it was shown at Cannes last spring.


Israel Said to Step Up Construction of Settlements
Three new studies issued recently, based on both official documents and unofficial estimates, confirm that over the last year Israel has built housing for Jewish settlers in the occupied territories on a scale that far outstrips previous construction programs.
Statistics vary among these reports, making it difficult to extract from them a single figure for settlement-building that qualifies as definitive.


Mixed Response for Troupe's Snub to Tony Voters
The recent decision of the National Actors Theater not to invite Tony Award voters to its productions has drawn both sympathy and criticism from those in the theater world.
Traditionally, two tickets to every Broadway production are provided free to each of the 700 Tony voters.
"We have a deficit of $3 million, and we can't afford to give away seats," said Manny Kladitis, general manager of the National Actors Theater, in explaining the decision.
The repertory company, founded by the actor Tony Randall, made its debut on Dec. 10 with a production of "The Crucible." Its second production, "A Little Hotel on the Side" by Georges Feydeau is in previews and opens Sunday afternoon.


Air Products &amp; Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Israel-China Relations Nearly Official
Foreign Minister David Levy of Israel arrived in Beijing today for a four-day visit that is expected to lead to the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and Israel.
Israel's 40-year pursuit of ties with China is likely to end on Friday, when Mr.
Levy and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen sign a joint communique to mark the new ties.


Flagler Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Supreme Court Limits Political Asylum Claims
The Supreme Court today narrowed the grounds on which people fleeing service in foreign armies may qualify for political asylum in the United States.
With its 6-to-3 decision, the Court may have effectively shut the door on thousands of asylum claims, principally from young men escaping conscription by guerrilla or government forces in strife-torn countries in Central America and Asia.


Family Strength by the Numbers
The son is a star, but his mother is a legend.
Andre Collins is a strong side linebacker for the Super Bowl favorite Washington Redskins.
Frances Collins is the strong-willed matriarch of a family that has almost enough people to field its own team and even a sports-agent daughter, Cheryl, to make the backroom deals.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section yesterday, about doctors' income, incorrectly characterized the figures.
The bars in the chart showed the median gross income of doctors in New York, New Jersey, New England and the United States; the numbers at the bottom showed the median gross income for all wage-earners in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and the United States.


James River Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Piccadilly Cafeterias reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Green Stays in Stride By Using His Speed
Put Darrell Green, the Washington Redskins' All-Pro cornerback and the player regarded as the National Football League's fastest man, in single coverage out on the wings against the best receivers the game has to offer, and he is at complete ease.
Put Darrell Green into the eye of a swirl of reporters, like those who surround him here at the Metrodome a few days before the Super Bowl, and his feet shuffle, his eyes dart and his mind clicks fast foward and in reverse, seemingly all at once.


Bowe Bout Is Off
RIDDICK BOWE's Feb. 1 fight against JOSE RIBALTA at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev., is off.
Bowe suffered an eye injury during a sparring session against KING IPITAN on Monday.
"The right eye is bruised," said ROCK NEWMAN, Bowe's manager, "and there is a hairline fracture of a little bone that separates the sinus membrane from the eye socket. It absolutely does not jeopardize a fight against EVANDER HOLYFIELD." Bowe was said to be the next in line to fight Holyfield, the undisputed heavyweight champion, in a bout that is targeted for April 24 in Las Vegas. . . .
The former champions GREG HAUGEN and RAY MANCINI, both 30 years old, will fight in Reno on April 3 in a scheduled 12-round outing, the fighters said yesterday.


With Some Misgivings, East Europe Snaps Up German Money
Germany's entrepreneurs and industrial giants are moving into Eastern Europe, spreading prosperity but stirring unease in a region that well remembers the horrors of World War II.
From this dilapidated town 200 miles southwest of Warsaw to Czechoslovakia to Hungary to the newly born nations of the former Soviet Union, the capital-hungry orphans of the Communist system are eagerly competing for investment from their nearest and largest Western neighbor.


Caning the Old and New
Yorkville Caning  31-04 60th Street (near Northern Boulevard), Woodside, Queens 11377; (718) 274-6464.
"Cane loves to be used," said David Feuer, president of Yorkville Caning.
But caned seats, backs and table tops are easily misused.
Owners stand on them, animals claw them and children love to poke things through them.
Cane also disintegrates and dries with age, becoming brittle and breakable.
But there are a variety of choices -- and price ranges -- when recaning is needed.


Knicks Are Pounded So Hard That They Fall Out of First
Once the Philadelphia 76ers got the Knicks down tonight, they never let them back up.
Charles Barkley, who scored a season-high 37 points, attacked the Knicks like a shark smelling blood.
As if that were not enough, Hersey Hawkins (23 points) and Armon Gilliam (24 points) made sure Barkley was not a one-man act.


Late Buying Pushes Dow Up by 32.42
Stock prices posted crisp gains in active trading yesterday, as investor confidence returned after two days of losses.
With low interest rates continuing to be a driving force, the Dow Jones industrial average climbed 32.42 points, to 3,255.81.
The surge appeared suddenly late in the afternoon, aided by waves of computer-program buying, said Philip H. Smyth, an analyst with Birinyi Associates, which tracks program trading.
He said the firm detected heavy program buying from about 3:18 P.M. to near the close, and the combined effect of the programs added 20.79 points to the Dow.


Eagle Precision Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc.  reports earnings for 16wks to Jan 8


Bard (C.R.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


MBNA Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amerifed Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Caterpillar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
Two articles and a picture caption yesterday about the racketeering trial of John Gotti rendered the name of his lawyer incorrectly.
He is Albert J. Krieger.


Ethyl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hasidic Public School District Is Unconstitutional, Judge Rules
A special public school district in a Hasidic community in Orange County was established in violation of the constitutional separation of church and state, a State Supreme Court judge ruled today.
The school district, which provides bilingual classes in English and Yiddish for 138 severely disabled children in the Hasidic enclave of Kiryas Joel, was formed in 1989 after many parents in the community refused to send their children to local public schools.


How to Make a Quick Economic Turnaround
To the Editor:
Let there be no mistake as to the causes of the current economic recession; understanding these causes will show us how to bring about a recovery.
They are the past and current inappropriate monetary and fiscal policies, in order of importance.


Consolidated Papers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
PAUL McCARTNEY has been awarded the first Polar Music Prize by the Swedish Academy of Music.
The Academy says the prize, about $200,000, is "without comparison in the world of music." It will be presented in Stockholm in May.
The prize was awarded to Mr.
McCartney for creativity as a composer and performer, and for helping to revitalize popular music in the past 30 years.
The stipend was made possible by a large donation made to the academy by Stig Anderson, who managed the Swedish pop group, Abba, some two decades ago.


47th STREET JOURNAL; A Bankrupt but Still Popular Mecca
The leafleters were on the street corners, making that crisp snapping sound as they handed out their blue and yellow fliers as always.
The elbow-to-elbow crowd at the counter was pointing and shooting point-and-shoot cameras and aiming extremely powerful binoculars at the farthest thing that they could find, which in this case was the cashier.
The day after 47th Street Photo filed for bankruptcy protection, the main store looked like business as usual.
But business as usual at 47th Street Photo has never been quite like business as usual anywhere else.


Revco Has New Plan To Block a Takeover
Revco D.S. today renewed its battle to remain independent, two weeks after the retail pharmacy chain appeared ready to accept a $1 billion takeover bid by the Jack Eckerd Corporation.
Revco, operating under Federal bankruptcy court protection, said it had filed a revised reorganization plan that would pay creditors more than $100 million in cash plus secured debt and equity.
The company valued the new plan at about $925 million.


Judge Spurns 'Caller ID'
An administrative law judge with the California Public Utilities Commission has recommended that a "Caller ID" telephone service proposed by Pacific Bell, GTE-California and Contel not be approved.
Pacific Bell said it would challenge the recommendation.
The proposed service would display the number of the caller on a small box attached to the telephone.
The companies would allow customers to prevent their numbers from appearing on a recipient's Caller ID box in a process called "blocking."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Tacoma, Wash.'s $40 million general obligation bonds have been tentatively priced by Smith Barney to yield 6.50 percent for the 2012 maturity, with a 6 1/4 percent coupon. *
Union Pacific's $83 million equipment trust certificates were offered by First Boston at prices to yield 4.15 percent for the February 1993 maturity to 8.06 percent for the 2012 maturity.
They are secured by 69 diesel electric locomotives.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Kenny Kirkland
Fat Tuesday's 190 Third Avenue (at 17th Street) Manhattan Through Sunday
The pianist Kenny Kirkland's first set at Fat Tuesday's on Tuesday night bumped along like a car with a flat tire.
Almost everything was going against it, including the club's sound system, which turned the music into an indistinct blare.
Jeff Watts, the group's drummer, played as if he were in Madison Square Garden instead of in a small club, drowning out much of what the band played.
And Mr.
Kirkland has a sentimental streak that turned a handful of ballads into excursions to a land where trite prettiness is passed off as emotion.
But two things saved the set: the brute force of the band and the addition of the percussionist Milton Cardona two-thirds of the way through the show.


Review/Theater; 'Virginia Woolf,' With Marlo Thomas
The Broadway opening of "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" sent a seismic shock through the American theater.
In common with "Look Back in Anger" in England, the Edward Albee play was something new and bracing in an art that was trapped by tradition.
With surgical precision, "Virginia Woolf" revealed the psychological truths within a disastrous, festering marriage.
The play awakened a dormant theater at the same time it offended the Pulitzer Prize committee, which rejected its justified nomination as the finest drama of its season.
Still, 1962 was very much Mr.
Albee's year.
Coming after his Off Broadway one-acts, the play confirmed his artistry and its success opened doors for writers like Sam Shepard, Lanford Wilson and David Mamet who followed him in replenishing the theater.
Thirty years later, "Virginia Woolf," in revival at the Hartford Stage Company, retains its natural ferocity and brilliance.
This is in spite of a production that is crucially marred in one of its two principal roles.


Airlines File Lawsuit Over Alien Detention
Refusing the role of jailers of aliens seeking political asylum, a group of major American airlines filed suit yesterday to challenge a policy by the Immigration and Naturalization Service that holds them responsible for detaining undocumented passengers and stowaways when their planes stop over in the United States.
In the suit filed in Federal District Court in Washington, the air carriers, represented by the Air Transport Association of America, charged that the policy violated Federal law setting a fee system to cover detention costs of undocumented foreigners.


SFFed Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Health Equity Prop reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CSX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Home Video
It's not every day that adults storm video stores to buy films with dancing mushrooms and Mickey Mouse.
In November when Disney released the animated classic "Fantasia" on tape for the first time, strange things began to happen.
"It wasn't the kids coming up with the parents saying 'I want that, Mommy or Daddy,' says Ron Castell, the senior vice president of Blockbuster, the country's largest video chain. "It was the parents who came in looking for it specifically."
Like Blockbuster, other stores report that "Fantasia," a rather stately and often abstract animated film with a classical sound track released in 1940, is being bought by parents as much for themselves as for their children.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Sound Bites Become Smaller Mouthfuls
Tom Brokaw of NBC News recently bemoaned "the cancer of the sound bite" afflicting Presidential campaigning, a description that accurately summarized the prevailing contempt toward those snippets of speech on the evening news.
But it may not have been the best metaphor.
Cancer tumors are invidious because they keep growing.
Sound bites seem only to shrink.
In 1968, which was about when television producers began using the term "sound bite," a Presidential candidate spoke for 43 uninterrupted seconds in the average appearance on the evening news.
With each subsequent campaign the bites got shorter, and by 1988 the average was a mere 9 seconds.


Security Pacific Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AMP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Los Angeles to Distribute Condoms in High Schools
The Board of Education here voted on Tuesday night to make condoms available at all public high schools to combat the spread of AIDS, making this the fourth big city school system in the country to adopt such a policy.
The board rejected a proposal to become the first district in the nation to make condoms available to junior high school students.
The 4-to-3 vote followed six tumultuous hours of public comment and board debate before a deeply divided audience of more than 200 people.
The meeting was interrupted several times by shouted insults and obscenities, and the police removed a few hecklers from the audience.


First Interstate Bancorp (N reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Idex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Editorial Notebook; Success, Then Anxiety, in Korea
South Korea's rush toward first world economic status has dazzled admiring outsiders.
But it leaves many Koreans anxious that material advances may have come at a spiritual cost.
Three decades of thundering growth have revolutionized material life.
In barely one generation, a nation of destitute peasants has become a nation of city dwellers addicted to cars and appliances.
This new middle class threw off authoritarianism; democratic institutions are now taking root.


U.S. Says It Foiled Japan on Beef Sale
What Japanese trade negotiators giveth, can Japanese bureaucrats taketh away?
This was the question today as American officials described what they said was a recent clandestine attempt by low-level Japanese bureaucrats to subvert a 1988 trade accord allowing unlimited imports of American beef into Japan.
The Americans said they blocked the attempt this week.


Union Pacific Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cybertek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Poor Children in Tough Times
Gov.
Mario Cuomo concedes that his new New York State budget isn't good news but says it's not "a doomsday budget" either.
Put more directly, it is a bad news budget, filled with sobering cuts in everything from Medicaid to the state work force.
No sector is immune from pain, but in a trying time Mr.
Cuomo at least makes an effort to maintain his commitment to children.
Many of the details are still missing but it is clear that the Governor's budget inevitably calls for cuts in programs and services that benefit children.
Children use Medicaid, go to hospitals and schools, live in cities, towns and counties that will suffer from reductions in state aid.


Knowledgeware Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


7 Deaths in 1990 Point Up Failings of Child Protection System
Seven children, whose families had been previously identified by New York City's child protection system as abusive or neglectful, died in 1990 after they were repeatedly beaten over a period of time, a city report has found.
The report, by a panel of experts who examined confidential city records, also disclosed that at least three children were taken from their parents only to die at the hands of their foster mothers.


Summit Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


John Remme, Performer, 56
John Remme, an actor, singer and cabaret performer, died on Saturday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 56 years old.
He died of AIDS, said Suzanne Smith, a friend.


Summit Health Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Next Computer's Revenues
Next Computer Inc., the company started by Steven P. Jobs, said today that its revenues for 1991 totaled $127.5 million, more than four times the $28 million recorded in 1990.
The announcement came during a speech at the Nextworld computer show here, at which Next introduced several new products, including a version of its Nextstep operating system for personal computers using the Intel Corporation's 486 microprocessor.
The product, designed to broaden the appeal of Next's software, will be available in the third quarter for $995, the company said.


MCI, Grown Big, Looks Abroad
At the MCI Communications Corporation, the nation's second-largest long-distance carrier, they figure that this year is 8 A.D., or eight years after the formal divestiture of A.T.&amp; T. The dark time before that is known as B.C. -- before competition.
But figured another way, this year is actually 10 A.D., 10 years after the initial agreement to dismantle the biggest company on earth.


Astronauts From 3 Countries Ride Shuttle Into Orbit
Seven astronauts from three countries sailed flawlessly into orbit today aboard the space shuttle Discovery and began a busy week of medical and scientific experiments.
The Discovery bolted from the Earth on a column of cream-colored smoke at 9:52 A.M.
The flight was delayed for an hour because of concerns about weather, an errant warning about a problem with a fuel cell and remote sensor readings indicating a potential problem with lightning.


English Bathrooms: Out of the Closet
The term water closet may sound like a quaint euphemism, but over the years it has also come to be a pretty fair description of the typical British bathroom.
As often as not, it is a cramped, airless cubicle, a kind of architectural afterthought crouched at the end of a creaky hallway or hidden beneath the stairs of a 19th-century terrace house.
But in the last few years, the British bathroom has begun to come into its own.
Not only are new houses equipped with larger and more luxurious bathrooms, but there is a growing trend to remodel and update old bathrooms, often using florid antique or reproduction fixtures that evoke the look and feel of Victorian manor houses.


Fernandez Hits Volleys and Bounces Sabatini
One hour was a day's work for top-seeded Monica Seles, who eliminated Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, 6-2, 6-2, today and advanced to the finals of the Australian Open.
Mary Joe Fernandez needed only 1 hour 24 minutes in her semifinal to discover that she could volley, an extreme departure for the stolid base liner and one that resulted in a 6-1, 6-4 upset of Gabriela Sabatini.


Hal Roach Recalls His First Century
The cinema celebrates its 100th birthday next year, but Hal Roach got there first.
The man who paired Laurel with Hardy, put black glasses on Harold Lloyd and cranked out more than 200 Our Gang comedies began his second century last week, and Thursday night the Smithsonian Resident Associate Program will honor him at the National Museum of Natural History here.
The evening's events will include screenings of "The Pip From Pittsburgh," a 1931 Charlie Chase comedy, and "Helpmates," a 1932 Laurel and Hardy classic.
Along with birthday cake and champagne, Mr.
Roach will be presented with the James Smithson Medal, the Smithsonian's highest award, given "in recognition of exceptional contributions to art, science, history, education and technology."


CHRONICLE
MARION WIESEL, the wife of ELIE WIESEL, will receive the French Legion of Honor tonight from President Francois Mitterrand at Elysee Palace.
Mrs.
Wiesel will receive the award for her work as executive director of a conference, "The Anatomy of Hatred," in Oslo in August 1990.
The conference brought together a dazzling assembly of more than 70 political leaders, writers, scientists and academicians, including VACLAV HAVEL, YELENA BONNER, NELSON MANDELA and JIMMY CARTER.


Mercantile Buying Maison Blanche
The Mercantile Stores Companyhas agreed to buy Maison Blanche Inc., a chain of 16 department stores in Louisiana and Florida, for an undisclosed amount.
Details of the agreement still have to be worked out, said Hans Sternberg, chairman of the family-owned Maison Blanche.
Mercantile, based in Wilmington, Del., operates 83 department stores under 12 names in the South and Midwest.
It will operate Maison Blanche's eight Louisiana stores under the Maison Blanche name and the chain's eight Florida stores as Gayfer's, a Mercantile division based in Mobile, Ala.


Israelis Try, Again, to Limit Access to Scrolls
In one more attempt to limit access to the Dead Sea Scrolls, an Israeli court has issued a temporary injunction to prevent the distribution of a book that contains photographs of previously unpublished texts of the famous documents from biblical times.
The order was issued on Tuesday in the District Court of Jerusalem against an American organization, the Biblical Archeology Society.
It applies to the distribution of the two-volume "Facsimile Edition of the Dead Sea Scrolls," which was published in November, in "any fashion, in Israel or elsewhere."


Multibank Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


How to Make a Quick Economic Turnaround; Tax-Cut Illusions
To the Editor:
In "Don't Look for Jobs in Japan" (editorial, Jan. 6), you advocate stimulating the economy through further cuts in the interest rate and/or tax cuts and increases in government spending.
Such policies have traditionally been used to pull the economy out of recession by stimulating demand.


David Bernstein, 98, Civic Leader on L.I.
David Bernstein, a leader in civic, business and Republican circles in Oyster Bay, L.I., and the father-in-law of the State Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, died on Friday at his home in Oyster Bay.
He was 98 years old.
He died in his sleep, said his daughter, Ethel Marino of Oyster Bay.


Tecumseh Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Aspect Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Los Angeles Cancels Huge Contract With a Japanese Maker of Rail Cars
In the most dramatic economic backlash yet against Japan, Los Angeles County today canceled a contract to buy $122 million worth of rail transit cars from a Japanese company.
At the same time, in a move that was likely to be as controversial as the original award of the contract to the Japanese company, the Sumitomo Corporation, the county began to carve out its own industrial policy.


Chemfeb Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


How to Make a Quick Economic Turnaround; Reform Tax Reform
To the Editor:
There is a solution to correcting our depressed economy, but first we must identify its primary cause.
It is the tax reform act of 1986, which put the crimp in the consumer real estate and automobile markets by the following changes:
(1) Raising rental residential real estate depreciation from 19 years to 29 1/2 years.


Bronx Teacher Shot in Crossfire Dies After 2 Weeks in Hospital
A junior high school teacher who was caught in crossfire at a Bronx intersection two weeks ago died of her wounds yesterday morning at Lincoln Hospital, and two suspects in the case were charged with second-degree murder.
At Junior High School 22 in the Bronx, where the 53-year-old teacher, Audrey Chasen, had taught since 1979, a team of psychologists and social workers was called in to help the children overcome the trauma over the news.


Western Co. of North America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Great Western Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


If Only Slurpers Were So Rare
THOUGH those little red and white cans of Campbell's Soup are everywhere, the company's extensive collection of soup tureens is a well-kept secret.
For those who have not visited the Campbell Museum in Camden, N.J. -- one of the country's little-known but riveting decorative arts collections -- an exhibition of 50 tureens selected from the museum is on view at the 1992 Winter Antiques Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan, through Sunday.


Merger of New York's Transit and City Police Is Still a Bad Idea
To the Editor:
Notwithstanding the change of heart by Phil Caruso, president of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, to support of merging the New York City Police with the Transit Authority Police, it is still a bad idea (news article, Dec. 21).
Here's why:


Norwest Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FDP Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Dayton Unit Developing New Store
Attracted by the sales boom in basic clothing, the Dayton Hudson Corporation will soon open a new store that sells inexpensive casual clothes like turtlenecks, khakis and sweaters.
Executives of Dayton Hudson's Target Stores division, which is developing the new store, said the look and the merchandise of the new store, called Everyday Hero, would be heavily influenced by successful casual-clothing stores like the Gap, the Limited and Banana Republic.
But the executives said their stores would have prices closer to discount stores and that they would sell a wider range of clothing, including a large children's section.


Silicon Graphics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.50
6.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.73
3.78
6.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.81
3.84
6.17
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.73
6.69
8.07
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.62
7.59
8.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.74
9.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.66
6.65
7.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Keystone Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Martin Marietta Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Evans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Acme-Cleveland Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Minnesota Mining &amp; Mfg.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dun &amp; Bradstreet reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Baker Hughes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cut at G.M. Plant
The General Motors Corporation will eliminate the second shift at its Fairfax assembly plant at the end of February, putting 1,000 workers at the plant on indefinite layoff.
The car maker, moving to slash production because of the recession, said Tuesday that the decision to cut production at Fairfax by about a third was not related to the company's announcement last month of a sweeping retrenchment.


Sterling Chemicals Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Progressive Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dole Food Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about food aid to the former Soviet republics omitted an American contract, because of incorrect information provided by the Agriculture Department.
The department awarded a $1.2 million contract last week to the Brother's Brother Foundation in Pittsburgh.


Egyptian Doctors Limit Kidney Transplants
In an effort to end the sale of human organs by the country's poor, Egyptian doctors have announced a ban on all kidney transplants from living donors to recipients who are not relatives.
The ban, to take effect in July, was established by the Egyptian society of kidney specialists.
It applies to all of Egypt's doctors.
The society is moving to set up an organ bank and for the first time begin to transplant kidneys from cadavers, rather than live donors.


Bills Stay The Course Despite Detour of Distractions
Buffalo, a team that has pointed to its focus as one of the main reasons that it returned to the Super Bowl this year, is beginning to show signs of distraction a few days from its showdown with Washington.
On Tuesday, defensive end Bruce Smith indicated that he would ask Bills management to trade him after Sunday's game, because he has received hate mail laced with racial slurs from some fans in Buffalo and the western New York area.


Brajdas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Algeria Arrests a Senior Islamic Leader
The acting leader of the Islamic fundamentalists in Algeria was arrested today by Algerian security officials.
The official, Abdelkader Hachani, had been jailed twice before, in 1985 and 1988, but was released and ran for Parliament in the first round of elections, which took place on Dec. 26.


Brooklyn Union Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Public Service Enterprise Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Diceon Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Corrections
Two articles and a picture caption yesterday about the racketeering trial of John Gotti rendered the name of his lawyer incorrectly.
He is Albert J. Krieger.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
The Treasury will intervene in the Government securities market whenever prices are distorted by a shortage of securities, whether resulting from market forces or market manipulation, the three agencies that regulate the market said.  [ Page A1. ]  On Wall Street and in Washington, there was widespread acknowledgement that the report represents a watershed.  [ D2. ]
Stock prices posted crisp gains in active trading, as investor confidence returned after two days of losses.
The Dow climbed 32.42, to 3,255.81.  [ D10. ]  Interest rates rose and prices of Treasury securities fell in light trading.  [ D16. ]


N.S. Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


C.I.A. Chief Says Threat By Ex-Soviets Is Small
In an unusual public review of global threats to American security, two intelligence chiefs testified today that the countries of the former Soviet Union have sharply cut their military spending and have lost the will -- and much of the ability -- to attack the United States.
One of the officials, Lieut.
Gen.
James R. Clapper Jr., Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, the Pentagon's intelligence arm, also reported that Iran intends to develop nuclear weapons and suggested that it would be able to make them in a few years.


Designing Gifts to Aid A Learning Center
Last year, the benefit coincided with the start of the Persian Gulf war.
This year, Lynn G. Feld, a special-events consultant for the National Center for Learning Disabilities, was not optimistic.
"I knew it was going to be a very tough year for benefits," Ms.
Feld said.
She had already arranged evenings around "The Best of the West" and "The Great Gatsby's Garden." The approach of Valentine's Day gave her the idea.


Advo-System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Budgetary Brinkmanship; Dire Threats to Cut Essential Services Are Often Just a Ploy
As tax receipts slip and budgets come under the knife in statehouses, city halls and private institutions, the region is witnessing the flowering of a kind of brinkmanship in which officials seek to protect their budgets by threatening to cut where the pain will be worst.
The object of this exercise is not usually to perform the dire amputations that are threatened, budget experts say, but to arouse support for an agency's strongest suit, usually the area in which it comes in contact with the public, and to deflect budget-cutting attention from more vulnerable, back-office operations with no public constituency.


Puget Sound Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
Algerian Party Chief Seized
Algeria arrested the acting leader of the major Islamic fundamentalist party and banned political activity in the country's mosques.
Page A3.
Justices Rule on Asylum
The Supreme Court narrowed the grounds on which people fleeing service in foreign armies may qualify for political asylum.
Page A20.
Bush Names a Transit Chief
The President selected Andrew H. Card Jr., former deputy White House chief of staff, to be Secretary of Transportation.
Page A14.
A Rise in Housing Starts
New-home building rose 2.6 percent in December, a healthy gain to cap a year in which total starts were the lowest since 1946.
Page D1.
Sadness Over Layoffs
United Technologies's move to trim its work force left people at a Pratt &amp; Whitney plant in Connecticut mourning the end of a way of life.
Page B1.
Unease Over German Owners
As Eastern European countries compete for German investment, their eagerness is tempered by dark memories of World War II.
Page A10.


Science Tests Now Get Their Day in Court
To the Editor:
In "DNA Fingerprinting Has Value as Evidence" (letter, Jan. 10), Lee M. Silver erroneously states that the 1944 verdict forcing Charlie Chaplin to pay child support for a child that blood testing had conclusively shown was not his came after the blood test was ruled inadmissible in court.


Is Your Sofa Grouchy?
THE most perceptive commentary on objects these days is to be found not in a museum or design book but in the Walt Disney film "Beauty and the Beast." After all, a Michael Graves teakettle can't begin to compete with Mrs.
Potts, the enchanted, matronly teapot.
As "Beauty and the Beast" proves, even the lowliest household object has a personality.
Here is the thinking behind some of the enchanted objects in the Beast's castle, as described by Linda Woolverton, the screenwriter:


Market Place; High-Flier May Be Airworthy Again
A LITTLE over a year ago, Sequent Computer Systems Inc. hit the invisible wall that seems to lie in wait for high-flying high-technology companies.
Sequent, which is based in Beaverton, Ore., and makes superminicomputers, missed its earnings forecast for the fourth quarter of 1990 and spent the first three quarters of 1991 mired in red ink.
Sequent's troubles began with a significant decline its original equipment manufacturing business, in which Sequent computers are resold by the Unisys Corporation.
That arrangement, coupled with the recession and some internal difficulties, left the company in a position where it "couldn't peel expenses fast enough," said Casey Powell, Sequent's chairman and chief executive.


Bachman Information Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Appliance Account Won by Conquest
The Candy Home Appliance Company, an Italian manufacturer of freezers, washing machines and other appliances, awarded its $25 million advertising account yesterday to the Conquest Europe unit of the WPP Group P.L.C. in London.
The assignment followed a review that included the incumbent agency, Alberto Cremonain Milan, which had handled the account since that shop was founded in 1986.
Also included were units of the Leo Burnett Company and TBWA Advertising.


Northern Trust Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Citicorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Natural Hoarder Opens a Shop, and the Style is 'Neo-Flea'
THE shop sort of announces its personality as soon as you walk in the door:
"Wonderful old paint," reads the tag on a country pie safe, "$995." "Home-style delicious, $4.50," says a sign by some jars of applesauce.
"Authentic country frame and photo, dated 1924, $225" catches one's eye.
A Boston-terrier-shaped iron doorstop -- "$255 (rare)" -- stands on a table; another stands in the window.


Bush Aide Named Transportation Chief
President Bush today selected as his new Transportation Secretary Andrew H. Card Jr., a White House aide with a reputation for managerial skills and political dedication but virtually no expertise in the field of transportation.
Mr.
Card's appointment to head the Department of Transportation, which will spend more than $150 billion in the next five years, seemed to underscore how much the President valued personal loyalty in his staff.


Easel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounts
*
Tree Top Inc., Selah, Wash., a processor and marketer of fruit products like juices and apple sauce, to Evans/ Kraft, Seattle, from McCann-Erickson, Seattle, for advertising, marketing and product publicity.
The agency, which was assigned the account following a review, estimated billings at $2 million to $3 million. *
Ciatti's Restaurants, a chain of Italian restaurants in Minnesota and Wisconsin, to Chuck Ruhr Advertising, Minneapolis, for its $1 million advertising account.
The account had previously been at K &amp; H Advertising, Minneapolis.


Lukens Posts a Loss
Lukens Inc. on Tuesday reported an $8.55 million loss in the fourth quarter because of a 15-week strike at its main steel plant and weak seasonal demand for some of its products.
In the comparable period last year, the company earned $9.26 million, or $1.06 a share.
Sales fell 16.5 percent, to $132.09 million, from $158.27 million in the fourth quarter of 1990.
About 1,300 workers at the Lukens steel plant in Coatesville returned to work last week after a strike that started Oct. 1.
The company announced layoffs of more than 300 workers last week.


Results Plus
N.H.L.
Bruins Win 5th Straight  Andy Moog made 37 saves and Peter Douris had a goal and an assist to lead the Boston Bruins to a 5-2 triumph over the Maple Leafs last night in Toronto.


A Little Dreaming, A Little Walking
AS every woman knows, high-heeled shoes are as much works of architecture and structural engineering as they are fashion items.
As if to underscore the point, an exhibition of works on paper by Roger Vivier, the French shoe designer, is on view at Stubbs Books and Prints, 153 East 70th Street in Manhattan, through Feb. 14.


New Chief Is Named At Crum &amp; Forster
The Xerox Corporation said yesterday that Joseph W. Brown Jr. had been named president and chief executive of its Crum &amp; Forster Inc. insurance subsidiary, replacing Robert J. Vairo, who is retiring at the age of 61.
Mr.
Vairo has been with the company for 17 years, the last three as chief executive.
Xerox moved quickly after the highly regarded Mr.
Brown unexpectedly resigned just over a month ago from his position as president and chief executive of the Fireman's Fund Insurance Company.
Mr.
Brown, who is 43 and is known as Jay, said at the time that he and his wife wanted to be closer to relatives on the East Coast.
But insurance industry executives assumed that the major reason was disagreements with executives at Allianz A.G.
Holding, the German insurance giant that acquired Fireman's Fund, which is based in Novato, Calif., in 1989.


Carnival Cruise Lines reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
American Honda Motor Co., Detroit, recalled 27,000 cars to replace a switch that could cause an oil leak.
The recall involves 1992 models built in Japan between early November and early December. *
Ashland Oil Inc., Ashland, Ky., was advised by National Intergroup Inc., Pittsburgh, a holding company, that National Intergroup had sold 2.2 million shares of Ashland common stock issued in connection with Ashland's acquisition of the Permian Corporation and related entities.


ECI Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


McEnroe String Snapped
What began as a series of breathtaking Australian Open victories over top-ranked opponents finally ended today as John McEnroe was unable to overcome the powerful and precise strokes of Wayne Ferreira.
The 46th-ranked Ferreira was virtually flawless in his 6-4, 6-4, 6-4 dissection of the 28th-ranked McEnroe.
And the McEnroe who was so stunning against Boris Becker and Emilio Sanchez early in the Open was now at a loss with this little-known player.


Diamond Shamrock reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Quixote Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


JB's Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 23


Gallagher (Arthur J.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2.6% Gain In Starts Of Housing
In a report pointing to economic recovery, Commerce Department figures showed today that builders broke ground for new homes in December at the fastest pace in more than a year and that permits for future construction did even better.
Housing starts ran at an annual rate of 1,103,000 last month, or 2.6 percent above the November rate, with all regions but the West posting gains.
Permits rose 5.8 percent, to 1,051,000.


Brophy Drops Zito as Trainer
Giles Brophy, one of the three feuding owners of Strike the Gold, winner of the Kentucky Derby last year, removed Nick Zito as trainer of his race horses yesterday.
But Zito will remain as the trainer of Strike the Gold, also owned by Bill Condren and Joe Cornaccia, who have said repeatedly that Zito would train their star colt despite the owners' legal battle over control of the horse.
Brophy, a broker in Government securities, said that Phil Johnson would take over as trainer of his personal stable of four horses in training at Gulfstream Park in Florida and would pick up five juveniles in the spring and take them to New York.


Defense Tries to Implicate the Husband in Triangle Murder Case
In his opening statement, Carolyn Warmus's lawyer today tried to pick apart the prosecution's murder case by casting suspicion on the victim's husband.
Ms.
Warmus, a former Westchester teacher, is being retried on charges of killing her former lover's wife.
Her first trial ended in April in a hung jury.


Interstate/Johnson Lane reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Husker Enters the Draft
Tight end JOHN MITCHELL has decided to shed Nebraska red for what he hopes will be National Football League green.
Motivated by a desire to help his family -- especially his grandparents in Mississippi -- the 6-foot-3-inch, 250-pound sophomore said he would enter the N.F.L. draft.
Last month, Mitchell said he would stay with the Cornhuskers for the 1992 season.
A third-team all-American, Mitchell had a team-leading 31 catches for 534 yards and 5 touchdowns. . . .
MAZIO ROYSTER, who became only the third Southern Cal sophomore to surpass the 1,000-yard mark in rushing when he gained 1,168 yards in 1990, announced he would skip his final year of eligibility to enter the N.F.L. draft. (AP)


First Savings Bank-S.C.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Drexler Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Blyleven Signs Pact
Right-hander BERT BLYLEVEN, a winner of 279 games who hasn't pitched since 1990, agreed yesterday to a minor league contract with the California Angels.
Blyleven, 40 years old, underwent surgery last April 16 after further tearing in his rotator cuff since surgery seven months earlier.
Blyleven, who began his big league career with the Minnesota Twins in 1970, is 279-238 with a 3.27 earned run average in 667 games.


Hertz Surcharge Doesn't Pay, One Franchise Says
The $2 billion-a-year Hertz Corporation has effectively stopped doing business with customers from the Bronx.
But Timothy R. Tostanoski, who runs a Hertz franchise here, can't afford to follow suit.
"The economy being what it is, I can't kiss anybody goodbye who is good business," he said.
"Absolutely not."


Old Stone Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ingersoll-Rand reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Craig Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about talks between American Jews and Saudi officials in Riyadh misstated the relationship between the Saudi Foreign Minister, Prince Saud, and King Fahd.
The Prince is the King's nephew, not his brother.


Campaign for Abortion Drug Is Intensifying
Leaders of abortion rights groups today announced an expanded campaign to pressure the Government and a New Jersey pharmaceutical company to make available in this country a European drug that will make early abortions easier.
The announcement was made in a news conference as anti-abortion forces demonstrated across the street.
The anti-abortion forces, who were protesting the Roe v.
Wade decision, maintained that the drug, RU-486, is not safe and should not be distributed.


Kansas City Southern reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Alberto-Culver Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


High Plains Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PARENT &amp; CHILD
PARENTS treasure their children's verbal skills -- until the children use those skills to talk back.
"You can't make me!" and "Big deal!" figure largely in this combative lexicon.
Child psychologists and psychiatrists warn that parents are often too quick to interpret this behavior as disrespectful, when it may simply be a reflection of the child's normal development.
In fact, a child who never talks back may be at higher risk for getting into serious trouble later on.


Tax-Free and Taxable Funds See Sharp Decline in Yields
Yields on tax-exempt money funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report dropped sharply for the week ended yesterday, and yields of taxable funds also dropped significantly.
Walter Frank, economist for the organization, attributed the sharp decline in yields on the tax-exempt funds to a "lack of supply of municipal bonds early in the year, as well as the easing by the Federal Reserve late in December." Another factor, Mr.
Frank added, was an inflow that took assets of the tax-exempts to a record level.


George S. Odiorne Is Dead at 71; Developed Theory of Management
George S. Odiorne, developer of a management concept that became popular with businesses around the world, died on Sunday at Humana Hospital-Northside in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
He was 71 years old and lived in St.
Petersburg, where he retired three years ago.
The cause of death was apparently a heart attack, his family said.


Health Insurance Bill Is Approved by Senate Panel
In a party-line vote that reflected the intensifying partisanship of the Presidential campaign season, a Senate committee today approved an overhaul of the nation's health insurance system to cover all Americans.
The bill faces an uncertain future on the floor of the Senate, where Republicans and a handful of conservative Democrats are preparing to argue that its requirement that businesses provide health insurance for employees will unfairly hurt small companies.
But whatever its prospects for passage, the bill will sharpen an issue that Democrats feel is a point of vulnerability for President Bush, who is expected to propose more modest adjustments to the current insurance system in the State of the Union Message next week.


Profit Posted By Santa Fe
The Santa Fe Pacific Corporation, the railroad and national resources company, said today that it posted a profit of $32.8 million, or 18 cents a share, in the fourth quarter, reversing a loss of $54.6 million in the period a year earlier.
The company, based in Schaumburg, Ill., said its sales in the quarter totaled $624.6 million, up from $572.1 million.


Amoco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


USAir Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cedar Fair L.P.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Requiring Classes In Divorce
BEFORE a very still and somber-looking audience of 80 parents, a social worker portrayed a slice of contemporary American life.
"I am a 6-year-old boy, and I live with Dad," said Aubrey Lee, the social worker, in his Southern drawl.
"One hour before I am supposed to visit Mom, Dad says, 'You can't see Mom. The check didn't come.' "


Quotation Of The Day
"Some of the most important statements of our life are short: 'I love you' and 'Will you marry me?' The problem with sound bites is that the ones chosen for the news often don't have any substance." -- KATHLEEN HALL JAMIESON, dean of the Annenberg School for Communication at the University of Pennsylvania.  [ A18:4. ]


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Corby Distilleries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Edmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Avnet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Irwin Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bell Atlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Baxter International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lee Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Curtice Burns Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Rangers Start Road Trip in a Tie
The Rangers may have looked at their 4-4 tie tonight with the Calgary Flames as somewhat unsatisfying, but what they probably should have seen was this: It ended a five-year drought and a six-game losing at the Saddledome.
The Rangers couldn't hold a 2-0 lead in the first period, but there was no reason to blame goaltender Mike Richter, who made every kind of save imaginable and finished with 28.
Calgary's Jeff Reese saved 29 shots.


Wells Fargo &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Essay; Baker's Big Bash
America's $33-billion-a-year intelligence industry doesn't know what to tell President Bush about the central question facing three score foreign affairs bigwigs gathered in our capital this week: whether or not to pump serious money into embryonic Slavic capitalism.
The C.I.A. has just renamed its Soviet division to catch up with the times. (The first name suggested was Commonwealth of Independent States Office, but that led to the acronym "Kissoff," so it is called the Slavic and Eurasian office.) The spooks at Slav-Eu, headed by George Kolt, have long been high on Boris Yeltsin and his free-market reformers, and think that money to bolster the new states would be well invested.


Henning Lands a Job
DAN HENNING was named the Detroit Lions' offensive coordinator yesterday, one month after he was dismissed as head coach of the San Diego Chargers.
Henning, 49 years old, was dismissed Dec. 23 after three losing seasons in San Diego.
He replaces DAVE LEVY, who was promoted to assistant head coach of the Lions. (AP)


4 Space Veterans and 3 Novices Make Trip
Col. Ronald J. Grabe  Mission Commander
Colonel Grabe, a 46-year-old Air Force pilot and veteran of two shuttle flights, made his first trip into space seven years ago.


Bush to Press Congress to Approve $645 Million for Ex-Soviet Lands
At the start of a conference to discuss aid to the former Soviet Union, President Bush said today that he would ask Congress for $645 million in new aid for Russia and the other independent republics.
It is not clear whether Congress, under pressure in an election year to deal with domestic problems, will approve the assistance.


Adtec reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


DPL Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tyson Cleared to Train
MIKE TYSON's injured ribs are healed.
According to a Tyson spokesman, JOHN SOLBERG, that was the verdict of Dr.
GERALD HIGGINS, who examined Tyson yesterday in Las Vegas, Nev., and cleared him to begin contact training.


Sports of The Times; Racial Slurs Not Confined To Buffalo
Here is some very disturbing news for Bruce Smith: There are racists in Denver, where he tried to sign a contract three years ago.
There are racists in L.A.
There are racists in Chicago.
Hard as this is to believe, there are even two or three racists around New York City.
Smith is the Buffalo Bills defensive end who says he wants to leave the club and the town after Sunday's Super Bowl because of the hate mail he has received from fans who think he is dogging it.


Ambush at Home Ends Life and Dreams of Immigrant
A 29-year-old Ukrainian immigrant, returning home after a business meeting Tuesday night, was shot and killed as he entered his Queens apartment lobby, the police said yesterday.
The victim, Jeff Ostrovskaya, had just entered the lobby at 43-55 Kissena Boulevard in Flushing and buzzed his apartment when he was shot twice in the head at close range, Lieut.
Arnold Korman of the 109th Precinct Detective Squad said.
Mr.
Ostrovskaya's wife, Gala, heard the shots over the intercom and ran downstairs to help but found him dead.


When Ambitious Students Search for a Higher Level
It happens to almost all skiers: the discouraging intermediate plateau.
After moving swiftly from the perils of being a beginner to the sanctuary of solid intermediate status, most people seem to remain there with only minor improvements toward advanced skiing.
"People get bored when they don't move ahead," said Skip King, director of communications at Sunday River, Me.
"There's no challenge and no more excitement. They want to get on a learning curve to improve."


Skepticism On 'Green' Ads
Europeans are willing to pay more for products that are environmentally correct, but have become skeptical of "green" claims that marketers make, according to the findings of a study co-sponsored by McCann-Erickson and the Harris Research Center, both in London.
In the study, which surveyed 525 people in France, Germany and Britain, 53 percent said they would buy a product less harmful to the environment, even if it cost more than another kind.
And 51 percent said that they would sacrifice some quality to buy a product that would cause less damage to the environment.


Golden West Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


G.E. Cutting Jobs
A General Electric Company military systems plant here will eliminate 500 jobs this year because of cuts in spending by the Pentagon.
The factory, which employed about 5,000 people in the mid-1980's, now has a work force of 2,900.
A spokesman said the layoffs could begin late this quarter.


Westinghouse To Sell Division
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation is selling its Electrical Systems division to the Sundstrand Corporation for about $125 million.
The sale will free Westinghouse's resources so the company can diversify into nonmilitary businesses while maintaining its military industries, company officials said on Tuesday.


NEW ELECTION PLAN IN ALBANY CREATES MINORITY DISTRICTS
A joint legislative committee today unveiled a redistricting plan that would create several new seats in the State Legislature for black and Hispanic office-seekers while protecting the Republican lock on the State Senate.
The plan, a result of intense backstage politicking in the Capitol, would set new lines for the 61 State Senate districts and 150 Assembly seats that are all up for election this fall.
The redrawing is required once a decade because of population shifts charted in the United States Census.


Leyland and Pirates Agree on New Contract
JIM LEYLAND just might get his wish.
"I'd like to manage in Pittsburgh for my whole career," the 47-year-old manager said yesterday after agreeing on a new five-year contract offer from the Pirates.
"Sometimes the grass looks greener on the other side of the fence, but, to me, it looks pretty green in Pittsburgh."
It should look green: The Pirates tore up the remaining two years on Leyland's old contract and gave him a new deal expected to make him one of the National League's highest-paid managers.
He made $300,000 last season.


Northern States Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dataflex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Keene Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bemis Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Failure of Dinkins Plan Puts Parade in Disarray
The St.
Patrick's Day Parade was thrown into a swirl of uncertainty yesterday after the collapse of Mayor David N. Dinkins's delicate maneuvering to assure that a gay organization would be allowed to march.
Mayoral aides were scrambling to find a way to put political pressure on the state chapter of the Ancient Order of Hibernians.
The Mayor chose the state group to sponsor the parade this year over the Manhattan chapter, which had sponsored it for 150 years.


2 Searches Under Way In Bias Cases
More than two weeks after the first of two bias attacks on schoolchildren in the Bronx, a special detective squad is still scouring the area in hopes of finding someone as elusive as the attackers -- witnesses.
Nearly every morning 20 members of the squad spread out along the streets where the three black or Hispanic children were knocked down and their faces were painted white, their marks a symbol of the tensions that have led to 47 reported bias incidents in the city since Jan. 1.


Browing-Ferris Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Citizens First Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY BIAS ATTACKS: STILL A MYSTERY


Canadian Satellite Communities reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Execufirst Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Campaign for Abortion Drug Is Intensifying
Leaders of abortion rights groups today announced an expanded campaign to pressure the Government and a New Jersey pharmaceutical company to make available in this country a European drug that will make early abortions easier.
The announcement was made in a news conference as anti-abortion forces demonstrated across the street.
The anti-abortion forces, who were protesting the Roe v.
Wade decision, maintained that the drug, RU-486, is not safe and should not be distributed.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
BRIGHTENING a room by applying wallpaper can be a gratifying antidote for the midwinter blues, even if you have never attempted such a project.
Many papers are designed to be put up by amateurs.
An excellent way to learn the basics is to view a videotape on them and then study the techniques in a book.
Many public libraries have such tapes and books.


Grandmother Convicted in Burglary Case


Banc One Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Washington Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


UConn Stymies Providence in Overtime
Nothing comes easy in the Big East as the Connecticut Huskies found out again tonight at the Civic Center.
The Friars of Providence College, who had lost their first five conference games, took the Huskies into overtime but then wilted in those extra five minutes as Connecticut won, 97-86.
Playing before a capacity audience of 13,410, the Friars came from behind to tie the score five times in the second half, the last time at 81-81, and perhaps deserved a better fate.


Cray in Pact To Use Chip Made by Sun
Sun Microsystems Inc. and Cray Research Inc. said today that Cray would develop a new line of computers in the $1 million to $3 million range based on Sun's Sparc microprocessor technology.
The companies also said they would share hardware and software technology to allow Sun computers and Cray supercomputers to work together more easily.
Cray also announced a strong rise in fourth-quarter profits.


Merchants National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Anglo-Irish Accord's Empty Promises
To the Editor:
"The 'Logic' in I.R.A. Zealotry" (editorial, Jan. 14) refers to "the landmark Anglo-Irish Agreement." But what has the Anglo-Irish Agreement, signed in 1985, achieved?
It is impossible to point to one concrete way in which the agreement has eased the plight of Catholics in Northern Ireland.


Review/Theater; Weird Epic Of History And Myth
People who know nothing about the Baltic nations and Central Europe in the Middle Ages should not try to find out anything before seeing "When Lithuania Ruled the World, Part 3" by Kestutis Nakas at the Courthouse Theater of the Anthology Film Archives.
It is enough to know that the history of that region is saturated with myth, romance and continuing ferocious controversy.
Besides, Mr.
Nakas is a very clever subverter of all versions of history; mere knowledge won't keep anyone a step ahead of him.
The medieval world Mr.
Nakas goes on creating (Parts 1 and 2 of this weird epic appeared in the 1980's; Part 4 is soon to be a film) is populated by good Lithuanian kings and rotten princes, Byzantine and Russian patriarchs, porcine and idiotic Teutonic knights, a saintly but stupid Good King Wenceslaus, a Russian czar with yeti feet, a splendidly barbaric Mongolian warlord, an underground god with horns and tail, wolves, wraiths and a monster with a bull's head wearing a cowbell.


Dinkins Wants Former Chicago Bank Chief in Top Economic Post
Barry F. Sullivan, a longtime banker and the retired head of the First Chicago Corporation, is the Dinkins administration's top choice to be New York City's new Deputy Mayor for Finance and Economic Development, and is to tell Mayor David N. Dinkins as soon as today whether he wants the job, mayoral aides said yesterday.
Mr.
Sullivan, who was born in the Bronx and spent 23 years at the Chase Manhattan Bank before leaving to head First Chicago in 1980, made a strong impression in an interview with Mr.
Dinkins at City Hall last week, the aides said.
He would replace Sally B. Hernandez-Pinero, who has said she wants to spend more time with her children by shifting to a less demanding post.


Victim's Left Arm Raised, Expert Tells Teaneck Jury
Michael Baden, a former Chief Medical Examiner of New York City, testified today that Phillip Pannell's upper left arm was raised when he was shot in the back by a Teaneck policeman in April 1990.
"It had to be upward and not downward at the time the bullet struck Mr. Pannell's back," Dr.
Baden said of the left arm closest to the shoulder.
He testified that he did not know exactly how high the arm was raised, but it was above a plane parallel to the ground.


Prices of Treasury Securities Fall
Interest rates rose and prices of Treasury securities fell in light trading yesterday, as market participants continued to grapple with conflicting signals about the economy and to cope with additional new corporate debt securities.
Those developments overshadowed a strong auction of $13.7 billion worth of two-year notes, which were sold at the lowest yield since the Treasury initiated the regular sale in 1974.


Ryan's Family Steak House reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Britain Names Head Of Fair Trade Agency
The Office of Fair Trading, Britain's equivalent of the Federal Trade Commission, has appointed Sir Bryan Carsberg, the country's top telecommunications industry regulator, as its director general.
Sir Bryan, who is 53, will take up his five-year appointment in June.
He will succeed Sir Gordon Borrie, 60, who has completed his third five-year term.


Calendar: Architecture, Gardens And Rococo
Architects Speak  92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; (212) 996-1100.
The architect Antoine Predock is the first speaker in a four-part lecture series that starts next Thursday.
The other architects are Robert A. M. Stern (Feb. 6), Eric Owen Moss (Feb. 13) and Henry N. Cobb (Feb. 27).
All talks start at 8 P.M.
Fee for the series, $50; single lecture, $15.
Winter Under Glass  New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Blvd., Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.
A show of American garden benches will be in the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory through March 8.
Conservatory hours: 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Tuesday through Sunday.
Admission: $2; $1 for students, children ages 6 to 16 and those 65 and older; free on Saturdays from 10 A.M. to noon.
On Feb. 1 from 8:30 A.M. to 4 P.M., the garden is sponsoring a symposium on wildflower cultivation.
Topics will include designing with native plants, fragrant species and wetlands management.
Fee, including lunch, $116; $104, members; $58, students.
Call (212) 220-8720 for registration.
"Desert Weekend," with displays of desert species, a plant sale, talks, demonstrations and children's events, will be held Feb. 1 and 2 from noon to 4 P.M. in the conservatory.
Park Space  Urban Center Galleries of the Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 935-3960.
A display of designs by graduate architectural students for a 23-acre park, running along the Hudson River between 72d and 59th Streets, opens Tuesday and runs through Feb 28.
The waterfront park is within the Riverside South Park development project.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday through Saturday (closed Thursday).
Free.
Horticultural Lectures  West Side Y.M.C.A., 5 West 63d Street, (212) 549-3200.
Wave Hill is offering the first of three talks at 6:30 P.M. on Tuesday, when Jean Paul Carlhian will speak about the Enid A. Haupt Garden at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.
The series continues on Feb. 25 with a talk about the horticulturist E. H. Wilson and on March 24 with a lecture on the gardens and parks at Rockefeller Center.
Fee for the series, $25; single lecture, $10.
Reservations required.
Colonial Style  Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street; (212) 879-5500.
An exhibition of 18th-century furniture, silver, ceramics, glassware and decorative objects in the American Rococo style starts Sunday and runs through May 17.
Hours: 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Tuesday through Sunday (except Friday and Saturday, when the museum closes at 9 P.M.).
Suggested admission: $6; $3 for students and people 65 and older.
Antiques in SoHo  The Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street at Houston Street; (212) 219-8018.
"From Pilgrim to Pop," an antiques show featuring 50 dealers, will be held from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday.
Admission is $6.
An early buying session, at $25 a couple, will be held on Saturday from 9 to 11 A.M.
Young Hands  Abigail Adams Smith Museum, 421 East 61st Street; (212) 838-6878.
Paula Nadelstern, a quilter, will lead a workshop on quilting for children ages 7 to 12, at 2 P.M. on Sunday.
The program is free with admission, but reservations are required.
Admission: $2; $1 for students and those 65 and older; children 12 and younger, free.
Tiny Plots  Planting Fields Arboretum, Planting Fields Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.; (516) 922-9200, or weekends, (516) 922-9201.
The 300 plants in Camellia House, a greenhouse at the arboretum, will be in peak bloom through March 1.
A training program for garden volunteers starts in February; call (516) 922-9511 for information.
The arboretum is open from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. daily.
Admission is $3 a car on weekends.
Staten Island Antiques  Sea View Home and Hospital, 460 Brielle Avenue (off Bradley Avenue); (718) 667-7110.
The Staten Island chapter of the Alzheimer's Association is sponsoring a benefit show with about 25 antiques dealers from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. on Saturday and Sunday.
Admission: $2; $1 for those 60 and older; children age 12 and younger, free.
Garden Seminar  Clark Botanic Garden, 193 I. U. Willets Road off Glen Cove Road, Albertson, L.I.; (516) 621-7568.
The garden is sponsoring a seminar on environmental issues on four consecutive Thursdays, staring today.
Each talk begins at 7 P.M.
Fee for the series, $10; $8 for members.
Registration required.
On Tuesdays, from noon to 3 P.M., a plant clinic is open for telephone and in-person gardening advice.
The clinic is staffed by gardeners from the Cornell Cooperative Extension Service of Nassau County; call (516) 621-7033 for information.


Suspect in Assault Dies After Arrest, Police Say
A 30-year-old man who drove his car up five flights of steps to the tennis courts in a Queens park, rammed a fence and then assaulted an elderly couple lost consciousness as he struggled with police officers and died shortly afterward, the police said last night.
The man, who was not identified last night, lost consciousness yesterday afternoon moments after two police officers freed him from a chain-link fence he had tried to get under to escape, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.


Conner Peripherals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Television; Feminism Invades London Police In New Three-Part 'Mystery' Tale
Public television's "Mystery" goes into a change-of-pace mode tonight with "Prime Suspect," a four-hour British production from Granada Television.
Tonight's special two-hour installment is on Channels 13 and 49 at 9 and Channel 21 at 10.
There are no mildly eccentric detectives snooping around quaint English villages in this one.
The scene is contemporary London.
The problem is a sadistic serial killer.
The upshot is a thumpingly powerful police drama, on a par with the best of the commercial kind done by Americans, who excel in this particular genre.
The police identify a dead woman as Della Mornay, a prostitute.
The murder is grisly: hands bound, whole body bruised and sexually assaulted.
Jane Tennison (Helen Mirren), promoted to detective chief inspector 18 months earlier, wants the case, explaining that she is tired of being "sidestepped." But her boss (John Benfield) warns her that "now is not the time to thrust your women's rights down our throat" and besides, Detective Chief Inspector John Shefford (John Forgeham) and his partner, Sgt.
Bill Otley (Tom Bell), have already rushed in to take over.


Washington Mutual Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


At Home Abroad; 'It Is Our Only Hope'
Dov Frohman is one of Israel's high-technology business stars, a vice president of the California microcomputer company Intel and general manager of Intel Israel.
Last year he won the Israel Prize for engineering and technology.
A jolly man with a large beard, he has had an international career.
Twenty years ago in California Mr.
Frohman invented the Eprom chip, a breakthrough that helped start Intel's phenomenal growth.
He took a year off in Africa, teaching in Ghana and going up the Congo River in Zaire.
Then he persuaded Intel, with much difficulty, to start operations in Israel.
They have been a great success.


Minnesota Basking In Found Money
The downtown streets of the host city of Super Bowl XXVI are quiet, the climate-controlled skyway mall shopping areas less than bursting with activity.
Yet, the city awaits a mini-explosion of business beginning Thursday as tens of thousands of out-of-towners make their way to this city for a long weekend of marketing and glitz that happens to conclude with a football game on Sunday.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  U.S. WEIGHING MISSILE CUTS
The White House and Pentagon are considering plans to sharply reduce or eliminate long-range nuclear missiles with more than one warhead, officials said.
Senior aides say they expect President Bush to describe the proposal in his State of the Union address next week.
A1  SPY CHIEFS SEE WANING THREAT
Intelligence chiefs told a Senate committee that countries of the former Soviet Union have sharply cut their military spending and have lost their will -- and much of their ability -- to attack the United States.
A8  DEBATE OVER AID TO RUSSIA
President Bush announced at a 47-nation conference that he would ask Congress for $645 million in new aid for Russia and other former Soviet republics.
Tensions are surfacing among the allies over how to help the new states.
A1  ALGERIA SEIZES FUNDAMENTALIST
Nine days after canceling elections, Algerian security forces arrested the acting leader of the country's victorious Islamic fundamentalist party.
The Government also banned political activities in the country's 10,000 mosques.
A3  ISRAELI ARRIVES IN BEIJING
The Israeli Foreign Minister arrived in China for a four-day visit that is expected to lead to the establishment of diplomatic relations.
A3  Israel is speeding West Bank settlement activity, studies show.
A6  An Israeli court tries again to limit access to the Dead Sea scrolls.
A7  EGYPT TO LIMIT TRANSPLANTS
In an effort to end the sale of human organs by the country's poor, Egyptian doctors have announced a ban on any kidney transplant from a living donor who is not a relative of the recipient.
A5  GERMAN RESCUE BRINGS A SHIVER
As Eastern European nations compete for German investment, there is an undertone of worry in regions that recall the horrors of World War II.
In Polish towns like Raciborz, which was once part of Germany, some politicians have begun to play on fears of German power.A10  DRUG SMUGGLER'S PARADISE
Isolated from the rest of the country, the Chilean border town of Arica has become one of the easiest transit points for cocaine bound for the United States and Europe.
A4  Former British spy pleads guilty to terrorism charges in Belfast.
A11  National A14-20, B10  BUSH HAILS ABORTION PROTESTERS
Preparing for an election campaign in which abortion could become a powerful issue, the President told thousands of anti-abortion demonstrators that he commended their efforts to overturn Roe v.
Wade.
He also chose a staunch opponent of abortion as chairman of the Republican platform committee.
A1  SMALL TALK
In 1968, about the time that television producers began using the term "sound bite," a Presidential candidate spoke for 43 uninterrupted seconds in the average appearance on the evening news.
With each subsequent campaign the bites grew shorter, and by 1988 the average was a mere nine seconds.
There have been complaints about this trend ever since it began, but never before so many as today.
A1  Governor Clinton's campaign director is his perfect foil.
A18  HEALTH CARE OVERHAUL GAINS
On a party-line vote that reflected the partisanship of the Presidential campaign, a Senate committee approved a bill that would require employers to either provide health insurance for their workers or pay a new payroll tax.
A19  NEW POLICY ON U.S.
SECURITIES
The Treasury will intervene in the Government securities market whenever prices are distorted by a shortage of securities, whether as a result of market forces or of manipulation.
A1  BUSH NAMES TRANSIT CHIEF
The President selected Andrew H. Card Jr. to be Secretary of Transportation.
Mr.
Card is a White House aide with a reputation for managerial skills but no expertise in the transportation field.
A14  JUSTICES RULE ON ASYLUM
The Supreme Court narrowed the grounds on which people fleeing service in foreign armies may qualify for political asylum in the United States.
A20  JAPANESE CONTRACT VOIDED
In the most dramatic economic backlash yet against Japan, Los Angeles County canceled a contract under which it would have bought $122 million worth of rail transit cars from a Japanese company.
A14  IMPLANT MAKER TO RELEASE DATA
The Dow Corning Corporation agreed to make public about 90 scientific studies and internal memorandums that call into question the safety of silicone gel breast implants.
A20  The space shuttle Discovery embarked on a scientific mission.
B10  Los Angeles will distribute condoms in its high schools.
A17  The Mayor of Birmingham lost his last chance to avoid prison.
A14  Metropolitan Digest, B1 ALBANY'S REDISTRICTING PLAN
A joint legislative committee unveiled a redistricting plan that would create new legislative seats for minorities and protect Republicans' hold on the State Senate as a result of intense backstage politicking in the Capitol.
A1  Neediest Cases B4  Business Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-12  A chair that's so new, it's a museum piece.
C1  You want a divorce?
You go to the class.C1  Once a euphemism, now a fancy: the English bathroom.
C1  Babyproofing the home.
C2  Robes fit for a monarch.
C5  A natural hoarder opens a shop, and the style is "neo-flea." C10  Parent &amp; Child C12  Arts/Entertainment C14-24  Hal Roach's first century.
C15  Sundance Film Festival entries.
C15  Mixed response to Tonys snub.
C15  Word and Image: Feminism on TV's "Mystery." C15  Obituaries B12  George S. Odiorne; developed theory of management.
A. J. Antoon, stage director.
Sports B13-20  Baseball: Mets trade Carreon to Detroit.
B15  Basketball: Nets beat Suns.
B13  Knicks lose in Philadelphia.
B14  Column: George Vecsey on Bruce Smith.
B13  Football: Distractions are dogging the Bills.
B13  Business is ready to boom in Minneapolis.
B18  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Poor children in tough times.
Consumers need rules.
David C. Unger: Korea.
Letters A22  William Safire: Baker's big bash.
A23  Anthony Lewis: "It is our only hope." A23  Elaine K. Swift and Kenneth Finegold: Has Clinton said enough?
A23  Mark Gerzon: Clinton's no Gary Hart.
A23


Shelby Williams Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Has Clinton Said Enough?; A Yes or No Will Do
"Have you ever had an extramarital affair, Governor?" a New Hampshire television reporter asked Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the Democratic presidential nominee.
As he has before, Mr.
Clinton sidestepped the question.
"Well," he said, "if I had, I wouldn't tell you."
We think Mr.
Clinton should give New Hampshire Democrats -- and the American electorate -- a simple yes or no.
The answer would reveal much about his character and electability.


First Florida Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Father Is Helped by Neediest Cases
Simon Rutledge is a man in a hurry.
Four years ago doctors told the 40-year-old Bronx resident that he had the virus that causes AIDS.
In a way, he said, it was a break.
"It let me know I had one chance, one last chance to make things right with my kids," he said.
"I want them to grow up right and think kind thoughts about me when I'm gone."


Knicks Would Be Elsewhere


Catering to Consumers' Ethnic Needs
In California, where waves of diverse and fast-growing immigrant groups have swept away any lingering notion of consumers as a homogeneous mass market, many companies have been forced to abandon their old approaches to selling their products and services.
And in their search for new strategies in the last few years, companies ranging from banks to television stations have learned one clear lesson: building business among a sometimes bewildering array of ethnic markets takes a lot more than just dubbing a few television commercials in Spanish or sponsoring a float in the local Chinese New Year's parade.


Merger of New York's Transit and City Police Is Still a Bad Idea; Better Subsidy Deal
To the Editor:
New York City Deputy Mayor Barbara J. Fife's "Give the City's Riders a Break" (Op-Ed, Jan. 11) illustrates the inequities of subsidy distribution between the commuter railroads and the Transit Authority with admirable clarity.
She points out that 90 percent of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's passengers rode Transit Authority subways and buses, and that farebox receipts support more than 60 percent of the Transit Authority's operating costs.


Haley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amoco's Net Plunges 62.8% On Rising Costs and Losses
Amoco Inc., the nation's fifth-largest energy company, said today that its net income plummeted by 62.8 percent in the fourth quarter.
As with other oil companies, lower prices for crude oil and natural gas pinched profits, but Amoco also reported higher costs from unsuccessful drilling programs and a loss in its chemical operations.
Texaco said on Tuesday that its income from operations fell by 37.6 percent.


Senators Hearten Dinkins
Mayor David N. Dinkins concluded two days of meetings here today saying he had found new support for efforts to make the plight of America's cities a focus of national economic policy.
"Washington can no longer turn its back on cities," said the Mayor, who also attended a meeting here of the United States Conference of Mayors.
"We need help now."


In Connecticut, Mourning for an Old Friend: Manufacturing Jobs
It may be months before the pink slips go out to the 2,400 workers and managers at the yellow-brick Pratt &amp; Whitney plant on Main Street here, where generations of workers have built aircraft engines.
But there was a sense of sadness outside the Art Deco-era complex today, one day after Pratt &amp; Whitney's parent company, United Technologies, announced that it would cut its work force by almost 14,000, including 6,400 at plants throughout Connecticut.


Jefferson Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


With Glue Hardly Dry, This Chair's a Classic
Once upon a time there was a renowned architect.
He had a great idea for a chair.
He dreamed of a ribbony chair -- thin, light and springy, like a basket.
One day a maker of famous chairs that wanted to keep its reputation came to the architect and said, "Design a chair for us." They built their Geppetto a workshop and soon there were designs.


Fulton Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


LSI Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; President and G.O.P. Take Aim At Abortion on Roe Anniversary
Preparing for a campaign in which abortion could become a powerful issue, President Bush today delivered a speech that showed no sign of flexibility in his position, and the Republican Party named a strong anti-abortion advocate as chairman of its platform committee.
One day after the Supreme Court agreed to hear a Pennsylvania case that could propel the abortion issue into the center of the Presidential campaign, Mr.
Bush addressed thousands of anti-abortion demonstrators by telephone from the Oval Office and commended efforts to overturn the Supreme Court decision, Roe v.
Wade, that made abortion a constitutional right 19 years ago today.


Bombardier Agrees to Buy De Havilland From Boeing
Bombardier Inc., the Montreal-based transportation conglomerate, said today that it would acquire the Boeing Company's ailing de Havilland division, a maker of commuter jets and Ontario's largest industrial employer.
In the complex deal, valued at nearly $600 million, public authorities will provide nearly $500 million in subsidies.
The Seattle-based Boeing, which paid $155 million for de Havilland in 1986 and has experienced losses totaling nearly $1 billion, will walk away with $100 million.


Minnesota Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


G.O.P. Leader to Back Benefits Extension
In the first test of the politics of the recession of the new Congressional session, Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois, the House Republican leader, is expected to testify Thursday in favor of another extension of unemployment insurance benefits.
But Mr.
Michel, who played a major role two months ago in getting the White House to compromise with Democrats on extensions of up to 20 weeks of benefits for people already out of work for at least half a year, is expected to tell a subcommittee of the House Ways and Means Committee that ways must be found to pay for the additional benefits instead of declaring a budget emergency that would permit them simply to increase the Federal deficit.


Steinbrenner In Suit Accord
George Steinbrenner is accustomed to doing things on a grand scale, but his effort to meet with Commissioner Fay Vincent is advancing inch by inch.
Arthur Christy, the lawyer for the court stenographic company that Steinbrenner sued in 1990, said yesterday that lawyers for the two sides had reached an agreement in principle for the lawsuit to be dropped.
But, he added, no agreement has been signed and no stipulation has been filed in court.
He said he had expected the papers to be filed yesterday, but they were not.


Dallas Semiconductor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Mets Trade Carreon to Tigers for Gibson
The Mets, completing an exhaustive and often exhilarating off-season reconstruction project, yesterday did their final bit of reassembling when they obtained left-handed reliever Paul Gibson from the Detroit Tigers for outfielder Mark Carreon and reliever Tony Castillo.
"We're set," said Gerry Hunsicker, the assistant vice president for baseball operations for the Mets, who also acquired Randy Marshall, a minor league pitcher, from the Tigers.
"Unless there is a major injury or development of that sort, I don't see us changing anymore before the season."


Smith Corona Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sysco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Genisco Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Business of Keeping Baby Safe
A few months ago, shortly after her 8-month-old son, Joshua, began to crawl, Sarah Nehrer knew she was in trouble.
Joshua, it seemed, was full of curiosity.
Among his favorite pastimes were teething on furniture, shredding magazines, toppling cups brimming with hot coffee and peering into kitchen cabinets that contained colorful but deadly cleaning solutions.
In short, Joshua was a normal child.


Pyramid Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Corrections
A People entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page last Thursday misstated the new positions of two regional advertising account managers for Men's Journal magazine.
Robert Frankel is Midwest ad manager and is based in Chicago; Marc Gordon is West Coast ad manager and is based in Los Angeles.


A Hint on Question No. 6: They Called Him Cal
TIME flies when you're having fun.
This year is the 200th anniversary of the construction of the White House.
"The White House, 1792 to 1992: Image in Architecture," an exhibition at the Octagon Museum in Washington, kicks off a yearlong celebration -- a year that may or may not end with a new President planning to move in.


Corrections
Two articles and a picture caption yesterday about the racketeering trial of John Gotti rendered the name of his lawyer incorrectly.
He is Albert J. Krieger.


People
*
Merle Schell has been named senior vice president and director of business development at Backer Spielvogel Bates, New York.
She had previously been a group management supervisor at Grey Advertising, New York. *
Mark Minkin has been named senior vice president of new-business development at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos Advertising Inc., Boston.
He had been director of worldwide advertising at Groupe Bull, Paris.


Books of The Times; Sinister Aspects of Left-Handedness
The Left-Hander Syndrome  The Causes and Consequences of Left-Handedness  By Stanley Coren  Illustrated. 308 pages.
The Free Press/Macmillan. $24.95.
At first, the prospect of reading Stanley Coren's surprising study, "The Left-Hander Syndrome: The Causes and Consequences of Left-Handedness," looks like fun.
You skim through the slightly too familiar stuff about left-handedness being equated throughout history with weakness, unluckiness and evil; or about the lingering in-group biases that make society treat the 10 percent of its members who are left-handed left-handedly.
This is old news.


Northeast Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Monsanto Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Armstrong Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Robes Fit for an Emperor, to See and Buy
MEMBERS of the Chinese court dressed for ceremonial occasions in clothes dictated not by whimsy or fashion but by protocol.
Pearls the size of marbles would top an emperor's hat.
A ruby finial would perch on the hats of nobles and top officials.
Clothes and accessories revealed status.
A show and sale of 100 robes, textiles and pieces of jewelry is on view through Feb. 1 at Robert Homma William Lipton, a gallery at 27 East 61st Street in Manhattan.
The show, "Imperial Wardrobe," reveals social customs as well as craft.


International Colin Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arica Journal; Cocaine Invades Chile, Scorning the Land Mines
After two hours of driving along desert roads, trekking through vaulting canyons and climbing rock embankments, Antonio Cubillo and his group of seven narcotics agents came to a small emerald-green valley.
On one side, almost out of view, was a crude hut with walls made of mud blocks.
A grimy sheepskin lay on the dirt floor.
Greasy pots and pans were stacked under a piece of tin, evidence of recent use.
The team confirmed that this was a stopping point for Bolivian Indians transporting cocaine to Chile, just the most recent sign of a disturbing trend in this northern border town.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In Nynex's New Campaign, It's People Over Machines
HOPING to put a human face on high technology, the first advertising for the Nynex Corporation in almost a year will put more focus on people than on fiber optics.
And like many other large advertisers, the telecommunications company has decided that the people who ought to be featured in its campaign, which begins on Sunday, are its own employees, from an installer who travels the snowy roads of rural New England to a repairer who descends into the dark basements of the South Bronx.


Bandag Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Battle Creek Developments reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


New Campaigns
*
A 15-second television commercial for the pain killer Nuprin features Jim Kelly, quarterback of the Super Bowl bound Buffalo Bills, with Joe Montana, the injured San Francisco 49ers quarterback.
In the spot, created by J. Walter Thompson, New York, Mr.
Kelly says, "Next year, Joe, you and me." Mr.
Montana's response: "I'll send you tickets." A newspaper advertisement with a Super Bowl theme, featuring Mr.
Kelly, will also run.
Both athletes have appeared in previous Nuprin spots.


Federal Paper Board reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Company to Release Data Questioning Implant Safety
The Dow Corning Corporation agreed today to make public about 90 scientific studies and internal memorandums that call into question the safety of silicone gel breast implants.
The Food and Drug Administration earlier this week asked the company to release the information, saying it was important for doctors and patients to understand what is known -- and unknown -- about the implants.
The documents suggest that company scientists have been concerned for years about the lack of data to prove that the implants are safe.


John H. Harland reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Bebel Gilberto  The Ballroom 253 West 28th Street Manhattan Through Saturday
Like so many younger Brazilian pop singers, Bebel Gilberto exudes a self-possession, unaffected elegance and comfortable sensuality that is almost impossible to find among American pop stars of the same age.
The 25-year-old daughter of the bossa nova pioneer Joao Gilberto opened a five-night engagement at the Ballroom on Tuesday as part of the club's second winter festival of Brazilian performers.
Her program consists mostly of Brazilian material, interspersed with the Beatles' "If I Fell" and the Gershwins' " 'S Wonderful."


Armor All Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Four Reach Agreement
CHRIS BOSIO of the Milwaukee Brewers, JIM GOTT of the Los Angeles Dodgers, TOM PAGNOZZI of the St.
Louis Cardinals and GARY VARSHO of the Pittsburgh Pirates agreed to one-year contracts yesterday, leaving 124 players remaining in salary arbitration.
Bosio and Gott split the difference in their arbitration cases.
Bosio, who made $915,000, will get $2,287,000, halfway between his request for $2,575,000 in arbitration and Milwaukee's offer of $2 million.
Gott, who made $1,725,000 in 1991, will get $2,125,000.
Pagnozzi, who made $345,000 in 1991, will get $967,500, and Varsho, who earned $155,000 last year, will get $332,500 plus the chance to earn another $52,500 in performance bonuses. (AP)


Glenfed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Discloses Tougher Rules To Revamp Treasury Market
The Treasury will intervene in the Government securities market whenever prices are distorted by a shortage of securities, whether a result of market forces or market manipulation, the three agencies that regulate the market said today.
The new policy for the $2.2 trillion market, where the Government borrows the money for its operations, is the most drastic item in a package of new rules, procedures and legislative changes put together by the Treasury Department, the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Federal Reserve in the wake of the illegal bidding scandal involving Salomon Brothers that was disclosed in August.


Taking 'I Want My MTV' Seriously in Vineland
Just before Thanksgiving, Yolanda Gutierrez opened her cable television bill and learned that the cost of basic service would increase $2.50 a month beginning Jan. 1.
Then she discovered that the cable company, Sammons Communications Inc., planned to drop her favorite channel, Music Television, from basic service and replace it with a pay-per-view rival, the Video Jukebox Network.


Big East, A.C.C. and Irish in Lockstep With 4 Bowls
The long-discussed coalition of four major college football bowl games moved within one step of reality yesterday when the Orange, Sugar, Cotton and Fiesta Bowls announced an agreement with the Big East and Atlantic Coast Conferences and Notre Dame.
Under the agreement, considered the last best chance for the current post-season system to produce a championship game without the establishment of a playoff, an orderly process beginning at the end of the 1992 college season will produce matchups that could include a meeting between the two highest-ranked teams in the country.


Boy Scouts Don't Qualify as Private Group
To the Editor:
In his Op-Ed article, "God and Boy in the Scouts" (Jan. 9), George H. Smith errs in thinking of the Boy Scouts of America as a purely private organization immune from legal challenge to its policy of religious discrimination.
In the Chicago Federal court challenge to the Scouts' discrimination against a nontheistic child, Welsh v.
Boy Scouts of America, to which Mr.
Smith did not refer and which is expected to be decided any day, the plaintiffs have made a very solid case that Boy Scouts of America is a "public accommodation" and thus not legally allowed to discriminate along religious lines.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices fell today in Tokyo, after two days of gains, on futures-related selling and profit taking.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues finished the day at 21,072.15, down by 508.57 points, or 2.3 percent.
At midday, the index was lower, by 561.58 points, or 2.6 percent.
On Thursday, the Nikkei rose 46.60 points.


Train Nonviolent Offenders at Former Bases; Wasting in Prison
To the Editor:
A while back a reader wrote upset that someone could suggest to the homeless that they commit crimes to get available housing in the "correctional" empire (letter, Oct. 29).
It may be news to your readers, but this is already frequently done.
Prison is no country club, as some believe.
However, the housing here is far more comfortable than a cardboard box in the cold.
There may be drugs and alcohol here, but drugs are scarce and treatment is available, so this is a good place to dry out.


Independent, Yes, but Estonia Shivers
Freshly minted trappings of statehood are in evidence immediately on arrival here: two Soviet-made planes proudly emblazoned "Estonian" stand on the tarmac, fuzzy-cheeked customs agents order arriving Russians to buy visas, youthful police officers wear new uniforms.
But there is no fuel to fly the planes or to run the police cars, or to heat much of the city.
Estonians who long dreamed of resuming the independence interrupted by the Soviets a half-century ago are finding along with their Baltic neighbors in Lithuania and Latvia that their triumphs carry higher costs than generally anticipated..


Italy Is Nice, But Addison Likes the Nets
One of the ways to uncover what's behind the Nets' upswing these days is to do what Coach Bill Fitch has been doing with regularity and success: Go to the bench.
Last week Derrick Coleman, normally a starter, helped the Nets win two games in a role off the bench, and Kenny Anderson, the highly regarded rookie, stepped in to preserve another victory.
But the reserve of the moment is 6-foot-7-inch swingman Rafael Addison, who was summoned to the rescue by Fitch in the second quarter on Wednesday night against Phoenix and responded nobly.


GATX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Restaurants
In 1985, the conservative French food establishment in New York City went into a swivet when La Caravelle, that fortress of classical French cuisine, took on an American chef, Michael Romano.
It was the first time in memory that a non-Frenchman had run the kitchen of an old-line Gallic institution in the city, something like having a Pakistani as grand marshal of the St.
Patrick's Day parade.
Only when the young Yankee vastly upgraded the menu did eyebrows lower.
Last year, La Caravelle's owner, Andre Jammet, took a giant step further from tradition by hiring a Japanese chef, Tadashi Ono.
Sushi on the gueridon?
Rice replacing pommes soufflee?
No such thing.
Like Mr.
Romano, Mr.
Ono, who trained in L'Orangerie and La Petite Chaya in Los Angeles, as well as at La Caravelle for three years, quickly proved that it is the man, not the flag, who makes the difference.
Under Mr.
Ono, La Caravelle is reaching one of the many peaks in its 32-year existence.


William G. Weart, Journalist, 85
William G. Weart, the Philadelphia correspondent of The New York Times for 21 years until his retirement in 1966, died on Saturday at the Lehigh Valley Medical Center in Allentown, Pa.
He was 85 years old.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Diner's Journal
Casual at Essex House
Cafe Botanica is the casual cousin of the splendid Les Celebrites, both in the Essex House hotel at 160 Central Park South in Manhattan.
It's a delightful spot at midday with a sweeping view of Central Park and the animated thoroughfare that borders it.
The dining area is bright and cheerful.
Tables are large and well spaced, wicker armchairs are soft and commodious, and a giant acrylic painting by the actress Elke Sommer will, if nothing else, snap you to attention.


Service Merchandise Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


2 Fiery Personas, but No Sparks, in Courtroom
As an occasion to anticipate, it had the juicy appeal of a dinner party where two fiery invitees are to meet for the first time.
But in the end, it seemed to be a normal day at the office for both guests of honor, the Rev.
Al Sharpton and former Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall.
The two encountered each other across a crowded Manhattan courtroom yesterday as Mr.
Sharpton tried to head off a trial for income-tax evasion and Justice Marshall sat in judgment of his appeal.
The courtroom overflowed with admirers of both, some clearly and vocally present in support of Mr.
Sharpton, some in simple reverence for Justice Marshall and some more than likely just curious about what it would be like to have the two of them in the same air space.


Donors in Need Aid Those Even Needier
Instead of spending more on gifts this holiday season, thousands in the New York region gave more to charity instead, producing a surge of small donations that enabled many charities to reach goals that had seemed out of reach in November.
The deluge of checks for $100 and less defied widespread predictions that the deepening recession and a rising sense of indifference or anger toward the poor would lead to a drop in donations.


Clorox Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Mayors Appear Unmoved by the Major Candidates
After hearing pitches from the Democratic Presidential contenders on how they would revive America's cities, dozens of mayors meeting here today seemed to agree on one thing: the single candidate who truly understands urban needs is Larry Agran.
Given that Mr.
Agran was once a mayor himself, of Irvine, Calif., it is not surprising that participants in a meeting of the United States Conference of Mayors would rally behind behind his long-shot Presidential candidacy.


Dell Buys Four Noted Fiction Magazines
The Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, best known for its hardcover and paperback books, announced yesterday that it would begin publishing four renowned fiction magazines.
The Dell Magazines division acquired the four monthly science-fiction and mystery magazines from Davis Publications Inc.
They are Analog Science Fiction &amp; Fact, Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine, Alfred Hitchcock's Mystery Magazine and Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine.


Chemical Bank Official To New Midlantic Post
Alan M. Silberstein, an 18-year employee of the Chemical Banking Corporation and now the bank's executive vice president responsible for the consumer banking group, was named yesterday to a new position as executive vice president and director of retail banking for the Midlantic Corporation.
Mr.
Silberstein, 44, has held a variety of positions at Chemical -- in finance, operations and consumer banking.
In 1978, he became the director of profit planning, and in 1982 he was appointed senior vice president in charge of retail operations.
In 1986, he became the head of Chemical's national consumer division.
The next year, he moved into branch banking, holding a number of positions.


A Corporate Nudge Onto U.S. Wheels
Corporate America is going to bat for Detroit.
Companies like Monsanto Chemical in St.
Louis and the Tosco Corporation in Stamford, Conn., and the Brown Paper Company of Greenwich, Conn., are all offering their employees $1,000 each toward buying an American car.
Just what is an American car -- with American workers making foreign brands at U.S. plants -- is up to each program.
But even though other countries send cars to the United States, only the Japanese imports seemed to be viewed as a threat.
Business Day, page D1.


Houghton Mifflin reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Otter Tail Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press last Friday about a Connecticut Supreme Court proceeding in the case of Murray Gold, who faces a fifth trial in the 1974 slayings of his former in-laws, misstated the position of James A. Killen, an Assistant State's Attorney.
He argued that in ordering a new trial, a judge had erred in concluding that medication taken by Mr.
Gold had interfered with his competence to assist in his defense.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 586 money market mutual funds increased by $7.52 billion, to $506.82 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 217 institutional funds increased by $3.45 billion, to $177.78 billion.
The assets of the 280 general-purpose funds were up by $2.31 billion, to $180.37 billion.
The 89 broker-dealer funds increased by $1.76 billion, to $148.67 billion, the institute said.


Corrections
A map on Jan. 16 with an article about the breakup of Yugoslavia included renderings of outdated flags of Slovenia and Croatia in some editions.
Up-to-date renderings appear below.


Chief Executive Is Named At Municipal Bond Insurer
The Financial Guaranty Insurance Company, the subsidiary of the GE Capital Corporation that insures securities, principally municipal bonds, has named Ann C. Stern president and chief executive.
Ms.
Stern replaces Stephen Berger, who has been appointed executive vice president of GE Capital, a diversified financial services company based in Stamford, Conn., that is a division of the General Electric Company.
Before joining Financial Guaranty, Mr.
Berger spent five years as the executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, and before that was an investment banker with Odyssey Partners.


BUSH TO ASK MORE FOR BASE CLEANUPS
The Bush Administration has sharply increased its estimate of the cost of cleaning up pollution on military bases, and plans to ask Congress for an immediate increase of $1 billion for this purpose beyond the $2.7 billion already included in this year's military budget.
The Administration's request for funds to clean up the environment at military bases in the fiscal year 1993, which begins Oct. 1, has also been raised about $1 billion, to $3.7 billion, according to budget documents made public today.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Laurence A. Tisch plans to buy Macy's.
The move by the Loews chairman, already a big investor in Macy's, is an apparent solution to the company's financial troubles.
He will reportedly spend about $1 billion to greatly increase his stake.  [ Page A1. ]
A.T.&amp; T. and three Baby Bells reported depressed fourth-quarter and full-year earnings, a reflection of furious competitive pressures to cut costs and employees.  [ D1. ]


Austin Named to Hall
TRACY AUSTIN's first reaction when she heard that she had been elected to the International Tennis Hall of Fame at the age of 29 was to laugh.
"It came so out of the blue," Austin said at a Hall of Fame press luncheon yesterday in New York.
"A lot of athletes make their retirement, then after five years talk starts about the Hall of Fame. I never felt like I retired."
Injuries to her back and shoulder effectively retired Austin at age 21.
Austin, who was the youngest player to win the United States Open (16 years 9 months in 1979) is now the youngest to join 158 others already in the Hall of Fame in Newport, R.I.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL Rodman Gets 27 Rebounds


Centel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Comics Break New Ground, Again
After nearly a decade of battling evil around the globe, the comic book hero Northstar has revealed to the 100,000 or so people who follow his exploits that he is gay.
Northstar appears in "Alpha Flight," a series produced by Marvel Comics, the nation's largest comic book publisher.
He reveals his sexual orientation in a story about his adoption of an AIDS-infected baby.
The second-largest company, DC Comics, has also introduced a gay character and AIDS-related themes in the "Flash" series.


Gerber Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY THE WAR FOR THE ROADS


Delta Air Lines Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Israel Agrees to Ties With China, Aiding Beijing Role in Talks
China and Israel established diplomatic ties today, paving the way for Beijing to participate in the Moscow round of Middle East peace talks next week.
Foreign Minister David Levy of Israel, who arrived in China on Wednesday for a four-day visit before he goes to Moscow, signed a joint protocol with the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, establishing ambassadorial-level relations effective immediately.


Public Service Co. of North Carolina reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Moody's Review Of Upjohn's Debt
The Upjohn Company's $520 million in debt is under review for a possible downgrade, Moody's Investors Service said yesterday.
Some of the debt now bears an AA-2 rating.
Moody's said it would take a look at the pharmaceutical company's new products and evaluate how they would help offset expected sales declines of some major drugs whose patents expire next year.
Also under study will be the impact of some adverse developments reported about the company's Halcion sedative.
The rating service said Upjohn's commercial paper, rated Prime-1, was not under review.


Quaker Oats Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Edward Yorio, Professor, 44
Edward Yorio, a professor at the Fordham University Law School, died on Sunday at Mount Vernon Hospital in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
He was 44 years old and lived in Mount Vernon.
He died of lymphoma, his family said.


Boston Edison Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Neediest Cases Surpasses '91 Total
Setting records is nothing new for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Fifty of its 80 annual appeals have raised more money than any before them.
But this year's campaign, which surpassed last year's total of $4.44 million yesterday, is one of the few to set a record during an economic downturn.


Uni-Marts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


EX-SOVIET LANDS TO GET SWIFT AID
The 47-nation conference on aid to the former Soviet Union ended today with some general proposals on how to expand and accelerate humanitarian assistance but with lingering uncertainty over how to pay for the programs and carry them out.
In an effort to spur the aid process, the Bush Administration announced today that it would fly 54 shipments of emergency food and medical supplies to Russia and the other republics, beginning Feb. 10, to help the new Commonwealth of Independent States through the winter.
On board the C-5 and C-141 aircraft will be some 16 million prepackaged meals left over from the Persian Gulf war.


Lord, Dentsu Wins Amati Ad Account
On Madison Avenue, where the world divides into agencies that have automobile accounts and those that do not, Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners yesterday joined the ranks of the "haves."
The agency, which has offices in Los Angeles and New York, won the estimated $60 million account for Mazda Motor of America's forthcoming luxury-car division, Amati, after a closely watched five-month review.


Sterling Chemicals Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Surprise! Surprise! One or Two Might Turn Up at the Metrodome
That line about not changing what brought you to the dance at first glance applies to both Washington and Buffalo in Super Bowl XXVI on Sunday.
The Redskins still want to run to set up their deep-strike passing game and on defense they begin and end with the principle of constantly applying pressure on the quarterback.
The Bills remain enamored of the no-huddle attack and defensively remain focused on preventing big plays and forcing mistakes on long drives.


Critic's Notebook; Toward a More Modern Modern
BIT by bit and month by month, the Museum of Modern Art has been undergoing a quiet transformation.
The change has been taking place at the heart of the institution -- in the second- and third-floor galleries of painting and sculpture, which for years have depicted modern art as an evolution beginning with Cezanne and culminating heroically in Abstract Expressionism.
That seamless interpretation, initiated by Alfred H. Barr Jr., founding director of the museum, and cultivated by William S. Rubin, former head of the department of painting and sculpture, unfolded as something authoritative and final.
Pop artists, Minimalists and all those who worked in the 1960's and later tended to be relegated to temporary quarters in the galleries of contemporary art.
Now Kirk Varnedoe, Mr.
Rubin's successor, is beginning to put his judicious imprint on the permanent collection.
He is extending it chronologically: for the first time, artists like Jasper Johns, Robert Rauschenberg and Andy Warhol have a prominence equal to that given Abstract Expressionists like Willem de Kooning and Barnett Newman.


Bills Say They Get No Respect At All
Bruce Smith is angry that the Redskins don't respect the Bills' defense.
Thurman Thomas, the consensus selection for most valuable player this season, doesn't believe he gets enough respect or recognition and has resigned himself that he "will have to live with the title of best all-around back."
The Bills, a team with an inferiority complex so large they could rent out space, began constructing their us-against-the-world attitude today in preparation for Sunday's Super Bowl showdown with the Washington Redskins.
Buffalo has been installed as a 7-point underdog.


Foxmeyer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


At the Movies
Bergman's Vision
Ingmar Bergman said a long time ago that he was retiring from film making.
And he has kept his word.
Sort of.
Devotees of the 73-year-old master have an opportunity to accompany him on an another excursion into the profound mysteries of life and love when "Best Intentions" is released in May by the Samuel Goldwyn Company.


Sherwin-Williams Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American President Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Senate Rejects Bush Plan to Aid The Poor Who Use Private Schools
The Senate dealt President Bush's education program a major defeat today by voting down a proposal to provide Federal aid for disadvantaged families that choose to send their children to parochial and other private schools.
Although the plan to spend $30 million in six regions would have had only a marginal effect on the nation's schools, it reopened the old debate over the separation of church and state.


Corrections
An article yesterday about RU-486, the drug known as the "French abortion pill," referred incorrectly to the campaign to make it available in the United States.
The Feminist Majority Foundation is studying the possibility of a boycott of the Hoechst Celanese Corporation, which holds the American rights to the drug; the group says it is not advocating a boycott.


The Art Market
Old Masters' Strength
The Old Masters dealers are feeling smug after the results of last week's New York auctions.
Indeed, their market is one of the few bright spots in an otherwise gloomy season.
"It's our turn to have a day in the sun," said Ian Kennedy, the director of Old Masters collections at Christie's.
"Old Masters are one of the only markets that haven't gone crazy and therefore haven't collapsed."


According to Levy, Smith, Safety, Is Out
Although he hasn't been officially ruled out of the Super Bowl, Bills strong safety Leonard Smith won't be available for Sunday's game, according to Buffalo Coach Marv Levy.
Smith has an infection in his knee and a fever, and he has missed practice for the last two weeks.


Sysco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Kimberly-Clark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


More Needed to Clean Bases
The Administration has sharply increased its estimate of the cost of removing pollution from the nation's military bases.
Page A15.


CHRONICLE
It's not easy for television correspondents to find the time to socialize, so CONNIE COLLINS found her WNBC-TV colleagues more than willing to go to Sag Harbor, L.I., this weekend to help her with a school benefit.
"We're all so busy as reporters that it's rare we get together, even for retirement parties," she said the other day as she explained the "Meet the Media" weekend she had organized to aid the Waterfront School, where her two children are students.
The private school, which has 100 pupils age 3 to 10, lost its director and 40 pupils last year and faces a deficit that could reach $100,000 this year.


Drug Makers To Subsidize Prescriptions
In the face of Congressional attacks on high drug prices, one drug maker announced a program yesterday to provide free prescription drugs to poor and elderly patients who are unable to pay for them, while another drug company introduced a rebate plan.
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said it would donate 17 heart, blood-pressure and cholesterol-lowering drugs for use by patients whose doctors certified that they had no insurance or other means of paying.


Dallas Journal; Uncompromising Choice Leaves Dallas Undecided
A little before 1 A.M. today Lori Palmer, a member of the Dallas City Council, tried to summarize the problem she and her colleagues faced, saying: "Dallas seems to have more difficulty than many other cities in coming to terms with its differences. We seem to have to go through exorcisms."
For five hours the council had been holding a public hearing on a proposal to end its ban on the hiring of homosexuals as police officers, a prohibition that was left unchanged.


Nynex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Data General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Hartmarx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


As Cabbies Protest, Taxi Panel Decides Against Fare Increase
Unlike subway and bus passengers, cab users won't be paying more for their rides -- at least not right away.
The chairman of New York City's Taxi and Limousine Commission said yesterday that he would not propose a taxi fare increase.
As he made the statement, more than 300 cabs drove through downtown and midtown Manhattan to protest even the possibility of an increase.


Corrections
A sampling of quotations yesterday, proposed by political strategists, satirists and others as sound bites likely to make the evening news in 1992, misstated the title of a book by P. J. O'Rourke.
It is "Republican Party Reptile." In some copies the sampling also referred erroneously, on second mention, to the contributor of one proposed sound bite.
The contribution -- "While George Bush putts, America goes down the hole" -- was from David Axelrod, a media consultant with the Clinton campaign, not a "Mr. Stone."


Market Place; Edgell May Show the Way To Heal Buyout Casualties
Edgell Communications was in many ways a prototypical leveraged buyout of the 1980's, forced by a raider into assuming so much debt that it soon collapsed.
Now Edgell is emerging from bankruptcy with a deal that may set a pattern for the 1990's.
The reorganization plan for Edgell, a magazine publisher, actively discriminates against the financiers who got Edgell into the mess in the first place, and, contrary to the wishes of some bondholders, it is forming a company with little debt that is likely to survive, if not prosper, even if the advertising recession persists for years.


Arms Makers Criticize Plan That Puts Focus on Research
The Bush Administration's proposal to shift the Pentagon's focus from building costly weapons to an approach revolving around laboratory research would be the most radical change in the military-industrial relationship since the birth of the modern arms business that mushroomed after World War II.
Military contractors said today that they had no firsthand knowledge of what the Administration was proposing, and even within the Pentagon it remained unclear which programs and companies might be most affected by the shift in policy.
But the contractors disputed the notion that the Pentagon could retain a vibrant arms industry without actually producing weapons, and they said the proposal could harm national security by leaving the nation unprepared to build sophisticated weapons in case of war.


Rohm &amp; Haas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The New Buy-American Auto Sweepstakes
Maybe it was President Bush's mixed success in Japan, or the Japanese official who said that American auto workers were lazy and illiterate.
Maybe it is the deep slump in Detroit.
But all of a sudden, companies around the United States are saying it would be good for America to be good to G.M., and they are offering inducements to their employees to buy from General Motors, Chrysler or Ford.
Some, groping to define just what constitutes an American car, are authorizing employees to buy autos made at the Honda plant in Marysville, Ohio, or Nissan's factory in Smyrna, Tenn.
But other companies have ruled out cars carrying American nameplates if they are manufactured in Canada or Japan.


Bush Weighs Health Benefits Tax And Cap on Medicaid Payments
As part of President Bush's effort to curb spending on health care, Administration officials want to limit how much Federal Medicaid payments can grow each year, and they want to impose a new tax on high-income people with health insurance purchased by employers.
Administration officials outlined their ideas at a meeting today with Republican senators and at a meeting on Tuesday with lobbyists for hospitals and health insurance companies.
Both proposals are subject to approval by Congress.


Asteroids Implicated in a 2d Mass Extinction
New geological evidence in Italy suggests that impacts of extraterrestrial objects, like asteroids or comets, could have been the cause of a mass extinction of life like the one in which the dinosaurs died out.
That extinction is also widely attributed to an impact.


Thomaston Mills Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Vans Vie Illegally for New York Bus Riders
One every two minutes, the unmarked vans scoot into city bus stops along Flatbush Avenue, scooping up clumps of waiting commuters.
Sometimes, the vans simply cut the buses off in a brazen race to the curb.
As soon as one is pulled over by the police -- and they often are -- its passengers slip out and around the corner, where another idles out of sight of the law.
A shadow bus system has taken hold along many of the busiest immigrant avenues of Brooklyn and Queens.
Run by Caribbean immigrants, largely for Caribbean immigrants, the unlicensed vans are winning growing numbers of converts from the city's buses.
They are cheaper -- $1 to the new $1.25 official transit fare.
Their riders also swear that they are faster and more comfortable, never mind the legal inconveniences.


2 Greenwich Youths Die In a Murder-Suicide
Two boys, seniors at Greenwich High School, were found shot to death in a wooded park here Wednesday night, and today the state medical examiner declared the deaths a murder-suicide.
Such violence is rare in this wealthy suburb; school officials said they could not remember any similar case involving students.


For Children
'You Won't Believe This, But'  Paper Bag Players Symphony Space Broadway and 95th Street Manhattan (212) 864-5400 Recommended ages: 4 to 9 Through March 8
In the Paper Bag Players' new show, cardboard boxes -- with grown-ups inside them -- are the stars.
Not that the troupe's grocery-store bags have been crumpled up and tossed in the bin.
It's just that, starting with the appearance of a large cardboard Checker cab on the stage, the players' cleverest moments during this hourlong program of nine short stories involve boxes in unexpected but practical guises.


Train Nonviolent Offenders at Former Bases; Treat Drug Convicts
To the Editor:
As the New York State budget deficit continues to grow, so does the state's prison population.
Correction Commissioner Thomas Coughlin has informed the Governor and the State Legislature that he needs the equivalent of eight 750-bed prisons next year.
Those prisons will ultimately cost the taxpayers of this state about a billion dollars.
But they don't have to be built.
The prison population in New York doesn't have to continue to skyrocket as it has during the last eight years, doubling to 58,000 now.
In recent years we have not been incarcerating primarily violent offenders but drug offenders, for whom treatment is more appropriate, more effective and far less costly.
In 1980 less than 1,000 drug offenders were sent to state prison, 11 percent of the total commitments.
By 1990 the number of drug offenders sent to state prison had grown to almost 11,000, 46 percent of the total commitments.


Review/Dance; Candle-Lit Renaissance To the Electric Present
The New York City Ballet's two varied programs on Sunday at the New York State Theater called attention to some of the many sources upon which choreographers can draw.
George Balanchine's "Monumentum Pro Gesualdo" acknowledges ballet's Renaissance origins.
Along with "Movements for Piano Orchestra," it is one of two ballets to music by Stravinsky that are almost always paired together.


12 Indicted On Violence In Drug Ring
Twelve people described as members of the "Supreme Team," which Federal authorities call a drug ring that terrorized southeastern Queens during the 1980's, were indicted yesterday in a string of violence that included at least nine murders.
Law-enforcement officials said the indictments involve one of the drug rings that, with organizations once led by Lorenzo (Fat Cat) Nichols and Howard (Pappy) Mason, have dominated crack distribution in southeastern Queens in the last decade.


Critics' Choices/Music; Chance to Be Daredevils
One sure-fire way to get new music performed is to dangle it in front of music students.
Although some are content to concentrate on Beethoven and Brahms, many are attracted both by the technical challenges that new music offers, and not least by the opportunity to play daredevil in public.
Though perceived by many as a bastion of musical conservatism, the Juilliard School actually fares quite well on the new-music front.
Its students play in the Museum of Modern Art's 20th-century Summergarden concerts every summer.
And the school's Focus week -- a series of free concerts started in 1985 as an outgrowth of Juilliard's Festival of Contemporary Music -- has become a highlight of the winter new-music calendar.


Train Nonviolent Offenders at Former Bases
To the Editor:
"Mr. Gingrich's Flawed Prison Math" (editorial, Jan. 7) criticizes Representative Newt Gingrich's proposal to build prisons on sites of former military bases because of the cost.
But it fails to explore a variation that could be accomplished with relatively limited expenditure.
Recently I suggested to Douglas Hansen, Federal director of base closure and utilization, that the conversion of military bases into low-security facilities for those convicted of less serious, nonviolent crimes could be effected quickly and at minimum cost.


Mead Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On Stage, and Off
'Mad Forest,' Mad Theater
It is surely a sign of the times that a play can open in a small New York theater, get unanimous rave reviews, sell out its limited run and possibly disappear without even one producer making a call to move it.
Caryl Churchill's "Mad Forest" is the 11-character play about life in Romania after the fall of the Ceausescus.
It opened at New York Theater Workshop's Perry Street Theater on Dec. 4 and has become the sold-out equivalent Off Broadway of "The Phantom of the Opera."


Telephone Earnings Depressed
A.T.&amp; T., as well as three of the regional companies known as Baby Bells, posted depressed fourth-quarter and full-year earnings yesterday.
Their reports generally reflected furious competitive pressures to cut costs and employees, plus a slowdown in the growth of telephone calls attributed to the persistent economic recession.
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company, the most widely held stock in the country, said its earnings dropped 21.5 percent in the fourth quarter and 83 percent for all of 1991.


TV Weekend; Mailer Plugs Himself Instead of His Book
You don't have to be as fascinated with Norman Mailer as Norman Mailer always has been or as David Frost seems to be to enjoy their conversation tonight.
Mr.
Mailer gives good talk.
There is a high intelligence operating along with a sometimes original perspective; at his most engaging, he manages to be off the wall and on the mark at the same time.
And his language has a way of rescuing his thoughts from drifting out into space.
"Talking With David Frost," at 9 P.M. on Channels 13 and 49, scarcely touches on the author as author.
You will hear no plug for his latest novel, "Harlot's Ghost." Instead, Mr.
Frost draws him out on some of the more notorious episodes of his eventful life, including the time he stabbed his wife and the part he played in the parole of Jack Henry Abbott, the criminal turned writer who murdered a young man soon after his release.
Mr.
Mailer is rueful.
As his 69th birthday approaches, he also seems somewhat chastened about other onetime enthusiasms, like promiscuous sex, violence, alcohol and marijuana.


Sounds Around Town
Pain and Heartbreak
Jimmy (Fastfingers) Dawkins, Chicago Blues, 73 Eighth Avenue, at 13th Street, Manhattan, (212) 255-7373.
Jimmy (Fastfingers) Dawkins is among the finest Chicago blues guitarists working: elemental and raw and intense.
He's also serious.
Instead of the standard good-time Saturday-night-party functionalism, he delivers pain and heartbreak.
His band, also from Chicago, finds the pleasure groove and stays there.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night start at 9; tickets are $12, and there is an $8 minimum at the tables.
Jazz Improvisation
Reunion Legacy Band, Condon's, 117 East 15th Street, Manhattan, (212) 254-0960.
Featuring the saxophonist Gary Bartz, the trumpeter Charles Tolliver and the trombonist Grachan Moncur 3d in the front line, and a rhythm section of John Hicks, Mickey Bass and Victor Lewis, the Reunion Legacy Band brings together some of the better players who arrived in the late 1960's and early 70's.
Mr.
Bartz has been one of New York's consistently exciting improvisers for years, and his recent appearances have had him burning through material, mixing be-bop with Coltrane-esque phrases and more.
Mr.
Lewis is one of jazz's best drummers.
There is a $15 cover and a two-drink minimum; shows today through Sunday are at 9:30 P.M., 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.
There is no third set on Sunday.
To a Haitian Beat
Rara Machine, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, Manhattan, (212) 243-4940.
One of the next wave of Haitian bands in New York, Rara Machine does its best to mix older guitar-driven Haitian compas style with more modern, keyboard-driven sounds of zouk from Guadeloupe.
The band members also throw in American pop.
But the best music the band plays, oddly, is the older Haitian style, which is pure dance music, unadulterated by all the various pulls and tugs of the star system.
And like many of the younger bands, Rara Machine is interested in roots; it is not afraid to use carnival and voodoo rhythms in the music.
The show starts at 11 tonight; the cover charge is $17.


Shady Stores for Moscow Night Owls
Russia's free-market groping is taking on a dark but promising edge as pioneer shopkeepers invent the all-night convenience store, Moscow style.
An array of shoe-box-sized sidewalk kiosks are jammed with high-priced vodka, chocolates, used clothes, lipsticks -- the stuff of a Muscovite consumer's salivations.


Joe Richards, Writer, 83
Joe Richards, a writer and a painter, died on Sunday at the Bay Pines Veterans Administration Hospital in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
He was 83 years old.
He died of pneumonia, said his sister, Ruth Eisenstein of New York City.


Playing the Markets, Any Markets
Robert Ross pulled out a gun.
"Calm down," he said. "I won't shoot."


Lafarge Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I Tried to Buy a U.S. Car (Sigh)
Before entering the car market in the spring for the first time in 15 years, I resolved to buy American -- a four-door Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme.
After a broker and I expressed contempt for Americans who buy imports, I specified the features: antilock brakes, front-wheel drive, console gear shift, lumbar seats.
I asked about an airbag.
Not possible, he replied.
He told me that I would have to go to a larger car but that I didn't want an airbag: they pop open for no reason, causing horrible accidents, and it costs $1,000 each time to restuff them.
He would call the next day, he said, and I could be driving my new car by the weekend.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Brown Finds Political Calendar Full of Radio Days
It was 10 past the hour on a recent Wednesday morning in Manhattan, and Edmund G. Brown Jr., former Governor of California and contender for the Democratic Presidential nomination, was already into his second radio talk show of the day.
Mr.
Brown was mixing it up with listeners of "The Joy Behar Show" on WABC, pounding away at his anti-big-money politics theme and periodically pitching his "800" number for telephone contributions.


A Military Revolt Fails To Oust Rulers in Zaire
The streets of the capital were deserted and tanks guarded the national broadcast center today after a group of rebel soldiers tried but failed to overthrow President Mobutu Sese Seko.
Two people were killed in the coup attempt, the Zairian military said.
The rebel soldiers seized the 20-story radio and television building late Wednesday and broadcast appeals for the ouster of Mr.
Mobutu, who has governed this central African country for 27 years.
The rebels also called for the resignation of Prime Minister Nguza Karl-i-Bond and the resumption of a pro-democracy conference that was canceled by Mr.
Nguza on Sunday.


Art in Review
Clyde Connell  Arthur Roger Gallery 136 Prince Street SoHo Through Feb. 1
Clyde Connell began making art when she was almost 50 years old -- she is now 91 -- and the contemporaries who most influenced her span several generations.
Adolph Gottlieb's paintings, new when she saw them, stirred her interest in pictographic forms; the example of Eva Hesse's work a few decades later encouraged her pursuit of sculpture in low-art materials.
In addition, Miss Connell points to the impact of black culture on her life, which she encountered as a plantation owner's daughter in Louisiana and as a civil rights advocate in the late 1950's.


The Spoken Word
LECTURE AND PERFORMANCE, Juilliard School, 60 Lincoln Center Plaza, at 65th Street, Manhattan.
"A Day of Mozart," featuring a lecture about the composer's early compositions, tomorrow at noon, given by Bruce Adolphe, a composer and faculty member, and Ore Carmi, a pianist; and performances of Mozart pieces at 3 and 6 P.M. by the Pre-College Symphony and Chorus and Chamber Orchestra.
All events are free.
Information: (212) 769-7406.
LECTURE AND FILM, Karen Horney Clinic Building Auditorium, 329 East 62d Street, Manhattan.
A screening of "A Double Life," followed by a discussion of the film and its cast, led by Ernest Martin, an acting instructor; sponsored by the Association for the Advancement of Psychoanalysis.
Today at 7:30 P.M.
Admission: $7 ($4 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 838-8044.


Factors That Drive Up Detroit's Costs
To the Editor:
"The Excuse Maker" (editorial, Jan. 14), blaming Detroit's decline on poor product and high prices, is no longer justified.
Detroit has virtually caught up in quality and sells comparably equipped cars for less than the Japanese even though American car makers have substantially higher health care and pension costs because of an older work force.
Chrysler, for example, had 88,675 retired employees receiving benefits in 1990 compared with only 79,123 active employees.
Transplanted auto makers manufacture almost as many vehicles as Chrysler, with fewer than 1,000 retirees.


Review/Theater; A Physical Approach For an Israeli 'Hamlet'
To kill or not to kill, that is the question in Rina Yerushalmi's provocative adaptation of "Hamlet" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
In reassessing Shakespeare's text from her contemporary Israeli point of view, the director offers a Hamlet as a man of moral conviction.
From her perspective, no killing is justified even if the motive is revenge for fratricide or, for that matter, crimes against the state.
The Cameri Theater production, performed in Hebrew (retranslated into English over headsets) is running through Sunday as part of a festival entitled Israel: the Next Generation.
Miss Yerushalmi's theorizing permeates her staging, but for theatergoers the primary reason for sitting through this long and demanding "Hamlet" is the director's stylistic approach, which accents the physical over the oral.


Shell Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American Telephone &amp; Telegraph reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Symantec Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amerada Hess reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Collegiate Chorale
The Collegiate Chorale is to present a concert in honor of its 50th anniversary, tomorrow at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
The chorus, under its director Robert Bass, will present Haydn's Te Deum, excerpts from Poulenc's Gloria and Mendelssohn's "Elijah," the Triumphal Scene from Verdi's "Aida," and the premiere of William Bolcom's "Dancers." Guest artists are the sopranos Martina Arroyo, Harolyn Blackwell and Leona Mitchell, the mezzo-soprano Mignon Dunn, the bass John Cheek and the New York City Gay Men's Chorus.
Tickets are $15 to $55.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Beatrice I. Lerner, 76, Democratic Party Aide
Beatrice I. Lerner, a longtime Democratic party worker and government aide in New Jersey and a leader in Jewish, cultural and charitable causes, died on Monday at the Cedar Grove Manor Convalescent Home in Cedar Grove, N.J.
She was 76 years old and was a resident of South Orange, N.J.
She died of complications from Alzheimer's disease, her family said.


Deadly Strain of Tuberculosis Is Spreading Fast, U.S. Finds
Particularly dangerous forms of tuberculosis have struck in 16 states, and the spread of the disease is out of control, Federal health officials said today.
Strains of the bacterium that are resistant to the standard anti-tuberculosis drugs have caused deadly outbreaks in 5 states and at least one case in 11 other states.
The more common form of the infection that responds to drug treatment is also spreading rapidly in many states.


Quantum Chemical Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BRIEFS
*
Cray Research Inc., Minneapolis, said Ford Motor Co. would install a Cray Y-MP C90 computer at its engineering center in Dearborn, Mich. *
Exxon Corp., New York, said that its affiliate Esso Nederland B.V. would build a $200 million hydrocracking unit at its Rotterdam factory.


Unisys Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BellSouth Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hess Loses $51.6 Million
The Amerada Hess Corporation said today that it had lost $51.6 million in the fourth quarter of last year, as lower crude prices and a big loss in refining hampered operations.
In the comparable period in 1990, net income totaled $234.2 million, or $2.90 a share.
Hess's revenues declined 33.3 percent, to $1.62 billion, from $2.43 billion in the 1990 period.
The nation's 16th-largest energy company, Hess supplies gasoline, jet fuel and other refined products along the East Coast from refineries in New Jersey and St.
Croix in the United States Virgin Islands.


2 Prison Escapees Charged in Robberies
Two recaptured escapees from a Connecticut prison were charged today with robbing a jewerly store and a food store in Bergen County while they were fugitives and staying at a motel in Spring Valley, in Rockland County, N.Y.
The men, Frank Vandever, 37 years old, and Ronald Rutan, 34, are accused of taking about $300 from a 7-Eleven convenience store in Montvale, N.J., just across the state line from Rockland County, shortly before midnight on Jan. 7, the Bergen County Prosecutor, John J. Fahy, said.
About seven hours earlier, the two entered a jewelry store in Rutherford, near the Meadowlands Sports Complex, with weapons and announced a holdup, Mr.
Fahy said.
But they fled empty-handed when they saw the owner push a silent alarm.
Mr.
Vandever, a transvestite and former stockbroker serving a 40-year prison term for killing a client who discovered he was stealing from his account, was caught Saturday afternoon at a shopping mall in Paramus.


U.S. Said to Give Deadline to North Korea
The United States has given North Korea a deadline for allowing inspections of its nuclear sites and will propose that an American air base be opened simultaneously for inspections, the South Korean news agency Yonhap reported today.
The message was delivered in New York on Wednesday at the first high-level talks between the nations in four decades, the agency said.
There was no independent confirmation of the report.


3 Are Killed In Car Wreck In Queens
Two automobile accidents on rain-slick streets in Queens and Brooklyn left 3 people dead and 11 injured yesterday, the police said.
One of the dead and six of the injured were children.
In the more serious accident, which occurred at 12:30 P.M. in Middle Village, Queens, a young woman, her stepfather and her 3-year-old son were killed when the car the man was driving went out of control and skidded into oncoming traffic on Metropolitan Avenue at 80th Street, said a police spokeswoman, Officer Kim Royster.


CHRONICLE
After 39 consecutive years on radio and television, HOWARD COSELL is signing off the air.
He will retire next Friday from the two radio programs he does for ABC Radio: "Speaking of Sports," a two-minute program broadcast daily on about 200 stations nationwide, and "Speaking of Everything," a weekly half-hour program on about 100 stations.
Mr.
Cosell appeared on "Monday Night Football" on television from 1969 to 1983, and was a commentator on baseball and boxing.
He gave up all work that required traveling in 1985, three years after he stopped doing boxing commentary because of what he called "the hypocrisy and sleaziness of the boxing scene."


Rypien Sustains An Ankle Sprain
The Redskins got a scare at practice today when quarterback Mark Rypien sprained his right ankle a few minutes before the end of their two-hour practice.
The sprain isn't serious enough to keep Rypien out of practice Friday and he's expected to be fine for Sunday's game.
According to a pool report of the Redskins practice, Rypien injured the ankle when he dropped back to pass and the pocket collapsed around him and several players fell on him.
The quarterback limped out of the pile and threw down his helmet in disgust.
The ankle was taped and Rypien did not return.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  SKETCHY AID TO RUSSIANS
A 47-nation conference in Washington on aid to the former Soviet Union ended with some sketchy proposals.
The Bush Administration plans to use congressional financing for 54 shipments of food and medicine this winter, but some of the other plans are so vague that it is unclear who will carry them out.
A1  MOSCOW'S ALL-NIGHT SHOPS
Pioneer shopkeepers in Moscow are opening all-night convenience stores that are threadbare by Western standards, but fantastically stocked by any local estimation.
The view from some of the kiosks is definitely from the underbelly.
A10  ESTONIA ADJUSTS ITS SIGHTS
Estonia has fulfilled its dream of regaining the independence interrupted by the Soviets a half-century ago, but the costs have proved higher than expected.
There is no fuel to fly its newly emblazoned planes or even to heat much of the capital.
A10  BUSES ATTACKED IN INDIA
Gunmen opened fire on a caravan of buses carrying political workers in Punjab state, killing 5 people and wounding 40, reports said.
The caravan was being led by the head of India's far-right nationalist party to the strife-torn Vale of Kashmir.
A3  GERMANS LIMIT ARMS SALES
Embarrassed by disclosures that German companies supplied Iraq with equipment that could be used to build nuclear arms, the German Parliament tightened controls on weapons exports.
A3  Austria proposes to make it easier to prosecute Nazi crimes.
A3  THE U.N.
AS PEACEMAKER
Leaders of the 15 nations on the U.N.
Security Council will be asked to reaffirm its role in maintaining world peace at a meeting on Jan. 31.
In the latest example of its peace efforts, the Council approved a ban on arms shipments to Somalia.
A2  PRAGUE TRIES EX-LEADERS
The trial of three former Communist officials points to the difficulties of punishing those responsible for the damage that most Czechoslovaks believe the old Government did to their country.
A11  BEIJING'S SENSE OF MORTALITY
The talk in Beijing these days is of cancer and illness and eventually funerals.
Of the 8 or 10 leaders who still exercise ultimate control over China, only one -- President Yang Shangkun, who is 85 years old -- still regularly appears in public and seems vigorous and alert.
A9  An Israeli panel canceled the deportation of one of 12 Palestinians.
A8  St.-Leger Journal: A quest to create a European form of Islam.
A4  National A12-18  BIG SHIFT IN WEAPONS PROGRAMS
In an effort that could save many billions of dollars, the Pentagon plans to suspend production of most new weapons after developing prototypes.
The fate of the plan rests with Congress.
A1  Military contractors reacted to the idea with alarm.
A15  A BUYER FOR MACY'S
Laurence A. Tisch, chief executive of Loews and CBS, has offered to buy the tottering R. H. Macy &amp; Company.
Already a major investor in the company, Mr.
Tisch would spend roughly $1 billion to substantially increase his stake, a proposal that Macy's board is expected to approve in the next few days.
A1  NEW CURBS ON HEALTH CARE COSTS
The Administration will propose fixed limits on the annual growth in Federal payments to Medicaid.
It also wants to impose a new tax on high-income people who have health insurance that is purchased by their employers.
A1  MORE MONEY TO CLEAN UP BASES
The Administration sharply increased its estimate of the cost of removing pollution from military bases.
It plans to ask Congress for an immediate increase of $1 billion beyond the $2.7 billion already included in this year's budget.
A15  MORE SALVOS ON JOBLESS BENEFITS
Congressional Democrats took the offensive by proposing another extension of unemployment benefits and daring Republicans to delay the measure by objecting to its financing.
A13  The Senate dealt the Bush education program a major defeat.
A15  IN BUSH'S PATH, STUMBLING BLOCKS
News analysis: As the President's re-election campaign enters a new phase, he continues to encounter political difficulties even among his followers.
A14  Mayors find the Democratic Presidential field wanting.
A14  Stumping on a shoestring, ex-Governor Brown opts for radio.
A14  TUBERCULOSIS SWEEPING NATION
Federal health officials said that particularly dangerous forms of tuberculosis had struck in 13 states and that the spread of the disease was now out of control.
A1  ABORTION AND AMBIGUITY
News analysis: If the Supreme Court does overturn Roe v.
Wade this year, how will anyone know?
A12  The Mayor of Birmingham surrendered to begin a prison term.
A12  Dallas Journal: A place on the prairie struggles with gay rights.
A12  Law Page B7  British officials ask whether an innocent man was hanged in 1953.
Metropolitan Desk Digest, B1 A SHADOW BUS SYSTEM
Unlicensed vans, running along many of the busiest avenues of Brooklyn and Queens, are winning growing numbers of converts from New York City's buses, and their riders say they are cheaper and faster.
A1  Neediest Cases B2  Business Digest, D1  Sports B8-14  JAPANESE BID FOR MARINERS
Seattle's leaders announced today that a group led by Japanese investors and with ties to Nintendo had made an offer of $100 million to buy the Mariners, the major league baseball team based in the city.
A1  Baseball: Status of Yankees' Michael grows shaky.
B9  Column: Vecsey on tumultuous teams.
B9  Football: Bills get no respect.
B9  Hockey: Media blitz hails Messier's return to Edmonton.
B11  Tennis: Fernandez in Australian Open final against Seles.
B14  Obituaries A19  Freddie Bartholomew, ex-child star.
Weekend C1-30  Alternatives to Super Bowl.
C1  Modernizing the Modern.
C1  Theater: Jane Alexander in "The Visit" at the Roundabout.
C1  Film: At the Movies C8  Dance: Two Balanchine works.
C3  Art: In Review.
C18  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials A28  Implants and Halcion.
Moscow needs more.
Comics break new ground.
Letters A28  A. M. Rosenthal: Thanking Saku rauchi.
A29  Leslie H. Gelb: Ousting Saddam or trapping Bush.
A29  James Grant: Party animals on Wall Street.
A29  Verne W. Newton: I tried to buy a U.S. car (sigh).
A29


Moscow Needs More Than a Gesture
The emergency food and medicine that 47 of the world's wealthiest nations have now promised to send to the former Soviet Union amount to a pittance.
But the gesture is important.
The citizens of the republics, terrified by the collapse of their economies, have at least been told that the West is in their corner.
Yet it would be tragic if the West stopped with yesterday's announcement.
The republics are engaged in a historic trek toward democracy and freer markets.
A successful traverse is not only vital to them but crucial to Western security.


Taking Communists to Court: Road Strewn With Nettles, Czechs Say
The trial of three former high-ranking Communist officials is exposing the difficulties of punishing those responsible for the damage that most Czechoslovaks believe the previous Government did to their country.
Frantisek Kincl, the last Interior Minister of the former Government, and the former heads of the Communist secret police and the counterespionage service are charged with abuse of power for having ordered the temporary detention of opponents of the Government in 1988 and 1989.
The maximum penalty is 10 years in prison.


Potomac Electric Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Imperial Holly reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eastern Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Springsteen to Release 2 Albums at Once
If Guns 'n' Roses can release two albums at once, so can Bruce Springsteen.
In early spring, Mr.
Springsteen will release "Human Touch" and "Lucky Town," his first new albums since "Tunnel of Love" in 1987.
"I'm excited about being finished and am looking forward to getting out on the road," Mr.
Springsteen said in a statement.
"Human Touch," designated Mr.
Springsteen's 10th album, was recorded for Columbia largely in 1989-90 in Los Angeles studios with a band that includes Roy Bittan (formerly of the E Street Band, Mr. Springsteen's longtime backup group) on keyboards, Randy Jackson on bass and Jeff Porcaro on drums, along with guest singers including Bobby Hatfield of the Righteous Brothers and Sam Moore of Sam and Dave.
"Lucky Town," his 11th album, was recorded after most of human touch was complete in Mr.
Springsteen's home studio, also in Los Angeles.
Patti Scialfa, Mr.
Springsteen's wife, appears on both albums, as do Mr.
Bittan and Mr.
Jackson.


Bearings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mets and O'Brien Agree
The Mets reached agreement yesterday with catcher CHARLIE O'BRIEN on a one-year contract.
O'Brien, who had been seeking $450,000, avoided arbitration by settling for $370,000.
The 30-year-old catcher, who is expected to be a veteran backup for the rookie TODD HUNDLEY this season, hit .185 in 69 games for the Mets in 1991 and has not hit above .200 since 1989.
The Mets had filed an arbitration figure of $285,000, down from O'Brien's 1991 salary of $300,000.
GREG MADDUX also averted arbitration with the Cubs.
Maddux, a 15-game winner last season, accepted a $4.2 million salary, only $200,000 less than he had sought.
The Cubs had submitted $3.65 million for arbitration.
Maddux got $2,425,000 last year.


5 Hindu Militants Slain on Kashmir Trip
Gunmen disguised as police officers opened fire with AK-47's just north of here this afternoon on several busloads of political workers, killing 5 people and wounding 40, news agencies reported.
The buses were part of a caravan, led by the leader of India's right-wing opposition party, that was headed for the strife-torn Vale of Kashmir.
The caravan, led by Murli Manohar Joshi, president of the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party, left southern India on Dec. 11 for Srinagar, the capital of Kashmir.
There, Mr.
Joshi has said, he plans to unfurl the Indian flag on Sunday, India's national day, to demonstrate the unity of the country.


Foreign Affairs; Ousting Saddam or Trapping Bush
President Bush could be trapping himself into a lose-lose strategy of overthrowing Saddam Hussein in much the same way he cornered himself with the "jobs, jobs, jobs" strategy on his recent trip to Japan.
By insisting on jobs Japanese leaders could not give him, Mr.
Bush forced himself to bash and bow and ended up looking weak and failing.


Centel Says It's Studying Possible Sale
The Centel Corporation, one of the country's largest non-Bell telephone companies and one of the few large cellular telephone properties not owned by a giant phone company, said yesterday that because of increasing industry consolidation, it might put itself on the auction block.
As recently as Wednesday, the stock market valued Centel at just over $3 billion.
But yesterday, reacting to the news, the market bid up the company's share price by $9, to $46, raising Centel's value to nearly $4 billion.


Billy Graham, 70, Welterweight Boxer
Billy Graham, a welterweight boxer noted for stylish and subtle moves that made him a difficult target in the ring, died Wednesday at his home in West Islip, L.I.
He was 70 years old.
His son, Billy Jr., said yesterday that the cause of death was cancer.


Books of The Times; Why Transvestites Make Other People Nervous
Vested Interests  Cross-Dressing and Cultural Anxiety  By Marjorie Garber  443 pages.
Illustrated.
Routledge. $35.
As the scholar Marjorie Garber points out in her fascinating new book, gender-bending images have proliferated throughout contemporary culture.
In the film "Tootsie," Dustin Hoffman tries to pass as a woman; in "Yentl," Barbra Streisand pretends to be a boy, and in "Victor/Victoria," Julie Andrews masquerades as a male transvestite.
"Dressed to Kill" and "The Silence of the Lambs" revolve around psychopathic killers, with a penchant for cross-dressing.
"The Sheltering Sky" shows Debra Winger, playing an American tourist, disguised as a young Arab boy.
And even "Bull Durham" features a rookie pitcher who wears a garter belt under his uniform.


On Any Given Sunday, Try Reading a Book
I don't care what the President said, there are at least 10 good reasons for not banning football, all of them on display this weekend.
1.
CIVIC PRIDE: Buffalo, we are told, is gripped by a Bills Bedlam as invigorating as the Mets Mania of 1969, which convinced New Yorkers that their health, educational and safety services would improve as dramatically as did their team.
If the Bills win, Buffalo will be saved, as was New York City.
It's a lot of pressure, especially for two players: Scott Norwood, the kicker, who should take the blame for plunging Buffalo into economic recession last year by missing a Super Bowl field goal that would have beaten the Giants; and Bruce Smith, the defensive end, who might have incited riots this week by threatening to leave town because of racist mail from fans who accused him of malingering after a knee injury.


Sonat Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arco Chemical Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Burlington Northern Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arthur M. Fishberg, Physician, 93
Dr.
Arthur M. Fishberg, a retired hospital official and an authority on hypertension, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 93 years old.
He died of respiratory failure and Parkinson's disease, said Felix A. Fishman, co-executor of his estate.


Quantum Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


A Happy Return for Messier Has Oilers Feeling Blue
Mark Messier returned home tonight and was embraced by the fans who followed him for 12 years here.
Then he won a game for the Rangers.
Messier's power-play goal early in the third period broke a 1-1 tie and helped the Rangers to a 3-1 victory over the Edmonton Oilers at the Northlands Coliseum.


Calfed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ex-Officer Found Guilty of $17,000 Bank Fraud
After deliberating for less than an hour, a Federal jury today found Robert C. Fioretti, a former New York City police officer, guilty of stealing $17,000 from his first wife's savings account in 1986, two months after she vanished.
Mr.
Fioretti, who is still the major suspect in the disappearance, sat motionless and stared blankly at the jury as the foreman read the guilty verdict.


Court Refuses Grand Jury Records
An appeals court yesterday rejected the Brooklyn District Attorney's request to release the secret grand jury minutes and records concerning the death of a 7-year-old black child in an automobile accident last year in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn.
District Attorney Charles J. Hynes had sought the release of the material after a grand jury found no basis for criminal charges against Yosef Lifsh, a Hasidic man whose car struck and killed the child, Gavin Cato, on Aug. 19.
The incident touched off several days of violence in Crown Heights.


Quotation of the Day
"This was the year the little guy came through. It shows that when times are tough, New Yorkers are still there to help one another." -- MSGR.
TIMOTHY McDONNELL, chief financial officer for Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York.  [ B1:2. ]


Clinton Denounces New Report of Affair
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas today denounced as "not true" a second wave of accusations of marital infidelity published by the tabloid newspaper Star.
The weekly newspaper says Mr.
Clinton, a candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination, had had a 12-year extramarital affair with Gennifer Flowers, identified as a cabaret singer who first met Mr.
Clinton when she was working as a reporter for a television station in Little Rock.


Reviews/Art; William Wegman's Versatile Humor Survives Man Ray
For people who believe art and humor are strange bedfellows, a visit to the 20-year retrospective of William Wegman at the Whitney Museum of American Art may make them think again.
Mr.
Wegman, a Conceptual artist turned painter, is the art world's most amusing heavyweight lightweight -- and its premier dog photographer.
He is perhaps best known for turning a cooperative Weimaraner named Man Ray into a virtual art icon, something on the order of a canine Andy Warhol.


Implants and Halcion: the Shadow
The U.S. system for regulating and prescribing drugs and medical devices turns on trust that leading manufacturers will diligently test the safety of their products and honestly report the results.
That trust has now been shaken by disturbing evidence and accusations in recent liability suits against two major companies.
The suits challenged the safety of silicone gel breast implants, used to augment the breasts as a post-mastectomy or purely cosmetic procedure, and of Halcion, the world's most popular sleeping pill.
Of even broader importance, the suits charged that the companies withheld vital safety information or even misrepresented test results to make their products look safer than they were.
The suits have cast a shadow over the public's trust in not only these two health products but the entire corporate, regulatory and medical system that sanctioned their use.


Public Service Co. of Colorado reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Austria Offers Legislation to Make It Easier to Prosecute Neo-Nazis
The Austrian Government said today that it would propose creating a new law and amending an old one to make it easier to prosecute crimes such as advocating Nazi ideas or denying the Holocaust.
The proposals, which would substantially alter the law on Nazi activities for the first time since its enactment in 1945, comes after several months of increased neo-Nazi activity in Austria and the arrests in the last two weeks of nine suspected right-wing militants in four different incidents.


Coca-Cola Begins 24-Hour Campaign
Beginning at 6 this morning, Eastern time, the Coca-Cola Company will sell around the clock, in its first 24-hour global television advertising bombardment.
To introduce a series of commercials tied to Coke's sponsorship of the Winter Olympics, which begin in Albertville, France, on Feb. 8, the company will run five spots in more than 100 countries worldwide, on the Cable News Network and MTV.
One commercial will run per hour, through 6 A.M. tomorrow, Eastern time, on both cable networks.


Officials Defend Policies To Protect Bond Market
Government officials who oversee the Treasury securities market asserted at a Senate committee hearing today that the changes they mandated on Wednesday would not disrupt trading and that they would move slowly before imposing the more contentious proposals.
A key goal of the regulators was to preserve the $2.2 trillion Treasury market as a place where speculators and investors can easily and quickly trade hundreds of millions of dollars of securities without causing a ripple effect on prices.


Let Pay of Absent Legislators Be Docked
To the Editor:
In his State of the State address, New York's Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo suggested that elected officials forfeit a day's pay for each day the budget is late (news article, Jan. 9).
In a different vein, during the Presidency of James Madison, the 14th session of Congress in 1815 passed an act for "this and every future Congress" mandating monetary penalties on absent members.
The text read "that in case any senator, representative or delegate shall not attend in his place at the day on which Congress shall convene, or shall absent himself before the close of the session, a deduction shall be made from the sum which would otherwise be allowed to him, in proportion to the time of his absence. . . ." Considering its absentee rate, this might not be a bad idea for New York's Legislature.
JAMES MARTIN Great Neck, L.I., Jan. 11, 1992


Ontario Is Placed On Credit Watch
The Province of Ontario and its state-owned utility, Ontario Hydro, have been placed on credit watch with negative implications by Standard &amp; Poor's Inc.
The long-term debt of the province and the power company now bears an AA+ rating.
The rating agency said statements from top government officials hadindicated the province might not follow a medium-term plan for fiscal adjustment that was outlined last year.
A weakened economy and financial pressures have hurt the ability of the province to cut its deficit.


Long-Term U.S. Issues Off Steeply
Treasury bond prices fell sharply and long-term interest rates rose further yesterday, as anxiety mounted among credit market participants about the coming battle in Washington over fiscal policy.
Traders and analysts said the sell off had nothing to do with underlying economic fundamentals, which remain positive for bonds.


Attica Judge Issues Order; Jury Rebels
The judge in the long-running Attica trial, who left for a Caribbean vacation in the middle of deliberations last week, returned against his will today to find the jurors in rebellion.
In a highly unusual letter, the jurors accused the judge, John T. Elfvin, of pressuring them to rush to a verdict by ordering them to deliberate from 9 A.M. until 10 P.M. on weekdays and for seven hours a day on weekends.


The Setting Looked Professional, but the Main Participants Were Forced to Take a Raincheck


With 700 Supporters Rallying Round, Birmingham Mayor Goes to Prison
After leading hundreds of his supporters, some of them draped in chains, from the 16th Street Baptist Church to the Federal courthouse in a scene evocative of the civil rights marches of the 1960's, Mayor Richard Arrington Jr. surrendered to United States marshals today under a contempt of court citation.
Mr.
Arrington, the first black Mayor of this city, submitted himself to the order of a Federal court after an emotional send-off by more than 700 of his supporters that started at the church.
It was where a bomb exploded on Sept. 15, 1963, taking the lives of four black children attending Sunday school.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about new interest in fragrances that were popular in the 1960's misstated sales figures for musk oil at Kiehl's Since 1851, a pharmacy and natural cosmetics store in Manhattan.
Musk oil accounts for 60 percent of the store's sales of scented oils.


Drifter Is Chief Suspect In Florida Church Fires
A drifter who has been jailed for two months on loitering and trespassing charges is now the leading suspect in at least 12 church fires in Gainesville and Tennessee last year, the authorities say.
The 41-year-old suspect, Patrick Lee Frank, was seized on Nov. 13 in Ocala, 50 miles south of here, by a task force of local, state and Federal officers that is investigating about 30 suspicious fires at Florida churches, most of them in the north-central part of the state.


Fidelity Investments Shores Up Retail Arm
In what Fidelity Investments called part of a planned expansion in retail brokerage, Thomas E. Meade, a manager with experience supervising regional brokerage outlets, was named yesterday as the president of Fidelity Brokerage Services Inc.
Mr.
Meade, 50 years old, spent 16 years with A. G. Edwards &amp; Sons as a broker, branch manager and regional manager.
For two years, he also ran Boettcher &amp; Company in Denver, one of the Kemper Securities Group's regional brokerages.


VLSI Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Washington Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 Tied to Fatal Crush at Game Are Leaving Jobs
Two City College officials whose roles in events leading up to the deadly crush at a celebrity basketball game last month have been questioned are leaving their jobs, the college announced yesterday.
A college spokesman, Charles DeCicco, said Jean Charles, director of student life, had resigned effective Jan. 31 and George D. McDonald, vice president for student affairs, had decided to retire.
The spokesman said Mr.
MacDonald, who is 55 years old, would relinquish his post Feb. 3 and go on leave until his retirement begins Oct. 1.


Hubbell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


McCloud Fined $10,000
Indiana Pacer guard GEORGE McCLOUD has been fined $10,000 and suspended without pay for one game for punching Cleveland's JOHN BATTLE after the Cavaliers' 119-115 victory Wednesday in Cleveland. (AP)


An S.&amp; L. Is Going Back to Basics
The savings and loan industry may be putting its notorious past behind it, but the legacy of its headlong rush into deregulation a decade ago continues to haunt some of the nation's largest savings institutions as they scramble to adapt to new regulations and cope with a weak economy.
Nowhere is that scrambling more evident than at GlenFed Inc., the parent of the nation's fourth-largest savings and loan.
Considered by many analysts and industry executives to be among the biggest question marks hanging over regulators, GlenFed is virtually reinventing itself in an effort to assure its survival.


MILITARY PROPOSES TO END PRODUCTION OF MOST NEW ARMS
In a shift that could save billions of dollars in future military spending, the Pentagon plans to suspend production of most new weapons after developing test models, senior Defense Department officials said today.
The production phase is by far the most expensive stage in buying a new weapons, consuming 35 to 45 percent of the total cost, while the research, design and development of test models, or prototypes, usually represents 20 to 25 percent.


Saul Z. Cohen, 65, Labor Lawyer, Dies
Saul Z. Cohen, a labor lawyer who was active in Jewish philanthropies, died yesterday at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital.
He was 65 years old and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.
He died of cancer, his daughter, Helen Cohen of San Francisco, said.


Intel Is Planning Several New Chips
The Intel Corporation said it would introduce more than 30 new variations of its 486 and 386 SL processors in 1992.
The company's chief executive, Andrew S. Grove, told securities analysts in New York that the new chips would include faster versions and some that operate on lower voltages for battery-powered computers.


Hunt Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Brett to Be Married
GEORGE BRETT, 38, the three-time American League batting champion of the Kansas City Royals, will marry LESLIE DAVENPORT of Kansas City, Mo., in the "near future," Royals spokesman DEAN VOGELAAR said. (AP)


At the Bar; Two Comedy Writers Aren't Laughing After Laurel and Hardy Routine Is a Flop in Court.
"Legal humor" may or may not be an oxymoron.
But attempts at it can prove costly, as two comedy writers thrust into the generally unfunny world of litigation recently learned.
For nearly four years now, E. J. Novak and Debra Studer, a husband-and-wife comedy-writing team, have been fighting NBC in court.
They assert that in six skits on "Saturday Night Live" -- involving, among others, Attila the Hun, Frankenstein and Lucky Luciano -- the program pirated material they had written years earlier.


Japanese Bid for Seattle Team Gets Baseball's Cold Shoulder
Reaching to Japan in an effort to keep the American national pastime alive in Seattle, this city's leaders announced today that a group led by Japanese investors had made an offer to buy the Seattle Mariners baseball team for $100 million.
The offer, by the family that founded Nintendo, the world's biggest video game company, is the first time that a potential buyer outside of North America has tried to buy a controlling interest in a major league baseball team.
The offer was presented here as the best chance to keep Jeff Smulyan, the team's current owner, from moving the club out of town.
As proposed, the Mariners would stay in Seattle and be under the control of a local board of directors; they could play some exhibition games in Japan, as well as develop a television following overseas.


Police Join Spectators At Fellow Officer's Trial
In a rare twist for a criminal trial, police officers are turning out strong here each morning to show their support for a defendant.
One of their own, Gary Spath, a white officer from Teaneck, is on trial, charged with manslaughter in the fatal shooting of a black teen-ager, Phillip Pannell, in 1990.


Review/Photography; 4 Shows That Borrow From the Past in Technique and Treatment
Ever since photography was invented, artists have tried to bend it to their will, to impose their own stamp upon the seemingly neutral transcriptions of visual information that it provides.
By far the most popular way has been to try to make photographs look like something else, usually something with a greater cachet as art, whether oil paintings, watercolors or charcoal drawings.
But there's no such thing as an innocent process, as is demonstrated by four current shows, all of which by coincidence feature photographs by contemporary artists who use historical techniques.
Photographic methods, particularly those practiced widely in an earlier time, bring with them the ghosts of the periods they come from.
While the artists featured in the current shows -- the team of David McDermott and Peter McGough, at the Robert Miller Gallery; Sheila Metzner, at the International Center of Photography and at the James Danziger Gallery, and the French artist Gerard Traquandi, at the Zabriskie Gallery -- use a variety of processes to achieve different ends, they all exploit the links to the past that their techniques provide.


New York Asks U.S. Help In Tracking New TB Cases
Federal health officials are investigating a spate of drug-resistant tuberculosis cases among patients at a city hospital in Queens between late 1990 and June 1991.
Hospital officials said they had asked the Centers for Disease Control to investigate whether the cases had resulted from the patients' stays at the hospital, the City Hospital Center in Elmhurst.


Plan Offered By Holtzman For M.A.C.
New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman proposed yesterday that the city use $200 million from the state's Municipal Assistance Corporation to pay for streamlining the city government through technological changes and early-retirement programs.
In the Comptroller's annual speech to the City Council, she suggested that the corporation's funds "be used to create an efficiency bank" that would "finance programs that require an initial investment but can produce savings by making the city more efficient." Possible uses would be computerizing the city's welfare operations and installing two-way video systems for routine court appearances, she said.


Peruvian Rebels Assert Role In Downing of a U.S. Copter
Peruvian rebels claimed responsibility today for the downing of an American helicopter this month in a coca-producing region.
Three Americans aboard the helicopter were killed.
The Shining Path guerrilla movement said in a report in its underground newspaper that it used surface-to-air missiles to down the helicopter on Jan. 12.
The helicopter crashed as it was providing illumination for another helicopter that had made an emergency landing for repairs.


Approval of Japanese Bid to Buy Mariners Unlikely
Last year two of the Yankees' limited partners were looking to sell their shares of the club and were approached by some Japanese businessmen.
"They inquired with our office what our policy was on non-North American ownership," Steve Greenberg, baseball's deputy commissioner, said.
"They were told what the policy was and that's the last I heard of it."


Olden Tunes By Fiddlers With the Lilt Of the Celts
Back in the early days of this century, an Irish fiddle player named Michael Coleman left his home in County Sligo and came to America.
Coleman was revered in Sligo as one of the best fiddlers the county had ever produced; he was famous for jigs and reels, and his name was synonymous with a kind of local pride.
When Coleman arrived in New York, he was exposed to all kinds of ethnic music through the city's vast immigrant population: German polkas, Italian love songs, Harlem jazz.
These new forms must have had subtle influences on his playing.
Coleman became one of the first Irish musicians to make recordings.
His disks found their way back to County Sligo, where he was celebrated yet again for bringing Irish music to the land of opportunity.
Kevin Burke, a Celtic fiddle player celebrated in our own day for his work with the Bothy Band in the 1970's and the group Patrick Street in the late 80's, remembers hearing Michael Coleman while he was growing up.
Mr.
Burke's family hailed from County Sligo, and his father owned several of Coleman's records.
Tomorrow night, in a concert at Symphony Space with another traditional fiddler, Johnny Cunningham, Mr.
Burke will pay tribute to Coleman by playing one of his tunes.
"There's a piece of music that he recorded that I've always liked," Mr.
Burke said recently in a telephone interview from Portland, Ore., where he is now based.
"I've been dabbling with it for a long time. It's a very simple piece of music, a kind of hornpipe. I've put it on a new record I'm making, with a clarinet line underneath, so there's a slight jazz influence."


Art in Review
Carl Goldhagen  Rosa Esman Gallery 575 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Feb. 8
By printing his photographs on sheets of lead wrapped around wood panels, Carl Goldhagen would seem to be trying to give his images a weighty presence.
What's curious, though, is how insubstantial many of the works here appear to be.
The tones of the black-and-white images are close to those of the lead itself, and Mr.
Goldhagen coats each piece with a shiny protective lacquer.
As a result, the images occupy a strangely ambiguous space, above the lead background but beneath the surface.
Occasionally, Mr.
Goldhagen will apply patches of gold leaf to the lead to highlight certain areas of an image.
In a photograph of a field of felled trees, for example, he uses an oval of gold to pick out a stump in the foreground.


Network Equipment Tech.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


FPL Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chinese Wait for Deaths of Their Leaders, Who Just Get Older
With China's octogenarian leaders now at least as fragile as they are powerful, the whispers in Beijing these days are of tracheotomies and cancer and eventually funerals.
There are signs that mortality may finally be catching up with some of those who run the country.
Of the eight or 10 powerful leaders who still exercise ultimate control over China, only one -- President Yang Shangkun, who is 85 years old -- still regularly appears in public and seems vigorous and alert.
The others are hardly ever seen these days even on television, and by most accounts they are very frail, and several may be near death.


Review/Film; Vintage Visconti, at Full Length
"Rocco and His Brothers" was shown as part of the 1991 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 21.
The film, in Italian with English subtitles, opens today at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street in Manhattan.
Luchino Visconti's 1960 Italian epic, "Rocco and His Brothers," is a reminder of where films have come from and of how small and safe and self-addressed most contemporary movies are.
"Rocco" is not perfect, but even when it goes over the top in its theatricality, it excites the imagination with the kind of boldness that is the only hope of the future.


Allegheny Power System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sounds Around Town
Music and Comedy
Wiseguys, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
The musical-comedy trio, originally from Dallas and made up of Jim Caruso, Fred Wells and Campbell Martin, is an impeccably smooth harmony ensemble whose wide grasp of musical style is matched by a sly humor.
The repertory of the Wiseguys runs from pop standards like "The Very Thought of You" to Maltby and Shire's comic ode to fitness fanaticism, "There's Nothing Like It," which the trio has expanded into an amusing theatrical set piece.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 9:15 and 11:15.
There is a $20 cover charge and a two-drink minimum. 2 Elegant Fellows
David Staller in "Noel and Cole," the Oak Room at the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-6800.
David Staller, a baritone, identifies deeply with Noel Coward and Cole Porter, whose work he performs with hearty gusto in his one-man tribute to these two pillars of traditional songwriting elegance.
Sprinkled between the selections are biographical tidbits and astute reflections on the similarities and differences between the two and the ways in which they mirrored their times.
Shows are today and tomorrow at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.; there is a $25 cover charge and a $10 beverage minimum.
New-Wave Songs
Marshall Crenshaw, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Manhattan, (212) 228-6300.
Marshall Crenshaw, whose finely honed new-wave songs brought the sensibility of Buddy Holly and the middle-period Beatles into the post-punk era, has yet to demonstrate mass appeal, and the reason is a mystery.
His songs are tuneful and smart, his output prolific, his sense of pop form masterly, his stage presence appealing.
Shows are at 8 and 11 tonight and tomorrow night, and tickets are $15.


CBS's Success in Super Bowl
CBS said yesterday that it had sold all but one of the 56 commercials that the network plans to run during its telecast of Super Bowl XXVI on Sunday.
"We've come this far in the last few days," said George Schweitzer, senior vice president of marketing and communications, referring to the five or six spots that were unsold earlier this week.
The game will be sold out by the time it goes on the air, he added.


Congressional Democrats Mount Offensive on Unemployment Pay
Democrats went on the offensive today over another extension of unemployment benefits and dared Republicans to delay the measure by objecting to its financing.
Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, appeared as a witness before a subcommittee of the panel and said that another 13 weeks of benefits for the long-term unemployed were essential now while the jobless waited for the economy to recover.


S.E.C. Doesn't Discriminate Against Theater
To the Editor:
John Chodes may be a fine playwright but he is no lawyer.
Contrary to the misleading impression of "The S.E.C.'s War on the Theater" (Op-Ed, Jan. 11):
(1) A play or any other type of business can raise up to $1 million without any disclosure requirements at all under Securities Act Rule 504;


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc.  reports earnings for 16wks to Jan 8


G.M.'s Computer Unit In Big Blue Cross Deal
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Massachusetts, one of many insurers under pressure to become more efficient in administration of claims, has awarded the Electronic Data Systems Corporation an $800 million, 10-year contract to provide computer services.
The agreement is the second-largest for E.D.S., excluding the $3 billion paid for computing services yearly by its parent, the General Motors Corporation.
The biggest was a $2.1 billion deal last year for the Continental Airlines reservations system.


Raychem Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Freddie Bartholomew Is Dead; Child Star in Films of the 1930's
Freddie Bartholomew, a Hollywood child star whose name became synonymous with the proper, curly-haired little English boys he played in "David Copperfield" and "Little Lord Fauntleroy," died yesterday at Sarasota Memorial Hospital in Sarasota, Fla.
His age was variously reported as 69 and 70.
He lived in Bradenton, Fla.
Mr. Bartholomew died of emphysema, said his stepdaughter, Celia Paul of Manhattan.


INSIDE
Surge in Charity Spending
A sudden increase in small donations is helping many charities attain goals that had seemed out of reach as recently as November.
Page B1.
Attica Judge Faces Revolt
Jurors in the Attica trial accused the judge, who took a vacation during deliberations last week, of pressuring them for a verdict.
Page B1.
Abortion and Ambiguity
If the Supreme Court does decide this year that Roe v.
Wade should be overturned, how will anyone know?
News analysis, page A12.
Prison for Alabama Mayor
After an emotional farewell by supporters, Birmingham's Mayor surrendered to begin serving a sentence for contempt of court.
Page A12.
Estonia Limps, but Proudly
Fuel is scarce, food shops are bare and leadership is in disarray in Estonia, which little dreamed independence would cost so much.
Page A10.


Zale Files Plan For Chapter 11
The Zale Corporation, the jewelry store chain under pressure from its creditors, filed for voluntary protection under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code today.
Zale said it arranged to receive a $510 million loan from the Chemical Banking Corporation to help it emerge from bankruptcy later.


Security Council to Pledge To Stop Global Aggression
President Bush and heads of government from the other 14 members of the United Nations Security Council will be asked at a meeting on Jan. 31 to commit themselves to reverse acts of aggression and affirm that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq must comply fully with their terms for ending the Persian Gulf war.
A draft of the declaration they plan to issue after the first ever summit meeting of the Council reaffirms its central role in maintaining world peace and says the world today has "the best chance for peace, security and development since the foundation of the United Nations" 47 years ago.


On a Clear Day, You Couldn't See This


Carolina Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Running Hard for Office At Great Neck's Library
While we all eagerly await the momentarily meaningful results in New Hampshire's presidential primaries, there's another election campaign under way.
It too has a four-year term.
It pits a younger opponent against an incumbent.
The candidates call for change or continuity.
They point with pride or derision.
They acknowledge tough times, vowing fiscal responsibility.
Both profess an inability to understand why the other is running.
Both predict victory.
Both want to be a trustee of the Great Neck Library.
Now, helping to govern a library on Long Island's leafy North Shore is not a position guaranteeing national television exposure or a halftime interview during Sunday's Super Bowl.
In return for attending ill-attended public meetings each month, poring over boring budgets and occasionally encountering grumpy users unable to park by the door, a library trustee receives no pay.


Ashland Oil Shows Profit
Ashland Oil Inc. today reported earnings of $29.5 million, or 50 cents a share, for the quarter ended Dec. 31, saying a good performance by its coal and motor oil operations helped it bounce back from an $10.8 million loss for the comparable period a year earlier.
Revenues were off three-tenths of 1 percent, to $2.51 billion, from $2.59 billion a year earlier.


Dow Jones &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Germany Acts to Curb Arms Exports
The German Parliament, embarrassed by new disclosures that German companies supplied Iraq with equipment that could be used to build nuclear weapons, approved long-stalled legislation today tightening controls on arms exports.
The bill creates a new Government agency to monitor exports in cooperation with customs officials.
Investigators will have the power to open mail and tap telephones in pursuit of evidence against weapons suppliers.


Vigoro Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SJW Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Film; A Dangerous Twist To the 50-Minute Hour
Since she won an Oscar nomination for her performance in "Anna" (1987), Sally Kirkland has worked tirelessly but to increasingly small effect in a series of movies whose titles, in all probability, only she remembers.
Add to the list: "In the Heat of Passion."
It's about Lee (Ms. Kirkland), a sexually insatiable psychiatrist, and Charlie (Nick Corri), a good-looking young would-be actor whom she picks up at a gas station.
Lee becomes something of an obsession to Charlie.


LG&amp;E Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tale of Briton's Hanging May Get Epilogue
In 1968, 15 years after Derek Bentley was hanged for the slaying of a police officer, his family won permission to move his remains to a cemetery from the yard of the prison where he was executed and buried.
Anticipating the reburial, his father, William, had the words "Victim of British Justice" chiseled on a tombstone.
Twenty-four years later Iris Bentley, Derek's sister, continues to call her brother -- who at the time of the crime was a 19-year-old epileptic with an I.Q. of 66 -- a victim of the British justice system.
And she is joined by Members of Parliament, legal experts and many in the arts, who contend that the conviction, for having urged a friend to shoot the officer, was a mistake.
The Bentley case was one of several that led to the abolition of capital punishment in Britain in 1965.


Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Art in Review
Jed Devine  Lieberman &amp; Saul Gallery 155 Spring Street SoHo Through Feb. 8
In the work shown here, Jed Devine brings the lyrical style he has used to photograph odd scenes in the streets of New York City to what are essentially exercises in form.
Mr.
Devine sets up arrangements of classic still-life elements -- pears, teacups, bowls and the like -- and photographs them with a large-format camera.
The resulting images, printed in the soft black-and-white tones of the palladium process, have a delicate, contemplative beauty.


Dow Down By 29.07, To 3,226.74
Blue-chip stocks fell sharply yesterday in heavy trading, almost erasing Wednesday's gains, while the broader market was mixed.
Investors grew cautious, analysts said, as many earnings reports failed to justify the market's current lofty levels, and a weak bond market failed to offer support.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 29.07 points, to 3,226.74, as New York Stock Exchange volume reached 234.6 million shares traded, up from 228.1 million on Wednesday.
Losing issues outpaced gainers by 939 to 798, as the Big Board composite index slipped 1.30, to 228.89.


St.-Leger Journal; Europe's Homebred Imams, Preaching Tolerance
In a rambling chateau on a misty wooded hillside in deepest Burgundy, a dozen or so young men with stubbly beards have enrolled in an ambitious experiment aimed at eliminating one of the principal causes of social tension in Europe today.
The premise is that they, and millions of other immigrants, are viewed with hostility and even fear mainly because they are Muslims.
The proposed solution is to create a European form of Islam that can coexist comfortably with Western societies shaped by Christian traditions.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
The District of Columbia's $39.1 million of revenue bonds for Georgetown University will be offered through Lehman Brothers next week.
They are rated AA by Moody's.
Common Stock


Oakwood Homes Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Top Court Could Overturn Roe Without Saying So
As thousands of demonstrators took to the streets here this week to mark the 19th anniversary of Roe v.
Wade, the obvious question was whether the Supreme Court's landmark ruling on the right to abortion would survive to see a 20th anniversary.
But there is another, less obvious question posed by the Court's announcement that it will hear a new abortion case this spring: If the Court does overrule Roe v.
Wade, how will anyone know?


Hannaford Bros Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Islanders Play 8 Minutes, but Leafs Play Whole Game
The Islanders solved a three-goal deficit with a midgame scoring spurt tonight, but because they did more aimless scrambling than intelligent skating, they found no solution to match Toronto's fourth goal and wound up with a 4-3 defeat at Nassau Coliseum.
"We stunk," said Ray Ferraro.
"We didn't deserve to win. We played eight minutes of hockey, and that's not enough."


For Deng, the First Public Appearance in a Year


Sports of The Times; Some Teams Succeed On Turmoil
Thurman Thomas is visibly seething because he feels undervalued.
Bruce Smith is also seething because some creeps have written him ugly letters.
They both look as if they would like to hit somebody.
In their line of work, this is not such a bad state of mind.
Even Joe Gibbs, the soft-spoken coach of Washington, acknowledges that this is a game in which "guys hit people in the mouth." It could be a grave mistake to label the Redskins as some harmonious band of colleagues, praying and playing together, while the other team is once again tagged as the Bickering Bills.


Johnson Is All-Star Amid More Questions
Hours after a medical officer with the Australian Olympic Committee said he would recommend that his team not play if Magic Johnson was on the court, the former Los Angeles Laker star, who has tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS, was selected as a starter for the National Basketball Association All-Star Game next month.
Johnson's election to the N.B.A.'s Western Conference team was certified yesterday when the league announced he was the fourth-leading vote-getter among Western Conference players and seventh over all in fan balloting.
He has said he intends to play.


Critics' Choices/Music; Sauve Enough to Slide
In "The Fabulous Bud E. Luv Show," an amusing tongue-in-cheek impersonation of the quintessential Las Vegas lounge singer, Robert Vickers, a mustachioed performer from San Francisco, portrays Bud Euripides Luvalopolis Jr., a fictional star who suggests a hybrid of Sonny Bono, Tony Orlando and Robert Goulet.
Wearing a phony smile, Bud E. runs through a repertory that ranges from lounge classics like "Mack the Knife" and "(You're) Having My Baby" to originals like "The Ballad of Sheila Cornucopia," the sleazy saga of his fifth marriage, to a former Miss Idaho.
Bud E. Luv ludicrously claims to have been on the scene wherever pop history has been made in the last 30 years.
His tribute to the "Woodchuck" festival includes a medley of Woodstock favorites, among them "Black Magic Marker" by "Suntana." Then there is his disco medley, which features "Kung Fu Fighting," "Boogie Oogie Oogie" and other monstrosities from the disco era.
Swiveling into the audience, he croons "Whole Lotta Love," by "Mr. Led Zeppelin," to a woman at ringside.


Review/Art; Masterpieces of the Pen, Including 2 Rembrandts
The current exhibition of "17th-Century Dutch Drawings" at the Pierpont Morgan Library comes from a single private collection for which "must see" is now the adjective of everyday use.
It burns small, and it burns slowly.
But in the memory, it blazes up.
The collection in question has been formed over the last 30 years by Maida and George Abrams.
That some of the drawings in it are "important" is evident at first sight.
Among them are two landscapes by Rembrandt that came up at Christie's in London in 1987 as part of a historic sale of drawings from Chatsworth, the home of the Dukes of Devonshire.
On that occasion, people who could hardly tell the front of an Old Master drawing from the back were fighting to get inside the door.


Redistricting Is Big Test for New Speaker
Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin, who enthralled colleagues with his blitzkrieg victory in last month's Speaker's race, suddenly faces discontent in his chamber because of his handling of legislative redistricting.
The drawing of new district lines was the first major political test for the 64-year-old Queens Democrat, who was thrust into the Speaker's job after his predecessor, Mel Miller, was convicted of Federal fraud charges on Dec. 13.


Karl New Sonics Coach
GEORGE KARL, the former coach of Cleveland (1984-86) and Golden State (1986-88), yesterday became coach of the Seattle SuperSonics.
Karl quit Sunday as coach of Real Madrid, which was 17-7 in the Spanish League.
BOB KLOPPENBURG, hired as the team's interim head coach after K. C. JONES was fired Jan. 15, will remain on the bench to assist Karl. (AP)


Corrections
An article yesterday about the killing of a Ukrainian immigrant in Flushing, Queens, rendered the name of the victim incorrectly.
He was Jeff Ostrovsky.


On Any Given Sunday, Try Reading a Book
I don't care what the President said, there are at least 10 good reasons for not banning football, all of them on display this weekend.
1.
CIVIC PRIDE: Buffalo, we are told, is gripped by a Bills Bedlam as invigorating as the Mets Mania of 1969, which convinced New Yorkers that their health, educational and safety services would improve as dramatically as did their team.
If the Bills win, Buffalo will be saved, as was New York City.
It's a lot of pressure, especially for two players: Scott Norwood, the kicker, who should take the blame for plunging Buffalo into economic recession last year by missing a Super Bowl field goal that would have beaten the Giants; and Bruce Smith, the defensive end, who might have incited riots this week by threatening to leave town because of racist mail from fans who accused him of malingering after a knee injury.


On My Mind; Thanking Sakurauchi
The Japanese -- some of them are beginning to get under our skin.
I'm thinking now of that politician who said that American workers are lazy and a third of them couldn't read.
Lazy?
American men and women line up to get work -- sometimes thousands waiting in the cold for too few jobs at too little money.
American workers can still outproduce Japanese person for person.
American industry, working people and servicemen did not seem all that lazy by the time World War II ended.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House Leader and Salesman; Bush Turns to Power of Incumbency And Tries to Defuse Revolt in Party
After apologizing for the state of the economy and assuring Americans that he cares, President Bush this week has moved to a new phase of his re-election campaign in which he is trying to use the power of his incumbency to demonstrate that he is doing something about the nation's problems.
But underscoring the difficulties he faces in selling his policies to the entire country, the President is still struggling to gather members of his own party behind the economic growth package that he will present in the State of the Union Message next Tuesday.


Art in Review
Sol LeWitt  John Weber Gallery 142 Greene Street SoHo Through tomorrow
Sol LeWitt has derived a lot of mileage from geometry.
During the 1980's, he translated his earlier open-work cubic structures into frescolike wall paintings, and the 100 gouache-on-paper "drawings" in this show recall that work.
Each has a single cube form painted in the colors Mr.
LeWitt favors: darkened tones of blue, violet, yellow and red.
Although individually framed, the gouaches hanging together on the wall create the impression of a larger crystalline form, and as a group they have the lightness that has always given Mr.
LeWitt's rigorous images a measure of poetry.


Michael's Tenure With Yankees Grows Shakier
Yankee General Manager Gene Michael had what was described as a major argument this week with Daniel McCarthy, the club's managing partner, over Michael's signing of catcher Matt Nokes to a new contract, a person close to the Yankees said yesterday.
The dispute follows several instances in which George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' owner, has harshly criticized Michael's decisions and raises new questions about Michael's job security.
McCarthy was upset over not being consulted Monday when Nokes was signed to a three-year $7.5 million contract and had wanted to fire the general manager, said the person, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
McCarthy had recently written a letter to Michael, the person said, and had informed him that every move the team made needed his approval, but Michael apparently defied the order in signing Nokes.


Central Maine Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sales of American Vehicles Dropped 1.9% in Mid-January
Sales of cars and light trucks built in North America declined 1.9 percent in mid-January, auto makers reported today.
Industry analysts said the figures suggest that the market is neither improving nor worsening.
"It's a continuation of the malaise," said Joseph S. Phillippi, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Brothers in Manhattan.
"We're probably going to bump along the bottom of this trough another six to eight weeks." Consumers 'Overly Cautious'


Omnicom Group to Acquire Goodby, Berlin
In an ambitious expansion effort, Omnicom Group Inc. announced yesterday that it had agreed to buy thestock that it did not already own in Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, a fast-growing advertising agency with a reputation for brash creativity .
Omnicom, the world's fourth-largest advertising group and owner of BBDO Worldwide and DDB Needham Worldwide, intends to expand Goodby, Berlin, which is based in San Francisco, into a national operation that is expected to become its third agency network.


Review/Theater: The Visit; Revenge and Common Greed As the Root of Much Evil
NO one need go to the theater to learn that people will do anything for money.
So why does "The Visit," Friedrich Durrenmatt's drama about a town that sells its soul for a fortune, still exert a chilling grip nearly 35 years after it shook up genteel Eisenhower-era audiences who had been drawn to it by the star power of Alfred Lunt and Lynn Fontanne?
The answers are there to be found in the Roundabout Theater Company's revival at the Criterion Center.
As directed by Edwin Sherin without benefit of star power but with lots of intelligence and a fiercely conceived lead performance by Jane Alexander, "The Visit" stands revealed as a small masterpiece of misanthropy, a play whose cynicism is so thickly layered that the greed driving the plot at its surface seems almost the least of its characters' sins.
For Durrenmatt, people, not money, are the root of all evil.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Chicago Mercantile Exchange re-elected its chairman, John F. Sandner.
His term will be two years. *
Great American Communications Co., Cincinnati, named John P. Zanotti president and chief operating officer of Great American Broadcasting and executive vice president of the parent company.


Western Co. of North America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Economic Scene; Conservative Plea To Aid Ex-Soviets
AID to the former Soviet republics has become an ideological issue in this country, pitting those who say the United States and its partners should move rapidly and generously to provide assistance against those who would wait for them to collapse.
Favoring large-scale aid, according to the oversimplified version, are liberals, pragmatists and internationalists, and on the side opposing aid, at least until authoritarian structures are destroyed, root and branch, are conservatives, supply-siders and America Firsters.
But Helmut Schlesinger, president of the German Bundesbank, celebrated as a conservative and anti-inflationist around the world, strongly supports Western aid for the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Calling the Commonwealth a "fragile construction," Dr.
Schlesinger said last week that "the Western part of the world must help to stabilize these young states economically, with the goal of stabilizing them politically as well." He said "huge transfers of capital and know-how" would be necessary.


Knicks Advised to Take the Game Home
The Knicks, who have played recently as if they need a change of scenery, will get one starting tonight when they begin a three-game Western Conference road trip against the Golden State Warriors.
Lately, it has not mattered much where the Knicks (23-15) have played.
They have lost four of their last five games, and Wednesday's 119-109 loss in Philadelphia dropped them out of first place in the Atlantic Division for the first time since Dec. 13.


Ashland Oil Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amdahl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Tisch Is Offering to Buy Macy's In Rescue From Huge Debt Load
In an apparent solution to R. H. Macy &amp; Company's overwhelming financial troubles, Laurence A. Tisch, chairman and chief executive of Loews and CBS, has offered to buy the tottering retail company.
Already a major investor in Macy, Mr.
Tisch would spend roughly $1 billion more to increase his stake substantially, people involved in talks to solve Macy's immense debt problems said last night.
They added that negotiations were continuing and that details of the proposal could change.


Israeli Military Panel Cancels Order to Deport a Palestinian
An army panel today recommended the canceling of an order to deport a Palestinian suspected of terrorist activities in the occupied territories, revoking one of 12 expulsions ordered this month by the Government.
The decision represents the first cancellation of a deportation order by the military since 1979.
A military spokesman said that the panel, which reviewed deportation orders against five Palestinians from the West Bank, recommended that Eyad Hani Abdul Raouf Joudeh be allowed to stay and that the decision was accepted by the area commander.


Question of Settlement
A judge in California was asked yesterday to determine whether a settlement has been reached in a wrongful death suit filed by the family of Hank Gathers, the Loyola Marymount University star.
BRUCE FAGEL, attorney for Gathers's family, asked Torrance Superior Court Judge GARY HASTINGS to rule on the matter.
Fagel said a settlement in the multimillion-dollar suit was reached Jan. 14, but the defendants later added more conditions.
An attorney for one defendant said no settlement agreement was made.


Southwestern Bell Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Last Chance
Here is a listing of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon.
Closing This Weekend
"DON GIOVANNI," by Mozart, Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance of the season.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $75.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
"AS YOU LIKE IT," Shakespeare comedy, directed by Anthony Cornish, with Joanne Camp, at the Pearl Theater, 125 West 22d Street, Manhattan.
Through tomorrow.
Shows: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 5 and 9 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Information: (212) 645-7708.
ALTOGETHER DIFFERENT, dance series, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Performances this weekend: tonight at 8, tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
SCULPTURE CENTER, 167 East 69th Street, Manhattan.
A group show featuring works by Steven DeFrank, Louise Dudis, Matvey Levenstein, Drew Shiflett and Daniel Wiener.
Through tomorrow.
Today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 879-3500.
"ARTISTS OF CONSCIENCE: 16 YEARS OF SOCIAL AND POLITICAL COMMENTARY," Alternative Museum, 594 Broadway, near Houston Street, SoHo.
Works by about 70 artists.
Through tomorrow.
Today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $3.
Information: (212) 966-4444.
"FROM EXPRESSIONISM TO RESISTANCE, ART IN GERMANY 1909-36: THE MARVIN AND JANET FISHMAN COLLECTION," a display of 190 paintings, sculptures and works on paper by artists including Max Ernst, Ludwig Kirchner, George Grosz and Otto Dix.
The Jewish Museum at the New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, at 76th Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Today, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.; Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4.50 ($3 for students and the elderly; $1 under age 12).
Information: (212) 399-3430.
"RE-EMERGENCE: JEWISH LIFE IN EASTERN EUROPE," a series of films from the former Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland, sponsored by the Jewish Museum and the Film Society of Lincoln Center.
Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Admission: $7 ($5 for Film Society and Jewish Museum members).
Information: (212) 875-5600.
"FROM OBJECT TO SUBJECT: DOCUMENTS AND DOCUMENTARIES FROM THE WOMEN'S MOVEMENT," films and videotapes from the 1970's.
Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Screenings throughout the day.
Today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.
Closing Next Week
"L'ELISIR D'AMORE," by Donizetti, Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance Thursday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $19 to $95.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
Closing Next Weekend
BILLY STRITCH, a singer and pianist, at Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th Floor.
Through Feb. 1.
Tuesday to Saturday at 9 and 11:15 P.M.
The early show requires a $35 cover charge and dinner; the cost for both would be about $120 a person.
There is only a $35 cover charge for the late show.
Information: (212) 632-5000.
"ISRAEL: THE NEXT GENERATION," last performance in the series features the rock and pop singers Shlomo Artzi and Etti Ankri, Feb. 1 at 7:30 P.M., at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene.
Tickets are $12 to $40.
Information: (718) 636-4100.
"CELEBRATING CALDER," a collection of 70 works, at the Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
Through Feb. 2.
Hours: Tuesday, 1 to 8 P.M.; Wednesday to Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.
SHEILA METZNER AND BRADFORD WASHBURN, at the International Center of Photography, 1130 Fifth Avenue, at 94th Street, Manhattan.
A retrospective by Ms.
Metzner and "Mountains," a collection of works by Mr.
Washburn.
Through Feb. 2.
Hours: Tuesday, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Wednesday to Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $3.50 ($2 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 860-1777.
MOIRA DRYER, an exhibition of paintings at the Mary Boone Gallery, 417 West Broadway, near Spring Street.
Through Feb. 1.
Hours: Tuesday to Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 431-1818.


Sealed Air Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Trinova Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Read-Rite Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Tandem Computers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sara Lee Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Mobil Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arch Petroleum Inc. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Technology Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


MacDermid Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Funeral Is Held for Teacher Fatally Wounded in Crossfire


Corrections
An article yesterday about the spread of tuberculosis included incomplete information from the Centers for Disease Control about states that have reported cases of the drug-resistant form of the infection.
Since 1989, 17 states have reported cases.
Deadly outbreaks occurred in Florida and New York.
At least one drug-resistant case has also been reported in each of these states: Alabama, Arizona, California, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Texas, Utah, Virginia and Washington.


Classical Music in Review
New York Virtuoso Singers and Parnassus  Merkin Concert Hall


AmeriCares Gets Aid Swiftly to Russians
To the Editor:
It was unfortunate that readers of your Jan. 11 news article on the problems experienced by American charities in getting food and medicines to Russia were not afforded an opportunity to learn about the instructive experience of one United States charity eminently involved in helping Russia and the republics of the former Soviet Union: AmeriCares.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Delsing's 65 Takes Lead in Phoenix


Forest Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nationwide Health Prop reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Topics of The Times; Principals and Principles
Lucy Cruz has been a member of the New York City Council for less than a month but she has already established a reputation for dubious ethics.
Before joining the Council, Ms.
Cruz was a member of School Board 12 in the south-central Bronx, a board with a history of mismanagement and corruption.
In the hours before her term expired on New Year's Eve, she cast the deciding vote to approve the appointment of six principals to fill vacancies at elementary and middle schools in the district.


New York Sets Out on Legal Path To Allow Gay Irish Unit in Parade
Seeking to force the sponsors of New York City's St.
Patrick's Day Parade to admit a gay Irish group, the Dinkins administration yesterday charged the organizers with illegal discrimination and asked to have a city hearing officer oversee admission of marchers in a "non-discriminatory" way.
The complaint filed by the city's Human Rights Commission orders the local, state and national chapters of the Ancient Order of Hibernians before a commission hearing officer to answer charges that they broke the city's civil rights laws when the Manhattan chapter refused to allow the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization to march under its own banner last year.


Digital Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Weighing Aid for Russian Nuclear Scientists
The Bush Administration is considering several plans to provide assistance to Russian nuclear scientists to keep them from accepting offers to work in developing nations trying to build weapons, the State Department said today.
Congressional leaders and private organizations concerned about the spread of nuclear weapons are pressing the Bush Administration to act quickly to provide assistance not only to prevent a brain drain but also to speed up the process of dismantling weapons in the former Soviet Union, a process that the scientists could assist.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.93
4.12
9.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.80
3.78
6.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.91
3.88
6.20
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.88
6.86
7.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.70
7.71
8.22
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.85
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.68
6.68
7.43
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bush to Seek More Money for Major Space Missions
Telling an enthusiastic group of young people that even in hard times the public must invest in the future, President Bush said today that he would seek additional money for the space station, robot missions to the moon and other aerospace projects.
Mr.
Bush, surrounded by 23 space shuttle astronauts who were visiting Washington, told more than 100 cheering school children and their advisers, "America's destiny must include manned exploration" of space.


De Klerk Vows Black Vote on Reform
President F. W. de Klerk promised today to include South Africa's disfranchised black majority in any referendum on political change, but at the same time he reiterated that the white minority would have an opportunity to veto the terms of transition to a new nonracist constitution.
Mr. de Klerk appeared to suggest that while all South African would be permitted to vote in the referendum, a separate tally would be kept of the white votes, and that passage would require a majority of both these ballots and the overall total.


Review/Pop; Grand Gestures, Played Big
The composer Henry Threadgill, who is performing at the New Music Cafe, 380 Canal Street, through tonight, has etched out a particular world for himself.
More than anything, it's a theatrical world, obsessed with the grand gesture of passion, played big so as not to be missed in the bleacher seats.
His band, the Very Very Circus, features two tubas and two guitars, a French horn and drums along with Mr.
Threadgill's saxophone and flute; with the group, Mr.
Threadgill dives deep into extremity, where tango rhythms and histrionic melodies mesh with wild polyphony and dirges that seem to take days to work themselves out.
And the improvisations, keyed to the material, seem as if they were being chased by death itself, they're so concerned with the expression of deeply felt emotions.


Biomagnetic Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Start Date for Plan B Signings Is Delayed
The National Football League will postpone the starting date for Plan B signings and new offer sheets for players with expired contracts in an effort to break the deadlock over football's collective-bargaining process.
In his annual Super Bowl news conference, N.F.L.
Commissioner Paul Tagliabue said that talks have been under way for several months between league officials and the Players Association and among the league's owners over how to solve the league's labor mess.
The N.F.L. has been without a labor agreement with its players since 1982.


Exar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Boston Journal; When Gilding the Roof Can Tarnish One's Image
Oliver Wendell Holmes called the State House that sits proudly atop Beacon Hill here "the hub of the solar system."
Even allowing for hyperbole, in Massachusetts, at least, the State House's golden dome has traditionally served as the measuring rod by which distances to Boston are calculated.
The building was designed in 1795 by Charles Bullfinch, the noted architect whose elegant creations transformed Boston.


Clintons to Rebut Rumors on "60 Minutes"
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and his wife, Hillary, have agreed to appear together on the CBS News program "60 Minutes" on Sunday night after the Super Bowl to respond to accusations that he has had extramarital affairs.
Campaign aides spent the day sifting through invitations to appear on news programs over the weekend before deciding on "60 Minutes," a Clinton campaign spokeswoman, Dee Dee Myers, said.
CBS said the program would start about 10 P.M.


Carpenter Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pfizer Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Zipaquira Journal; A Colombian Cathedral? Take Salt, Add Water . . .
Jorge Casteblanco Reyes, his miner's lamp flickering on gray underground walls of salt, spoke fervently of carving a sacristy, a baptistry, a series of chapels and a central nave soaring stories inside a salt mountain here.
Mr.
Casteblanco was not experiencing religious visions induced by inhaling the mine's powerful sulphur fumes.
With his rubber boots firmly planted on the salt-mine floor, the engineer explained his role as Colombia's modern-day cathedral builder.


Dow Gains 6, but Drops 32 for Week
Stock prices rose slightly yesterday, again showing resiliency after a hefty pullback on Thursday.
The Dow Jones industrial average finished at 3,232.78, up 6.04 points for the day but off 32.20 for the week.
Peter Labe, chief investment strategist for Josepthal, Lyon &amp; Ross, saw yesterday's market as biding its time.
"The current consolidation and pullback is good," he said, "but the market would like to see what the President has to say on Jan. 28, when he gives the State of the Union Message, and what the budget looks like on the 29th when it is submitted. Until then, the market is likely to mill around waiting for fresh information."  Volume Is Heavy
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was heavy at 214.6 million shares, down from 234.6 million on Thursday, as the number of stocks up on the day outpaced declining issues by 908 to 813.
The Big Board composite was up 0.28, to 229.17.


Silicon Valley Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Suit Says 2 Frank Concerns Pollute Harbor
Federal officials followed a New York State agency yesterday in taking action against the Frank family, which owns barge, shipyard, ship-cleaning companies that state environmentalists have called among the worst polluters of New York Harbor.
The Federal Environmental Protection Agency filed two suits in Federal District Court in Newark against two Frank-owned companies.


Company Settles Lawsuit Over Exposure to Dioxin
The Diamond Shamrock Company, which for years has fought claims that it recklessly endangered the health of workers and residents near a former herbicide plant by exposing them to dioxin, has agreed to a $1 million settlement.
The settlement came unexpectedly Thursday during the seventh week of a trial before Judge Leo Yanoff of Superior Court.
Lawyers for the company and for 72 plaintiffs, including residents of the area, families of former workers and contractors who worked at the site, said they were satisfied with the settlement, even though the case fell short of proving a link between dioxin and health problems among the workers.


Spinnaker Software Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 Salvadoran Officers Sentenced To 30 Years in Jesuits' Slayings
El Salvador moved at an almost breathless pace toward tying up the remnants of its 12-year civil war today, with a judge sentencing two army officers for the killing of six Jesuit priests while guerrilla commanders made a surprise return before the formal cease-fire.
United Nations officials presided over talks between the six guerrillas and Salvadoran military and Government leaders about the logistics of the guerrillas' emergence from clandestine life under the terms of an amnesty adopted unanimously by the Legislative Assembly just before midnight Thursday.


Datascope Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wetterau Inc.  reports earnings for 13wks to Dec 28


Concord Camera Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


4 Decades of Bungling at Bomb Plant
The Government has compiled a list of four decades of accidents at the Hanford nuclear bomb plant that presents the most detailed overview yet of personnel errors, management failures and inattention to detail at the huge complex in Washington State.
Although the Department of Energy, which released the report late Thursday, said it contained "absolutely no new information," an environmental group said that many of the accidents had not been disclosed before.
They include fires, explosions, fuel melting, safety system failures, and various incidents that exposed workers to radiation and dangerous chemicals.


CEM Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Zero Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


David V. Habif, Medical Professor, 77
David V. Habif, a medical professor and an expert on cancer surgery, died on Jan. 17 at his home in Tenafly, N.J.
He was 77 years old.
Dr. Habif died of a heart attack, his family said.


Filling the Cathedral with Liberace and Liturgy
Climb the 23 stairs of a spiral staircase.
It is dark.
The air, cool.
What sounds there are seem strangely muffled.
"Welcome to the organ loft," says Dorothy J. Papadakos. "The cockpit."


Notre Dame Mourns Two Swimmers Killed in Crash
Two members of the Notre Dame women's swimming team that was returning from a meet near Chicago were killed early today after the team bus crashed and overturned four miles from campus.
The accident stunned the university, which canceled all weekend athletic events for the first time since the assassination of President Kennedy 28 years ago.
"People are shocked," said Dennis Brown, a university spokesman.
"Everybody in the Notre Dame family has been affected."


To Keep Memories, Keep Ellis Island Buildings
To the Editor:
"Save Ellis Islands's Ghosts" (editorial, Dec. 27), on the restoration of the south part of the island, misses the boat on crucial issues regarding good adaptive reuse of historic buildings.
As architect of the previous scheme that saves all the existing south side structures while fashioning an international conference center, I feel compelled to point out the reasons for your miss.


Washington and Redskins: What More Perfect Union?
Washington is a city that takes itself ever so seriously, never more than when it is being seriously silly.
For the past two weeks, the capital of the free world has taken on the trappings of a raucous oversized high school, and the colors of patriotism are no longer red, white and blue, but burgundy and gold.
The Washington Redskins (a Mann, a Monk and some hogs) face the Buffalo Bills in the Super Bowl on Sunday.
And the suits are getting ready to take off their pinstripes, put on their pig snouts and party.
Stripping and Singing
Like absolutely everything else that happens in Washington, this is important.
Why?
Because winning is considered an art form here, and that means winners are artists, and, hey, where else would someone express his devotion to art by offering to sing "Hail to the Redskins" upside down with his head in a toilet while two women in cheerleader outfits strip down to their Redskins underwear?


Lund International Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


License Bike-Messenger Employers and Increase Public Safety; Curb Pedestrians!
To the Editor:
Karen Tina Harrison urges cyclists to stay on the roadway where they belong (letter, Jan. 6) -- as indeed they should.
However, as a bicycle commuter who stops at lights and signals turns, I beseech pedestrians to stay where
they
belong: on the sidewalk.


Hayes-Dana reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Quote of the Day
"We lived through a lot during the war: famine and hardship. But we lived on hope for a better life. Now we know there is no better life. We have lost our belief. There is nothing more to believe in." -- TSILYA KACHEVA, a recent immigrant from the former Soviet Union.  [ 7:5. ]


American Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Parading Bigotry
The Irish of New York were the victims of discrimination for centuries.
That makes it all the more deplorable that organizers of the St.
Patrick's Day Parade, the Ancient Order of the Hibernians, persist in preventing a gay Irish organization from marching as a unit in the celebration on March 17.
Their obstinate bias insults a proud history and a proud city.
But what should the city government do about it?
Mayor David Dinkins hoped to get the gay group included by authorizing the state chapter of the Hibernians to sponsor the parade instead of the traditional Manhattan chapter.
But the state chapter proved as bigoted as the local.
So now the city Human Rights Commission has filed a complaint charging that the sponsors of last year's parade discriminated by banning the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization.
The commission may also seek an injunction ordering inclusion of the gay organization pending resolution of its complaint.


8 Embark on Quest for Challenger's Slot
It is the eve of racing for eight international sailing teams that have challenged the San Diego Yacht Club for the America's Cup.
On Saturday they will begin a three-month series of trial races to determine which will win the Louis Vuitton Cup for the right to challenge the United States in the America's Cup final in May.
For many of them, just getting here was a victory.
In the last month, attrition claimed two teams, the Slovenians and the Russians.
Over the last four years, plans for a dozen other cup efforts collapsed under the burden of costs that are approaching $100 million for a campaign.


Your Taxes; Mail-Order Rule Likely to Change
If the Justices' questioning during oral arguments is any guide to their ultimate decision, the Supreme Court seems likely to overturn a landmark 1967 ruling and decide this spring that a state may levy sales taxes on mail-order merchandise from outside its borders.
The Court seemed quite unsympathetic on Wednesday to the position of the Quill Corporation, an Illinois-based marketer of office supplies.
Its sales in North Dakota have produced a high-stakes challenge to the principle that states could not make tax collectors of companies with no physical presence within their borders.


Woman Who Stabbed Her Newborn Son Is Sentenced in New Jersey


Acme Steel Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; BUSH CAMP RENEWS STRATEGY DEBATE
The Bush campaign today made public a television commercial apologizing to New Hampshire voters for their economic pain, but at the White House a renewed debate broke out over the general tone of President Bush's re-election campaign.
The discussion of whether Mr.
Bush should be conciliatory or combative in his State of the Union Message next Tuesday began Thursday night when his two top political aides, Samuel K. Skinner, the White House chief of staff, and Robert M. Teeter, the campaign chairman, summoned about 20 Republicans to a strategy session.
No Change in Program
Bush aides have been saying all week that the address to Congress would kick off the election effort by offering Mr.
Bush's plan to fix the economy.
But Mr.
Skinner and Mr.
Teeter found themselves bombarded with demands that Mr.
Bush also use his speech to declare war on the Democrats in Congress.


Gambling Hot Line Awaits Flood of Calls
Super Bowl XXVI is the jewel in the crown of the National Football League season, but the frenzied interest in the game also produces the single biggest day of betting fever for the nation's compulsive gamblers.
As legal sports books in Nevada prepare to handle at least $45 million to $50 million in Super Bowl wagers, the Compulsive Gamblers Hotline (1-800-332-0402) is planning for the usual onslaught of crisis calls during and after the game.


A Studied Calm on Algeria's Day of Prayer
The first Friday prayers in Algeria since the arrest of a senior Muslim fundamentalist leader were held peacefully today, as militant opponents of the Government apparently heeded their party's advice to maintain an outward calm.
The Algerian Government deployed thousands of special security forces across the country and in the capital, Algiers, especially around mosques that are known as strongholds of Muslim fundamentalists.
The Government had issued an edict on banning political speeches at Friday prayers.


California Water Service Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PAR Technology Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New President Named For Pacific Exchange
The Pacific Stock Exchange has promoted Robert M. Greber to the post of president and chief operating officer, effective immediately.
Mr.
Greber had been the exchange's executive vice president, director of marketing and strategic planning, since July 1990.
As president, Mr.
Greber succeeds Lee Korins, who continues as chairman and chief executive.
The chief operating officer's position has been vacant for two years.
Mr.
Greber, who is 53, will now manage the exchange's marketing, planning, corporate communications, new-product development, and government and public affairs programs.


Polk Audio Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Devils Overcome Capital Centre
Coach Tom McVie kept reminding the Devils all week what an insurmountable task it has been over the years for New Jersey to win at the Capital Centre, especially after falling behind the Washington Capitals.
No wonder.
In their 10-year history, the Devils had won only four games in 33 visits here.
But tonight, the talk from the coach apparently worked in remarkable fashion as the Devils ambushed the Capitals from the outset and skated off with a 5-2 triumph.


Prudential Rating Cut By Moody's
Moody's downgraded its rating by a notch yesterday on the Prudential Insurance Company of America's financial strength, in an expression of concern over the insurer's holdings in commercial real estate and junk bonds.
Moody's Investors Service, in downgrading Prudential from Aaa, or "exceptional," to Aa1, or the best of the service's "excellent" ratings, stressed the continued stability and strength of the mutual insurance giant.
With more than $169 billion in assets, it is the nation's largest life insurer.
And one leading consumer advocate said the rating change should not cause policyholders undue worry.


6th Quarterly Loss in Row for Texas Instruments
Texas Instruments Inc. today reported its sixth consecutive quarterly loss, but analysts said cost-cutting moves taken last year by the giant chip maker appeared to be working.
The company trimmed 6,000 jobs through voluntary retirement, layoffs, attrition and assets sales during 1991 for a one-time charge of $240 million, leading to a loss of $85 million.
But the $220 million in yearly savings projected today by Jerry R. Junkins, chairman and chief executive, contributed to a small operating profit of $12 million in the fourth quarter.


Head of National Gallery Is Retiring
J.
Carter Brown, who oversaw the transformation of the National Gallery of Art in Washington from a specialized museum into one of the largest art institutions in the country, announced yesterday that he would retire as its director by the end of the year.
Only the third director in the National Gallery's 50-year history, he has held the position for 22 years.
"I've spent over half my life at the National Gallery," said Mr.
Brown, who joined the gallery as assistant director in 1961 and is now 57 years old.
"I only started thinking about retirement a month ago. The time just seemed right." The museum has just come to the end of a yearlong celebration of its 50th anniversary and has also just concluded "Circa 1492: Art in the Age of Exploration," one of the largest of the lavish exhibitions for which Mr.
Brown's tenure was known.


University Tightens Its Belt, Loses a Head Football Coach
JIM REID, a longtime football coach at the University of Massachusetts, resigned yesterday after being told that budget cuts would curtail athletic scholarships.
"All I am is just one more victim of what has been a disastrous economy statewide and nationally," said the 41-year-old Reid, who had been a coach at the school in Amherst, Mass., for 18 years, the last six as a head coach.


Jerusalem Judge Orders Mosque to Lower Voice
The enduring conflict between Israelis and Palestinians has had many battlegrounds over the decades, and it shifted this week to still a new one: decibel levels.
To an Israeli court, the loudspeakers on the minaret of a Jerusalem mosque blare too much.
When the muezzin there calls the faithful to prayer five times a day, a judge ruled on Thursday, he unduly disturbs the peace of Jews living nearby.


EXECUTIVES
*
Alias Research Inc., Toronto, named Ian Giffen chief financial officer. *
American International Group Inc., New York, an insurance company, named Petros K. Sabatacakis senior vice president-financial services.


2 Shot in $25,000 Armored-Truck Ambush
Two employees of a check-cashing company were ambushed and critically wounded yesterday by robbers who stole $25,000 that the men were delivering to a warehouse here, the police said.
Officers said the robbers lay in wait for the delivery, then shot the two with automatic weapons as they stepped from their armored truck.


Messier Enjoys Nostalgic Trip
The night had been so emotional, so full of memories, that long after it had finally ended, Mark Messier still seemed to be gasping for air as he spoke.
Messier -- forever Edmonton's favorite son -- had come home, heard the familiar roar from the Northlands Coliseum crowd, seen the Stanley Cup banners hanging above the rink and skated across the ice as he had for 12 seasons as an Oiler.


Network General reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Topics of The Times; King Cat
One morning this week, the owner of two cats watched horrified while the older and fatter, Leo, explored what to him was a new continent.
It was a long shelf, eight or so feet off the floor, lined with a lifetime's collection of pottery.
None of it had come cheap.
"Leo, get down from there," she was about to shout when a friend put a warning hand on her arm.
"Don't startle him," the friend said.
"If you do, he'll jump and break something."


From Russia with Hope: In America to Stay - A special report; Seeking Shelter in U.S. After the Soviet Storm
The scene is familiar.
Immigrants are crowded onto cots in the back rooms of a church in Los Angeles.
But these are not Latin Americans escaping poverty and civil war.
They are penniless Russians, members of a new wave of underground immigrants to the United States.
Sheltered under the gold domes of the Protection of the Holy Virgin, a Russian Orthodox church in Hollywood, are what might pass for a cross section of Russian society: a jeweler, an actress, a merchant seaman, a would-be fashion model, a Soviet Army deserter and a mother who fled with her three children from an outbreak of ethnic violence.


Vulcan Materials reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For the Big Game, Inspiration Before Perspiration
A familiar sound in the Buffalo Bills' locker room before a game is the thump, thump of Leonard Smith's head against a metal door, or a cement wall, whichever he happens to locate first.
"He bangs his head like that all the time," said Jeff Wright, the team nose tackle, regarding the singular activity of Smith, the strong safety.
"It's his way of pumping himself up for the game."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Astral Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Tecnol Medical Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Watkins-Johnson Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Morgan Stanley Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Expected to Push Germany to Cut Rates
When the Group of Seven finance ministers meet Saturday on Long Island, the United States will continue its campaign to put pressure on Germany to lower interest rates as a way to promote economic growth around the world, American officials say.
With the American economy continuing to languish, Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady is expected to enlist France and some other industrial countries to call on Germany's central bank to reduce its interest rates.


Quarterback to Keep His Irish Up
Quarterback RICK MIRER announced yesterday that he would return to Notre Dame for his senior season.
Mirer, who had been considering giving up his final year of eligibility to enter the National Football League draft, said there were "a lot of things" that went into his decision.
"Most importantly, I just wanted to be happy, and I think I could be happy here another year," Mirer said.
"I've got another shot at helping us try to win a national championship, and that's something I've thought about since I was being recruited back in 1988 when Notre Dame won it all," he said.


Patents; Aggressive Defender Branches Out
Depending on one's perspective, Texas Instruments Inc. has achieved either fame or notoriety for the aggressive way it pursues its intellectual property rights.
By demanding unusually high royalty payments from companies it contends are using its patented technologies, and suing those that fail to comply, the company has turned its patents into a profit center.
Now, Melvin Sharp, who devised and executed Texas Instruments' patent program, hopes to spread his gospel to other high-tech corporations both in the United States and abroad.
Texas Instruments' highest-ranking patent lawyer until taking early retirement in October, Mr.
Sharp last week announced the formation of a consulting service to help companies wishing to take greater advantage of their intellectual property portfolios.


Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


News Summary
International 2-5 BAKER SEEKS PROMISE FROM ISRAEL
Secretary of State Baker told Israel that to consider providing $10 billion in housing loan guarantees, Washington needed assurances that the money would not be spent to further the building of settlements, American officials said.  1  MOSQUE FINED ON NOISE COMPLAINT
The enduring conflict between Israelis and Palestinians has had many battlegrounds over the decades, and it shifted this week to still a new one: decibel levels.  5  JAPAN-U.S.
COOPERATION PLEDGED
Shaken by scandals and new frictions with Washington, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan opened a Parliament session pledging to "make every effort to cooperate" with the United States.  2  CLOSING OUT EL SALVADOR'S WAR
El Salvador moved toward tying up the remnants of its 12-year civil war, with a judge sentencing two army officers for the killing of six Jesuit priests while guerrilla commanders made a surprise return before a formal cease-fire.  4  U.S.
PLANS MILITARY AID TO PERU
After months of Congressionally imposed delays, the Bush Administration is preparing to release $10 million in military aid to Peru as the first stage of a new policy to help the Peruvian military fight drug traffickers and Maoist guerrillas.  4  WHITES HAVE VETO, DE KLERK SAYS
President de Klerk promised to include South Africa's disfranchised black majority in any referendum on political change but reiterated that the white minority would be able to veto the terms of transition to a nonracist constitution.  5  MORE PAINFUL REFORMS FOR RUSSIA
Under attack for letting prices soar, the Russian Government won reluctant approval for the next phase of its painful economic reforms: a budget that it says is virtually deficit-free but calls for deep spending cuts and higher taxes.  3  AID FOR ATOM SCIENTISTS WEIGHED
The Bush Administration is considering assistance to Russian nuclear scientists to keep them from accepting offers to work in developing nations trying to build weapons.  3  Serbs collected evidence of a mass killing by Croat extremists.  3  Rebels in Indian-governed Kashmir bombed police headquarters.  2  Zipaquira Journal: A cathedral is being carved in a mountain.  4  National 6-9  MACY'S DEAL FALLS APART
A proposal by Laurence A. Tisch to rescue Macy's fell through when a big creditor rejected the terms.
The creditor is the Prudential Insurance Company of America, which balked at refinancing an $811 million mortgage on some 70 Macy stores.  1  A FIGHTER OR A MEDIATOR?
A heated debate is under way among White House aides over what tone President Bush should adopt in his State of Union Message next week: conciliatory with Democrats in Congress in working to spur the economy, or combative in dealing with them.  1  Candidates are providing the details, but do voters care?  8  Governor Clinton goes to Arkansas to oversee an execution.  8  THE CAPITAL HAS GONE GIDDY
In a city where winning is what matters most, the Washington Redskins have become a kind of civic religion, and the impending Super Bowl has made the population of the capital a little loony.  1  SURGE OF SOVIET IMMIGRANTS
Many of the tens of thousands of people who have come to this country from the former Soviet lands are going underground when their visas expire, and their interaction with American society is changing long-held suspicions and prejudices.  1  HOPE IN TUBERCULOSIS OUTBREAK
Although a strain of tuberculosis is out of control in the United States, Federal Health officials say they are somewhat encouraged because it is not particularly contagious.  1  BUSH SAYS HE BACKS SPACE EFFORT
Renewing a commitment to manned space travel, President Bush said he would seek additional money for a space station, robot missions to the Moon and other aerospace projects.  6  A COMPILATION OF NUCLEAR PERILS
Four decades of accidents at the troubled Hanford nuclear bomb plant, including fires, explosions, fuel melting, safety system failures, and worker exposures to radiation and dangerous chemicals, were made public in new list compiled by the Government.  6  Boston Journal: Gold on the capitol is a dilemma for the Governor.  6  Metropolitan Digest, 25  ROUND 3 IN IRISH PARADE
Seeking to force the sponsors of New York City's St.
Patrick's Day Parade to admit a gay Irish group, the Dinkins administration yesterday charged the organizers with illegal discrimination and asked that the city oversee admission of marchers.
Making long CD-playing longer.
Buying almost-new cars that have a past.
A scale tells you if you're late or too heavy.
Obituaries 11  Eugene Root, a developer of missiles.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials 22  Death and the Presidency.
Libya's unfriendly skies.
Parading bigotry.
Topics: Principals, principles.
Letters 22  Russell Baker: It's only a story, Bill.  23  Alain E. Enthoven, Richard Kronick: Better, cheaper medical care.  23  Judith Feder: Managed medical care won't save money.  23  Esther Dyson: There's no capitalism without capitalists.  23


Laclede Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Too Quick to Dismiss Buchanan's Candidacy
To the Editor:
Aram Bakshian Jr.'s "America First, Buchanan Last" (Op-Ed, Jan. 7), is both shortsighted and sardonic in dismissing the candidacy of Patrick Buchanan for the Republican nomination for President.


Alexander &amp; Baldwin reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Unfriendly Skies for Libya
For too long, terrorism in the air has been a crime without punishment for outlaw states that shelter wanted suspects.
This week, for the first time, the United Nations held Libya directly accountable for its involvement in "deeply disturbing" terrorist acts.
It is a salutary precedent that can hasten the end of a dirty business.
A unanimous Security Council has ordered Libya to surrender for trial two agents accused of planting the bomb that blew up Pan American Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.
If Col.
Muammar al-Qaddafi refuses to comply, he risks a painful follow-up: the severing of international air links to Libya and a U.N. embargo on sales of aircraft and spare parts.


It's a Wrap: Rypien Says Ankle Is No Problem
One day after suffering a mild ankle sprain that shortened his workout, quarterback Mark Rypien participated this afternoon in the Washington Redskins' final practice of the week and passed the test as smoothly as he does the football.
Rypien said afterward that his right ankle would not hinder his performance in Sunday's showdown with Buffalo.


Policeman Charged in Gun Sale
During a nine-month undercover operation, the police say they bought pistols and automatic weapons from the manager and an employee of a Brooklyn shoe store.
On Thursday, when officers moved in to arrest the two for illegally selling the guns, they unexpectedly learned that one was a rookie police officer who had just come off duty in a neighboring Brooklyn precinct.


P.O.W.'s Questioned by K.G.B. in Vietnam
To the Editor:
I was bewildered on reading your Jan. 13 editorial on the continuing question of U.S. servicemen missing in action in Vietnam.
At no time in the United States or anywhere else did I say, as you assert, that American prisoners of war were interrogated by K.G.B. agents
inside
the Soviet Union years after the war was over.
The public record shows that all my statements on the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue related to a handful of American servicemen who were interviewed by Soviet intelligence officers in Vietnam, not in the Soviet Union.


Just Who Can Raise the Shades and Peek Into Private Matters?
Louis Brandeis once said that "privacy is the most comprehensive of all rights."
Now the issue of privacy is inspiring new and heated debate.
On the one hand, credit bureaus and others who gather personal data about consumers say that they must have it to provide lenders and employers with information they need to do business.
On the other are those who say that too much private information about the way people live, spend and save is becoming available to industry and government without the knowledge of the individuals involved.
This, they say, infringes people's rights.


Hanan J. Ayalti, 81; Wrote Yiddish Works
Hanan J. Ayalti, author of many Yiddish and Hebrew works, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Chester, Conn.
He died of lung cancer, said his son, Daniel Klenbort, of Atlanta.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


Tisch Proposal to Rescue Macy Falls Through as Creditor Balks
Laurence A. Tisch's proposal to rescue R. H. Macy &amp; Company from its crushing debt load at the expense of its creditors fell through late yesterday when a major creditor refused to agree to his terms.
In a statement issued last evening, the Loews Corporation, of which Mr.
Tisch is chairman and chief executive, said it had ended its discussions to buy Macy.
"The Loews proposal was conditioned upon the cooperation of various other parties," the statement said, "but was rejected by a major creditor of Macy's this afternoon."


Feud Threatens Yankee Deal
There were signs yesterday that the argument earlier this week between General Manager Gene Michael and Daniel McCarthy, the managing general partner, may be sending the Yankees back into another period of stagnation.
The Yankees recently offered a one-year contract to Eric King, a free agent right-hander.
That was before McCarthy had a disagreement with Michael about not being consulted when Matt Nokes was signed to a three-year, $7.5 million deal Monday.
McCarthy had earlier written Michael a letter telling him he had to approve every move the team made and Michael apparently defied the order in signing Nokes.


Justice Dept. Aide Is Named To Be I.R.S. Commissioner
President Bush today announced the selection of Shirley D. Peterson, a Justice Department lawyer, as Commissioner of Internal Revenue.
She is to succeed Fred T. Goldberg Jr., who was named today as the President's choice to take the job of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Tax Policy, which is being vacated at the end of the month by Kenneth W. Gideon.


Mason Is the Man at Crunch Time As Knicks Ramble Past Warriors
The slumping Knicks righted themselves for a night, at least, and against one of the league's hottest teams.
Losers of four of their last five, the Knicks built a big first-half lead here tonight against the Golden State Warriors, lost it, then came back to claim a 114-109 victory.


Making a Puzzle of the Political Pie
Come take a bird's-eye view of the proposed new boundaries for the 11th State Senate District in Queens, which a bird could certainly traverse far more easily than any legislator could.
The bird would gaze down on a district essentially chopped into three separate pieces.
Now legally, the legislative mapmakers cannot chop a district into three pieces.
So the Republicans, who created this district, have connected the parts with a tiny strip of sand under the Throgs Neck Bridge, some beach front along the East River and a concrete shoulder of the Cross-Island Parkway, where nobody actually lives.
The Republicans who drew the map have thus satisfied, it would appear, the technical requirement that all the land in the district be contiguous.


Best Year for Morgan Stanley
With trading and investment banking revenue up sharply, Morgan Stanley announced yesterday that its quarterly earnings more than doubled from the period a year earlier, lifting its yearly profits to $475.1 million, its best ever.
"It was a very healthy quarter," said Richard B. Fisher, chairman of Morgan Stanley Group Inc.
"It was not simply one market that we got right. It was broad-based."


Legislators Try to Save Seawolf Program
With Connecticut's vital defense industries already hard hit by layoffs and preparing for more, the state's Congressional delegation is desperately trying to save the Seawolf nuclear submarine and the thousands of jobs it provides.
"It's like standing in the face of a blizzard and a hurricane simultaneously," said Christopher J. Dodd, the state's senior Democratic Senator.
"It's a real maelstrom. And obviously we're bracing for more tough news."


INSIDE
Closing Out Salvadoran War
A judge in El Salvador sentenced two army officers for the killing of six Jesuit priests, and guerrilla leaders made a surprise early return.
Page 4.
Japan Pledges Cooperation
Japan's Prime Minister pledged to "make every effort to cooperate" with the United States to solve its economic problems.
Page 2.
Military Aid to Peru Planned
The United States is planning $10 million in aid to Peru to fight drug traffickers and guerrillas.
Page 4.
Feds Take Over Crossland
Regulators closed Crossland Savings, then reopened it with new managers and more money.
Page 37.
Change at National Gallery
J.
Carter Brown, who made the National Gallery of Art in Washington a major museum, is retiring.
Page 13.


How Do You Stop Coleman? Nights Like This, You Don't
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J., Jan. 24 --
Although he played for 29 minutes in the Nets' 123-117 victory over the Miami Heat, Nets center Sam Bowie was having a lot more fun doing what most of the 11,415 fans who paid their way into Byrne Meadowlands Arena were doing tonight -- watching Derrick Coleman and Mookie Blaylock.
Coleman, last year's National Basketball Association rookie of the year, put on a masterful show, scoring a game-high 38 points and showing some nifty moves in the paint -- despite being double- and triple-teamed by the Heat.
The forward from Syracuse hit on his first 11 shots, not missing until the waning moments of the third period as he finished with 14 baskets in 18 attempts.
Coleman was also 10 of 12 from the free-throw line.


Autrex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Cards to Play Japanese Squad
Commissioner Fay Vincent announced yesterday that the St.
Louis Cardinals would play a team of Japanese all-stars in two exhibition games March 14-15 in Barcelona, Spain.
The games will be played in the new Olympic baseball stadium at L'Hospitalet, a suburb of Barcelona.
The Japanese team will be made up of players from each of the country's 12 professional teams.
Stan Musial, Stan Musial, a longtime Cardinal Hall of Fame star, and the Japanese home run champion, Sadaharu Oh, will serve as honorary captains.


Police Say 2 Connecticut Youths Made Suicide Tape Before Dying
Two teen-agers found shot to death Wednesday in a park here recorded a tape shortly before they died saying they were depressed and had decided to kill themselves, the police said today.
The tape, found in a portable tape player next to the bodies, included about 40 minutes of commentary from David F. Lippmann and Alan P. Ritch Jr., the 17-year-old Greenwich High School seniors whose deaths have been declared a murder-suicide by investigators.
The deaths have jolted this Fairfield County suburb, where violence is rare.


Review/Music; A Tribute as Personal as the Singer
In the best of all possible worlds, great artists would receive tributes according to their accomplishments.
Egotistical divas would be given hosannas by claques of fans.
Self-important virtuoso pianists would be hailed in cascades of octaves and vigorous ovations.
And a singer like Jan DeGaetani -- well, a singer like Jan DeGaetani would receive a musical tribute like the one offered on Thursday night at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater at Columbia University.
In this first of three scheduled concerts dedicated to the memory of the beloved mezzo-soprano, who died of leukemia in 1989 at the age of 56, the tribute seemed an extension of DeGaetani's musical gifts.
Her repertory ranged from Bach to Stephen Foster, from Elizabethan love songs to Elliott Carter.
She was so devoted to her craft that she spent a year of study before performing Schoenberg's "Pierrot Lunaire" in 1959.


Motorists and Neighborhoods Brace for Gowanus Rebuilding
Motorists who use the Gowanus Expressway and residents of the western Brooklyn neighborhoods it cuts through could get their first sour taste this weekend of an effort to rebuild a four-mile elevated stretch of the busy and battered highway over the next 10 years.
The project is expected to cause traffic chaos, especially after 1993, as large segments of the expressway are shut down and traffic is diverted to local streets from Bay Ridge to Brooklyn Heights.


Bond Yields Fall; Short-Term Rates Rise
Interest rates were narrowly mixed in sluggish trading in the credit markets yesterday.
Treasury bond yields fell for the first time in several sessions, but the huge increases in the money supply reported late on Thursday continued to push up rates on short- to intermediate-term securities.


Smithfield Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Call by Victims' Gang Helps End Kidnapping
The notorious Ghost Shadows gang, which has long terrorized Chinatown with extortion, murder and skulduggery and has never had a soft spot for the law, called the police when two of its members were kidnapped in a $98,000 drug deal that went awry -- and was rewarded with a swift, efficient rescue, the police said yesterday.
Investigators said the strange episode occurred in Queens Thursday night when three Ghost Shadows tried to sell bogus heroin to six Dominican men in an apartment in Jackson Heights.
One Ghost Shadow was allowed to leave with some of the money, but before the two others could get away, the ruse was discovered and the two Ghost Shadows were seized at gunpoint, the police said.


Cases of Tuberculosis Surge, But Risk of Contagion Is Low
Although Federal health officials say tuberculosis is out of control in the United States, they take some comfort in the fact that the disease is not particularly contagious.
Certainly the spread of tuberculosis is not comparable to that of influenza, which can strike in explosive epidemics.
Nor is it like outbreaks of measles and chicken pox, in which sick people can infect nearly everyone they meet who has not already had the disease.


American Health Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jones Spacelink Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Racing Times Is Up for Sale
The Racing Times, the daily turf newspaper established nine months ago by Robert Maxwell, is being offered for sale by the Maxwell estate and has reportedly drawn two possible buyers, including its main rival, The Daily Racing Form.
Officials of The Racing Times predicted this week that they would be put out of business if the paper was bought by their larger rival.
And Steven Crist, the editor, said, "I would hope that it would be sold to someone who will continue it."


Scientist Rebuts Officer on Teaneck Youth's Last Actions
A forensic scientist testified today that Phillip Pannell was facing Officer Gary Spath of the Teaneck police, and not turning toward him, when the policeman's first shot pierced the lower left corner of the youth's parka.
The scientist, Lucien C. Haag, was the only witness today in Officer Spath's manslaughter trial in Superior Court here, and he testified about his chemical, laser-beam and other tests concerning the first shot.
Self-Defense Is Claimed
His work, including a videotaped simulation of Mr.
Pannell's movements just before he was killed, are major elements in the state's efforts to prove that the 16-year-old was trying to surrender, with his left arm or both arms raised, when Officer Spath shot him in April 1990.


Interspec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


U.S. TELLS ISRAELIS AID CANNOT FUND NEW SETTLEMENTS
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d told Israel's Ambassador today that if Washington is going to support Israel's request for $10 billion in housing loan guarantees, it needs assurances that the money will not be spent to further a policy, Israeli settlement building, that runs counter to American principles, United States officials said.
The meeting between Mr.
Baker and Israel's Ambassador, Zalman Shoval, resumed what are expected to be drawn-out negotiations over the "terms and conditions" under which the Bush Administration would consider granting all or part of Israel's request for loan guarantees to help absorb Russian Jewish immigrants, the officials said.


Aceto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; A New View of History
There is a one-liner I first heard in the 9th or 10th grade that has become a metaphor for the reality of loss, gain and fairness in America.
It came after someone had left a seat at the movie, only to return moments later to find that seat had been taken.


Innovex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


To Keep Memories, Keep Ellis Island Buildings; Striking a Balance
To the Editor:
"Save Ellis Island's Ghosts" (editorial, Dec. 27) balances many of the critical decisions faced in charting the future of this unique national monument.
To honor the millions who passed through these portals, a thoughtful plan must be developed to save significant elements across the island.
But under current plans no part of Ellis Island is safe.


Weitek Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I.R.S. Eases Fears Over Gifts to Arts By Business
An Internal Revenue Service ruling that corporate contributions will be considered taxable income if they serve as advertising sent shock waves through the art world when it was made public last month.
Many arts organizations, which have increasingly relied on corporate grants to help make up for the loss of government support in recent years, expressed fears that if the new rules were applied to their sponsored events, they could lose up to 34 percent of the grants in taxes.


CHRONICLE
Never mind all those musty case textbooks that are used to teach law: In the classroom of STEPHEN GILLERS, professor of legal ethics at New York University School of Law, it's the folks from NBC's television show "L.A. Law" who incite the most provocative classroom discussions.
" 'L.A. Law' has dramatized some of the most difficult legal ethics issues in ways that are both inviting and emotionally draining," Professor Gillers said yesterday.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the trial to determine New York State officials' liability in the 1971 Attica prison uprising misstated the amount of damages sought by former inmates.
It is $2.8 billion.


Comdisco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chevron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Will Assist Peru's Army in Fighting Cocaine and Rebels
After months of Congressionally imposed delays, the Bush Administration is preparing to release $10 million in military aid to Peru as the first stage of a new policy to help the Peruvian military fight drug traffickers and Maoist guerrillas involved in the cocaine trade.
The program marks a change after more than two decades of limited relations between Washington and the Peruvian military, which had long retained close ties to the Soviet Union and which had recently been criticized by Administration officials for its dismal record on human rights.


Libya Denies Link to Goods Seized at Frankfurt Airport
Libya today denied any link to a consignment of American-made equipment with possible nuclear applications that was seized by Germany, saying the story had been fabricated by Western intelligence agencies.
The German Government said on Wednesday that the consignment had been intercepted at the Frankfurt airport last month, minutes before the plane carrying it had been due to take off for Libya.


Japan Premier, Under Pressure, Opens Parliament
Shaken by scandals and new frictions with Washington, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa opened a new session of Parliament today pledging to "make every effort to cooperate" with the United States to solve its economic problems.
He also offered "profound apologies" for the fact that one of his closest aides had been arrested on a "most regrettable" bribery charge and said he would push for political reforms "so politics does not languish because of such incidents."


Rockefeller Center Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Open Positions on Short Sales Off 5.3% on Nasdaq
With stock prices rising rapidly, short-sellers are reducing their positions in over-the-counter stocks.
The number of actively traded shares listed in the Nasdaq national market system that had been sold short and not yet covered fell by 17.5 million, or 5.3 percent, to 315 million for the month ended Jan. 15, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
It was the second consecutive monthly decline, coming after a drop of 2.2 million shares in December, and seemed to reflect short-sellers seeking refuge from the rapid rise in stock prices in early January.


Tandycrafts Inc. (X) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Possibility of Orion Bid
The Turner Broadcasting System is considering a bid for the Orion Pictures Corporation, according to several movie industry executives.
But a spokesman for Turner declined to comment yesterday.
Turner's chairman, Ted Turner, had previously considered bidding for Orion as well as MGM/UA Entertainment.
Warner Brothers, the film division of Time Warner Inc., is also looking at Orion, but only to see if there are any assets that the movie studio might want to buy.
One entertainment industry analyst who declined to be named said that a deal in which Turner would buy Orion and then strike a deal for Orion's pictures to be distributed theatrically by Warner would make a certain amount of sense since it would allow Turner to cut Orion's overhead.
A Time Warner spokesman declined to comment.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Campaign's New Prop: A Prescription in Print
Last Sunday, when the Democratic candidates met for a televised debate, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas brought a prop: a copy of his 86-page prescription for solving the country's problems.
"This is not rhetoric," he said at one point, waving the gray booklet in front of the camera.
"This is a real economic plan."


Puerto Rican Cement Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BJ Services Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Donations to Neediest Cases Arrive From Faraway Places
While contributors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund have not exhausted the worldwide supply of "par avion" envelopes, the fund has received many donations from abroad this year.
Some foreigners contributed because of their frequent visits to the city.
"I travel to New York for the glamour of the opera and to be uplifted by the arts," wrote Robert Bell of Toronto.
"I also see many homeless living on the streets in such bitter cold. I feel privileged to make my 16th contribution to the fund. It is my hope that this money will bring some joy into the lives of the needy."


Cars That Sell Themselves? Indeed
In an industry suffering from a severe slump, the Swanson Chrysler Plymouth car dealership here has found that the best way to improve sales is to get rid of the sales staff, cut the prices and let car buyers shop in peace.
No haggling.
No pressure.
Just a yellow sign on each car's windshield, with a take-it-or-leave-it price.
The strategy, introduced at the start of the year, has yielded 71 sales this month, as of today, compared with 72 for all of January last year.
George A. Fischell, the general manager, expects Swanson to sell more than 100 cars this month, the best performance in more than a year but about the volume a midsize dealership like this one normally expects.
With expenses down, the month's profits on vehicle sales will be three times those of January 1991.


New England Electric System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Where Recession Is an Ocean Away
Less than four hours at sea, Stephen and Marion Bartlett of Mount Bethel, Pa., were at their usual table in the Queen's Grill on the Queen Elizabeth 2.
"I don't care where the ship's going," Mrs.
Bartlett said with a laugh, "just as long as it takes me with it."
As it so happens, the QE2 is taking the Bartletts around the world.
They and about 250 other people who paid as much as $126,900 (double occupancy) are on board for a 100-day voyage to Honolulu, Bali, Hong Kong and 28 other warm-weather ports.
By the time the ship returns to New York on April 14, winter and opening day of the 1992 baseball season will be only memories.


BRIEFS
*
BellSouth Enterprises, Atlanta, completed the U.S. mobile data and some international portions of its agreement with Ram Broadcasting Corp.
The companies will form a venture to own and operate mobile data-communications networks. *
Burns Philp &amp; Co. of Australia, signed letters to acquire the U.S. and Canadian spice and seasonings business of Durkee-French, a unit of Reckitt &amp; Colman P.L.C., London.
The price is $86 million (U.S.).


DQE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


China and Israel Establish Formal Diplomatic Ties


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


White Collars and Mortarboards Are No Shield in This Recession
The recession loitering in the region for three years now has been paying surprise visits to the homes of many people who had always thought that blue-chip educations and white-collar jobs made them immune to cutbacks and unemployment.
For these people, the economics of the slump have brought home a hard truth: recessions that used to spell trouble mostly for factory workers are now also disrupting the lives of the educated and the professional elite.


Duke Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Auto-trol Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Guidepost
Days Gray? Dream Green
If you are looking ahead to spring, you can do something about it this month: order tree and shrub seedlings at cost or less from state or county agencies and some utility companies for spring delivery.
Seedlings are 6 to 18 inches tall and are packaged in small or large numbers, for the suburban gardener or the big landowner.
How to Order Call the municipal or county office of environmental conservation.
Ask for seedling sales information, where to obtain an order form and the nearest pickup points.
The forestry offices in state capitals and cooperative extension services at colleges also have information.
Not all programs are state-run.
Many municipalities and utilities also sell seedlings.


Exxon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Buying Almost-New Cars With a Past
When car dealers started selling current-model cars used by rental companies like Hertz and Avis at sharp discounts, many consumers found attractive deals.
But those deals are about to become less attractive.
Why?
Because car manufacturers, hurt by poor new-car sales, are requiring the rental companies to keep the cars longer before they buy them back for resale.
Under this system, instituted by manufacturers a few years ago to move excess stock by boosting fleet sales, the car makers sell the repurchased rental cars at auction to dealers, who in turn offer them to the public as used cars.


Observer; It's Only A Story, Bill
Not a single vote cast, and Governor Clinton has already won the press.
He is now the Front-Runner!
Evidence is everywhere.
The cover of Time.
The New Republic dazzled.
New York magazine fascinated.
Grocery tabloids leering with hints of scandal.
What could be firmer evidence of front-runnerhood than hints that the man is worth a grocery leer?
The Washington Post coins "Clintonmania" and gives ultimate proof of front-runnership: a practically endless portrait of his campaign strategist.
This indeed is front-running.
And not a vote cast anywhere.


Mariners Fans Angered by Vincent's Response
After suffering through a series of losing seasons unmatched in modern baseball and a succession of out-of-town owners who traded away enough all-stars to fill a team, Seattle Mariners fans thought their prayers had been answered.
Once and for all, said the city's leaders in a jubilant news conference Thursday morning, a group of local investors had been found to purchase and run the team.
They would buy the team for $100 million and pump an additional $25 million into the club.


Micronics Computers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oh How the Mighty Have Fallen
PETE INCAVIGLIA, ignored as a free agent in spite of his 135 home runs in six major league seasons, finally got a job yesterday.
The Houston Astros signed the outfielder, who never played in the minors, to a minor league contract, but they expect him to make their youngster-laden team.
If he does, he would have a $700,000 salary for next season plus the chance to earn an additional $300,000 in performance bonuses.
The Astros also would have an option for 1993 at a $1.75 million salary, or Incaviglia would be paid $250,000 as a buyout of the option.


Andrew Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Medical Action Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about the novelist Pietro di Donato misidentified one of his books.
It is "Three Circles of Light," not "Three Circles of Life."


Federal Judge Orders Rush On Prison Tuberculosis Unit
A Federal judge overseeing New York City's jails yesterday ordered that a state of emergency be declared to speed construction of a tuberculosis unit for inmates that he had ordered built more than three years ago.
With Federal health officials warning that the spread of a highly resistant strain of tuberculosis was "out of control" across the country, Judge Morris E. Lasker of Federal District Court in Manhattan said "immediate relief is necessary." He ordered that 42 isolation rooms for inmates with the highly contagious disease be completed "no later than May 1, 1992."


State of the Art Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BCE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Evidence in Massacre Points to Croats
In this remote, snow-covered hamlet under the control of Serbs, local militiamen and a team of Yugoslav Army pathologists have collected hard evidence of a mass killing by Croat extremists of Serb civilians from the town of Gospic.
Local Serbs patrolling a no man's land near the village of Siroka Kula on Dec. 25 happened on the charred bodies of 15 men and 9 women, Col.
Milan Milivojevic, the local Yugoslav Army commander, said today.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY LEGAL ACTION ON IRISH PARADE


Detective Shoots Suspect
An off-duty New York City police detective shot and killed a man who tried to hold him up at gunpoint in the Bronx last night, the police said.
The detective, Roger Gibson, was walking past 25 East Mosholu Parkway in Bedford Park when the gunman approached him and demanded money.
The detective fired three times at the suspect, hitting him once, the police said.
The suspect, Roger Garcia, 25 years old, died at Jacobi Hospital.


Ryan, Beck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Benthos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Ciatti's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Death Penalty; Arkansas Execution Raises Questions on Governor's Politics
The issue was a man's life: the execution tonight of the convicted murderer Rickey Ray Rector.
But also at issue today was what the execution said about the Democratic Presidential candidate, Bill Clinton, who as Arkansas Governor refused to issue an order of executive clemency this week to halt it.


CHRONICLE
CAROL THATCHER, the 38-year-old daughter of MARGARET THATCHER, the former Prime Minister of Britain, has said she has no desire to have children and that watching her mother juggle career and family probably had something to do with her decision.
Ms.
Thatcher, who is single, made her comments on a British television program called "The Truth About Women," which was broadcast on Thursday morning.
She was one of several women who discussed their choice of career over children.
Margaret Thatcher was elected to Parliament when her children, twins Carol and Mark, were 6 years old.
"It was an erratic life," said Ms.
Thatcher, who is a freelance journalist.
"She was in the constituency on weekends and often in the House of Commmons in the evenings, so it wasn't a sort of 9 to 5 working mum."


Technitrol Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


License Bike-Messenger Employers and Increase Public Safety
To the Editor:
"Keep the Bicyclists Off the Sidewalks," by Karen Tina Harrison (letter, Jan. 6), tells only half the story.


Profits Drop for Exxon, Mobil and Chevron
Three of the nation's biggest oil companies reported lower earnings today for the fourth quarter, as world crude prices slumped and the recession slowed sales of gasoline and other refined products.
Exxon said net income fell 28.2 percent.
Mobil reported an earnings decline of 38.5 percent.
And Chevron, which took a one-time charge against earnings of $244 million, said net income plunged 93.8 percent.


Uproar Over Mariners Creates Bad Feeling in Japan
Government officials and businessmen in Japan reacted with indignation and puzzlement today over reports that American baseball officials were opposed to the offer by a Japanese company to help buy the Seattle Mariners.
Hiroshi Yamauchi, president of the Nintendo Company, which has teamed up with a group of businessmen in Washington State to bid for the Mariners, held a news conference today to explain the offer.
He said he might be forced to withdraw the bid if the public reaction was negative.
Although the reception in Seattle was favorable, the baseball commissioner, Fay Vincent, said it was unlikely the bid would be approved.


Imperial Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


To Keep Memories, Keep Ellis Island Buildings; For Conference Center
To the Editor:
The most important thing to realize when considering the plan to restore and convert the old hospital buildings on Ellis Island into a conference center is that a decision has been made to let these buildings rot and decay.
The proposal to restore the principal hospital buildings, and to introduce a completely new use for them, means changing this decision.


Nynex Settles On Payments
The Federal Communications Commission, the nation's chief regulator of telephone companies, said yesterday that it had reached a consent decree with the Nynex Corporation, involving a $500,000 penalty for Nynex's disputed payment into a fund to help telephone companies in mostly rural areas.
The commission said Nynex's main units, New York Telephone and New England Telephone and Telegraph, had paid too much into a fund run by the National Exchange Carrier Association, which helps stabilize local rates by subsidizing generally rural carriers.


Two Shows Will Lower Some Prices
The producers of "The Will Rogers Follies," the musical that won the Tony Award last year, announced yesterday that they were lowering the price of some seats to $20.
There will also be a new low ticket price of $7.50 -- the cost of many Manhattan movie admissions -- for "Grand Hotel" when the musical moves from the Martin Beck Theater to the Gershwin Theater on Feb. 4.
The recession was cited for both moves.


Texas Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Woman Gets $7 Million in Airline Discrimination Suit
A woman who was passed over for promotion to the job of general manager of American Airlines' LaGuardia Airport office has won $7.1 million in compensatory and punitive damages for sex, age and disability discrimination.
The woman, Barbara L. Sogg, said yesterday that she hoped the verdict would help shatter the glass ceiling that has kept women from many of the top jobs in large corporations.


Critic's Notebook; A Play That Improves as It Travels From Place to Place
Caryl Churchill's "Mad Forest" is a rare case of a play that has been strengthened in its travels from theater to theater.
Despite that fact and the enthusiasm of the audience, which has filled the Perry Street Theater ever since the work opened in December, "Mad Forest" is scheduled to end its brief run next weekend.
Producers have apparently been unable to arrange for a move to another, equally hospitable theater.
But the premature closing should not detract from the process that brought the play to this highly creative point.
With a quick response to a volatile political situation, Miss Churchill used her playwright's art to clarify the chaos of the Romanian uprising.
Several months after the dictator Nicolae Ceausescu was executed for crimes against the state, Miss Churchill, the director Mark Wing-Davey and a group of students from the Central School of Speech and Drama in London went on a fact-finding mission to Romania.
On location, they explored the roots and the effects of the revolution that toppled the Ceausescu Government from power.
By the summer of 1990, Miss Churchill had completed "Mad Forest," and the students performed it in London for a limited run.


Death, Life and the Presidency
It's no surprise that three of the five Democratic candidates for President now say they support the death penalty as heartily as any law-and-order Republican.
Their positions are misguided, and there is good reason to wonder if they have spoken too soon.
With large popular majorities angry about crime and perceiving execution as an appropriate response, Bill Clinton, Bob Kerrey and Paul Tsongas find it easy to embrace the death penalty.
Mr.
Clinton goes out of his way to point out that, as Governor of Arkansas, he has presided over two executions.
Yesterday he left the campaign trail to preside over a third, a man given a lethal injection for murdering a police officer, though brain damage suffered when the man shot himself during capture raised questions about his competence to stand trial.


Crossland Is Seized By the U.S.
The slumping New York real estate market claimed another victim yesterday afternoon when Federal banking regulators closed Crossland Savings, the city's largest savings bank.
One hour and $1.2 billion later, they opened the new Crossland Federal Savings Bank, with new management and Federal ownership.
The seizure has no immediate effect on the bank's 400,000 customers.
Depositors at Crossland, which is based in Brooklyn and has 44 branches in the New York area, continue to be insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation for up to $100,000 an account.
Interest rates on certificates of deposit will not be changed until the deposits mature.
Notes Taped to the Doors
Notices taped to the doors of all Crossland branches at 3 P.M. told customers of the change, and said branches that normally stayed open late on Fridays would reopen at 4 P.M.
About a dozen branches in Nassau County that are open on Saturdays will also be open today for business as usual.


Review/Ballet; What Jerome Robbins Heard in Bach
Jerome Robbins's "Goldberg Variations" is a contemporary experimental work, not in spite of its celebrated Bach score but because of it.
The choreography, performed by the New York City Ballet on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater, continued to reveal its richness of detail.
Twenty years after its premiere, the ballet has been unavoidably affected by several generations of cast changes; the duets among the principals, most notably, now have a more emotional resonance.
But the work as a whole continues to operate on several levels of meaning.
At heart, it is Mr.
Robbins's response to the music.
Essentially, he hears music in unexpected ways, preferring the surprising dramatic image to a strict visual counterpart to the score's structure.


Cuba Rally Scheduled Despite Security Concerns
A rally by a group calling for improved ties with Cuba, canceled by the Jacob Javits Convention Center because of fears of possible violence and overcrowding, will go on as scheduled today.
At a hearing yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, convention center officials came to an agreement with the group on security measures to avoid clashes with anti-Castro protesters and possible crowd control problems.


Manitowoc Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Australian Boycott 'Completely False'
An Australian official has discredited a doctor who suggested that the Australian team should boycott Olympic basketball games next summer against the United States if MAGIC JOHNSON plays.
Dr.
BRIAN SANDO, the senior medical director of the Australian Olympic Federation's basketball program, said on Wednesday that Johnson, who has tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS, presented a realistic threat of passing on the infection.
He recommended that the Australian team not play against Johnson.


Dinkins Aide Fails to Repay $158,000
Mayor David N. Dinkins's campaign finance chairman, who resigned last week after it was discovered that he took $158,000 from a campaign bank account, has not yet returned the money, as he promised to do, because the Internal Revenue Service has placed a lien on his bank account for unpaid taxes, campaign officials said yesterday.
Harold Ickes, counsel to the Committee for David Dinkins II, said that Arnold Biegen, the finance chairman, wrote the campaign a personal check for the missing money last week but that the check has not cleared Bank Leumi because the I.R.S. has frozen Mr.
Biegen's account, seeking $300,000 in back taxes for 1979, 1980 and 1981.


Hanna (M.A.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Middlesex Water Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Finks Hospitalized Because of Chest Pain
JIM FINKS, the New Orleans Saints' general manager, was hospitalized in Minneapolis yesterday after experiencing chest pains.
Finks, 64 years old, was listed in serious, but stable condition at Abbott Northwestern Hospital's cardiac intensive unit, said GLORIA O'CONNELL, a hospital spokeswoman.
Finks was playing indoor tennis with JERRY BURNS, the former Minnesota Vikings coach; JAYE DYER, the Vikings' senior vice president, and WILL McDONOUGH, an NBC-TV analyst.
About 40 minutes into the game, Finks began experiencing chest pains.
He was expected to undergo an angiogram last night to determine the condition of his arteries and heart. (AP)


Engineers Plan a Better Way in China Via Roads in New Jersey


Gendex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Thomson Advisory Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Job at Universal Foods Requires Taste for New
The Universal Foods Corporation has named Kenneth P. Manning to be president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Manning's main job will be to keep the food, flavoring and french fry company on course and developing new products.
Richard Elam, a food industry analyst with Kemper Securities Group in Chicago, said, "This is a very well-managed company."


U S West Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dominion Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Russian Budget Is Strong Medicine
Under attack from all sides for policies that have let prices soar, the Russian Government won reluctant approval today for the next phase of its painful economic reforms: a budget that it says is virtually deficit-free but calls for deep spending cuts and higher taxes.
As Deputy Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar, the architect of the reforms, explained to Parliament today, a balanced budget and a tight monetary policy are necessary if Russia is to keep hyperinflation at bay and pull itself toward a market economy.


Bills Think the Carpet Could Be Magic
Buffalo has been designated the home team for Super Bowl XXVI.
And while the Bills might not have the most fans at the game, they will probably have a true home-field advantage over the Redskins Sunday because they are more accustomed to artificial turf.
The Bills play on artificial turf at Rich Stadium in Buffalo, and have compiled a 11-2 record, including playoff games, on the surface this season and a 4-1 record on grass.
The Redskins play on grass at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium in Washington and compiled a 12-1 record on grass and a 4-1 record on turf, including playoff games.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Laurence A. Tisch's proposal to rescue Macy's at the expense of its creditors fell through.  [ Page 1. ]


Bridge
If a runner with six inches left to complete a mile race produced a 100-yard sprint, everyone would laugh at him.
But bridge players sometimes do something comparable and draw cheers.
Dick Goldman of Franklin Square, L.I., reached a stage last year at which he needed 6/100 of a master point to reach life master rank.
He then won a Regional Stratified Pairs in Cambridge, Mass., earning 39.6 points, or 660 times as many as he needed.
He was playing with his wife, Flo Goldman, and they were partners again on the diagramed deal.
It was played at the Grand Club in Franklin Square, and gave him a chance, with the East cards, to show his defensive skill.


New England BusinessService reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Esther A. Simon, 90, Painter and Art Patron
Esther Annenberg Simon, a painter and supporter of the arts, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 90 years old.
Mrs. Simon died of heart failure, her family said.


Reeds Jewelers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Blast Destroys Kashmir Police Base as Hindu Caravan Stirs Tension
Separatist rebels set off a bomb today inside the police headquarters of Kashmir's capital, Srinagar, wounding at least eight senior police officials and killing a constable, the authorities said.
The explosion occurred as a caravan of Hindus led by a right-wing political leader moved toward Kashmir, a predominantly Muslim region gripped by a guerrilla war against Indian domination.


Bandits Shoot 3 in Queens In Cash Theft
Two armored-car guards delivering money to a crowded check-cashing store in Queens walked into an ambush yesterday morning, as masked gunmen opened fire, killing one of them, critically injuring the other and also wounding a 78-year-old woman walking by, the police said.
The four robbers escaped with $82,000 in a canvas money bag as one guard crumpled to the floor and the other, shot in the face, staggered across the street and collapsed on the sidewalk, the police and witnesses said.


Religion Notes
Dominican Faces Dismissal
Today is the deadline for the Roman Catholic priest, the Rev.
Matthew Fox, to return to his home province of Chicago from Oakland, Calif., or face dismissal from the Dominican order.


It Tells You If You're Late, or Too Heavy
You're off on a trip and your bags are packed with all the conveniences of home in miniature: a CD player, hair dryer, travel dumbbells and telephone answering machine.
Now you can also take along an alarm clock that weighs you.
The Mini Scale is made in Israel by Mepro Epilady.
It is 4 1/4 inches in diameter, weighs 13 ounces and looks somewhat like a kitchen timer.
With the press of a button, it shifts from digital scale to alarm clock, or vice versa, in seven seconds.


Energen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Film; Trying to Set a Trap For a Serial Rapist
The realm of the exploitation thriller is not normally the province of feminist film makers, but in "Love Crimes" Lizzie Borden attempts some subversive inroads.
She tells the story of David Hanover (Patrick Bergin), a sex offender masquerading as a famous fashion photographer, and of the efforts of an Atlanta assistant district attorney named Dana Greenway (Sean Young) to catch him at his own game.
Ordinarily this might mean a little routine voyeurism and a lot of lurid cat-and-mousing.
But Ms.
Borden, director of the militant 1983 "Born in Flames" and the more effective 1987 "Working Girls," tries to frame this seemingly conventional thriller in more thoughtful ways.
It's unusual, when the prosecutor finally confronts the criminal, to find her asking him "Why do you hate women?" It's also unusual to find a female character asking "Do you always have to be so patronizing?" while discussing the case in bed with her boss.


No Salute For Trading Sax
To the Sports Editor:
Let's hear a giant Bronx cheer for the Yankee management for its thoroughly predictable ingratitude in trading away Steve Sax.
The class and loyalty with which he responded to the indignities heaped on him last season made it clear that he was not the Yankees' sort of player.
He didn't run crying to the press when his position was snatched away from him.
He didn't even run away and sulk; he talked graciously and reasonably about an unreasonable situation.
And he simply played harder and let his numbers show who really belonged at second base.


Style Makers; Edmee Froment, Pet Sweater Designer
When Edmee Froment lost her job as a graphics designer and art director with a publishing company, predictably she was not happy.
But as sometimes happens, the lost job was the stepping stone to a new and fulfilling career.
She had always loved animals, she had dogs and she hied herself to a school to learn how to keep dogs happy, healthy and groomed.


Father Knows Best
MY WIFE AND I MET IN THE MID-60'S ON A SKI slope in the Catskills.
I was a chef in Manhattan during the week, but on winter weekends I worked as a ski instructor at Hunter Mountain.
Gloria, already a good skier and a member of the ski patrol, arranged for a private lesson -- not, as I found out later, to improve her skiing but to meet me.
Always the dedicated teacher, I followed her down the hill, beating on the backs of her legs with my ski poles and calling out: "Bend your knees! Look down the hill!" At the end of the lesson, I left her standing on the hill with instructions to "just go out and practice and learn what I've taught you!" Luckily, she signed up for a second lesson, and we exchanged phone numbers afterward.


Correction
The Cuttings column on the Pastimes page last Sunday, about seeds of the past, misidentified the university from which Dr.
Alan Kapuler, the founder of Peace Seeds in Corvallis, Ore., received his Ph.D. in molecular biology.
It is Rockefeller University, not the University of Rochester.


No Fan Of Wagner's
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein concludes his essay on the politics of "Tristan and Isolde" by suggesting that the problem may be "discomfort with the music itself." Times readers may be interested to know that Igor Stravinsky was among the discomfited.


U.S. Secretly Gave Aid to Iraq Early in Its War Against Iran
The Reagan Administration secretly decided to provide highly classified intelligence to Iraq in the spring of 1982 -- more than two years earlier than previously disclosed -- while also permitting the sale of American-made arms to Baghdad in a successful effort to help President Saddam Hussein avert imminent defeat in the war with Iran, former intelligence and State Department officials say.
The American decision to lend crucial help to Baghdad so early in the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq war came after American intelligence agencies warned that Iraq was on the verge of being overrun by Iran, whose army was bolstered the year before by covert shipments of American-made weapons.


Flying as a Courier: Bit Bumpy but the Price Is Right
WHEN you say "courier travel," everyone listens.
In days of tight money and high-priced air tickets, it is a topic of intense interest.
In courier travel, people who are free to go by themselves on a flexible schedule, sometimes with little notice, can get to many places in Europe, South America and Asia for relatively little money -- $250 round trip to Amsterdam or $399 round trip to Singapore, for example -- by acting as escorts for parcels, usually financial documents, that use up their checked baggage allowance.
The qualifications are modest: You must be at least 21 (there is no upper age limit, although you must be physically able) and you need a valid passport, good coping skills and knowledge of how to get around in your departure city.
You must be able to pay for your ticket, any departure taxes, a long-distance phone call or two and possibly also put up a refundable deposit of $100 or $200.
Then you will need to be able to do a lot of phoning to courier companies or brokers to get what you want.
The closer to flight time, the cheaper the flight.
At the last hour, you might get a free trip.
One organization estimates that 25,000 courier flights take off from the United States annually from six big cities, and at least a dozen companies that use or book couriers in the New York area are listed in directories.


Spanish Class At the Source
AFTER several fast-paced trips to Europe, which left me exhausted, spending a vacation studying a language in its native land looked like a welcome change.
For several weeks last July, my clothes could rest peacefully on their hangers as I became not a tourist passing through, but a resident of a small European town with ample time to explore the area.
Best of all, I would be improving my skill in the language of the country, in this case, Spain.
Three years of high school Spanish and several adult education courses had left me with only everyday phrases like "buenos dias" and "adios" and simple sentences using the infinitive or present tense.


How the Japanese Learned to Drink Bourbon; Our New Nemesis?
To the Editor:
The enthusiastic criticism of Japanese economic policy, mostly by American politicians seeking to avoid responsibility for solving our economic woes, suggests that Japan will eventually fill the void left by the Soviet Union and become our new national nemesis.


Landmark in Westport Adapts to a New Era
SINCE Porky Manero's opened in 1959, generations of Westport residents have grown up on the restaurant's steaks and prime ribs.
But times and tastes change.
Last year the restaurant was sold by the granddaughter of the founder, and the new owners decided to adapt the town landmark to more contemporary fashions in food.
The free-standing building, near the Westport railroad station, looks the same.
But the cavernous main room has been lightened through natural oak wainscoting and upper wall paneling.
Pale pink wallpaper matches the paper place mats that have replaced white tablecloths.
Other changes include a plethora of hanging artificial plants as well as ceiling-fan lights, laminated tabletops edged in oak and booths along the walls.
The high-ceilinged room is lighter and airier now, befitting the current, more casual menu.
The large dining room is the nonsmoking section; the smaller raised area of booths along the right-hand side is reserved for smokers.
A gas fire (unfortunately emitting a gas aroma on our visits) burns in the fieldstone fireplace at the end of the main room.


Performances by County Residents
WESTCHESTER not only provides performing venues for distinguished visitors but also for many other artists -- some of them equally renowned -- who either teach here or have chosen to make the county their home.
Today at 3 P.M. a recital at the Hoff-Barthelson School in Scarsdale finds Gail Isenberg, a faculty pianist and White Plains resident, welcoming two guest musicians, the cellist Eleanor Howells of Croton and the pianist Jody Wise of Weehawken, N.J.
Poulenc's Sonata for Two Pianos is one of the promised pieces; another is the Debussy Cello Sonata.
There will also be shorter works by Bach, Granados, Ravel and Barber.
For more information, call 723-1169.


Christine Breck, Banker, to Wed
Christine Breck, an assistant treasurer at the Swedish bank Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken, and Jan Birger Pettersson, a vice president of Oppenheimer &amp; Company, the investment banking house, are to be married in September.
They both work in in New York.
Miss Breck, 27 years old, graduated from Connecticut College and is a daughter of Barbara Alkiewicz of Ridgefield, Conn., and Richard F. Breck of Sarasota, Fla.
Her father is a retired member of the New York Stock Exchange.


Seles Pounds Fernandez In Final
Nobody plays tennis tag better than Monica Seles.
She rarely loses because it's rare that anyone can catch her.
The 1992 Australian Open was no exception.


Stamps
Collectors interested in postal history tend to focus on the outside of envelopes rather than what is inside.
They study the stamps, which reflect the postal fees in effect at the time; the cancellations and perhaps the address.
They also trace any other markings that indicate, for example, what route the letter traveled, whether it was delayed in an accident or whether it was censored in wartime.
The reason for this focus is a simple reflection of reality: Whatever was once in the envelope was what the recipient was interested in -- a personal letter, business correspondence -- and thus the enclosure did not come onto the philatelic market, nor did it circulate among collectors.


This Time, He Came in Peace
NO LONGER ENEMIES, NOT YET FRIENDS
An American Soldier Returns to Vietnam.
By Frederick Downs.
Illustrated. 352 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.95.


Commuters Flock to Newest Rail Line
CONNECTICUT'S newest commuter railroad, the Shoreline East, has turned out to be a rousing success since it began running in May 1990.
Each weekday morning six westbound trains make the 50-minute trip from Old Saybrook to New Haven, followed by eight eastbound runs each afternoon and evening.


A Big Break for Yonkers Filmmaker
WHEN in December the Eighth Street Playhouse in Greenwich Village started a series called "Something Old, Something New," four weeks of masterful directors' works were announced.
For Ingmar Bergman week, nine films were shown.
An Akira Kurosawa retrospective consisted of eight in one week.
Claude Chabrol had nine; Martin Scorsese, eight.
Now the "Something New" part is on, and the week that started on Wednesday and ends Tuesday is being devoted to just one feature-length film: "There's Nothing Out There," the first commercial release by Rolfe Kanefsky, who wrote it at 18 and filmed it at 20.


B.W.I.A. Takes Birds Out of Air
B.W.I.A.
International Airways, the Caribbean airline, has banned the transportation of parrots and other exotic birds and endangered or threatened wildlife species from all its flights.
The ban is in response to a report from the United States Government Environmental Investigation Agency that says that millions of wild birds destined for the cage-bird business perish because of inadequate care and shock from travel.
The Humane Society of the United States reports that of more than 7 million birds imported into the country during the past decade 1.2 million died in transit or in quarantine. (The Department of Agriculture quarantines birds for 30 days then examines them and returns them to the country of origin if they are not healthy. Some exotic birds carry disease that can infect domestic poultry.)
B.W.I.A., which is the national airline of Trinidad and Tobago, flies to Miami, New York and Toronto and six gateways in Europe as well as islands in the Caribbean.


No Emmy For Walsh
To the Sports Editor:
Much to my astonishment, Richard Sandomir sang the praises of Bill Walsh (The Times, Jan. 14).
In my opinion, Walsh's commentary during the Bills-Broncos game was more off the mark than usual.
Three instances come immediately to mind.


INSIDE
Volvo's $6 Billion Merger
The auto and truck maker said it would merge with a Swedish food and drug company, creating one of Europe's largest companies.
Page 7.
Aquino Makes Endorsement
Corazon Aquino endorsed former Defense Secretary Fidel Ramos to succeed her as President of the Philippines in the coming election.
Page 3.
Manhattan Store Murder
A young woman was bound, gagged and stabbed to death with a screwdriver in the Manhattan clothing store where she worked.
Page 24.


She Didn't Know Her Place
AHEAD OF HER TIME
Abby Kelley and the Politics of Antislavery.
By Dorothy Sterling.
Illustrated. 436 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.95.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 5 about the endowed chair in Holocaust studies at Stockton State College referred incorrectly to Dr.
Vera King Farris, the college president.
She was not the first woman to head a state college; Dr.
Larraine Matusak was president of Thomas A. Edison State College from 1979 to 1982.


Tossing Our Cookies
THE HUMORIST SAM Levenson used to tell of a little boy who reported that all the children in his class had been asked to stand up and do a turn on their first day at school.
"And what did you do, Johnny?" asked his parents.
Replied the boy: "I vomited."
This homely anecdote convulsed audiences because (a) children do it all too often in real life, and (b) the verb
to vomit
packs such a punch.


Ms. Ginsberg Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert I. Ginsberg of Norwalk, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Zahava Ginsberg to Lawrence Steven Sodano, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy Sodano of Concord, Mass.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ginsberg, 28 years old, is a program director at Brakely, John Price Jones Inc., Stamford, Conn., consultants on fund-raising.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is president and chief executive of Carol Wright Sales, a mail-order company in Stamford.
Her mother, Ilene Ginsberg, an administrative assistant to the director of auditsfor Save the Children in Westport, Conn.


Michael Kim Engaged to Jin Lee
Dr. and Mrs.
Sang Bock Lee of Oakland, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jin Hee Lee to Michael Ik-Hee Kim, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sukon Kim of East Hills, L.I.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lee, 24 years old, is an editorial research associate at GQ magazine.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is an anesthesiologist at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.


Layers for Looks and Comfort on Skis
The challenge for the avid skier is to stay warm and have fun.
But today's skiers are much more fashion-conscious than they used to be, so thick, bulky skiwear is taking a back seat to stylish thinner clothing with layered insulation.
"Thickness does not always mean warmth," said Don Schwamb, the executive vice president of Bogner of America in Manhattan.
Mr.
Schwamb said the company's ski jackets rely on layers to create air pockets that keep the cold air from getting in and body heat from getting out.
Such styling gets rid of the old "puffy" look.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS -- N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Dec.
Nov.
Dec. 90
Rents
172.6
+0.8
+4.9
Homeowner's costs
174.2
-0.2
+4.9
Fuel and utilities
105.6
+0.5
+2.6
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester,
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex,
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.67
8.42
9.96
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.05
6.04
7.89
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.51
8.32
9.77
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.82
5.84
7.70
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.51
8.29
9.78
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.90
5.90
7.77
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.77
8.46
10.18
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.47
6.48
8.17
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.17
4.06
6.62
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.43
8.43
9.58
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


Basketball Star and People Person
You know Jim Jackson must be good even before the ball goes into the air.
And when he takes the floor with the Ohio State Buckeyes, he soon displays the apparent contradictions that somehow all make sense.
Jackson appears passive yet intent, proud without being overconfident, and in command while seeking to involve others.
He is a scorer who is often at his best in the role of a 6-foot-6-inch point guard.


Cindi Augarten, an Architect, Is to Wed in June
Harvey Augarten of Carlstadt, N.J., and Barbara Augarten of Livingston, N.J., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Cindi Augarten, and Jay Pila, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Pila of West Orange, N.J.
Miss Augarten, a Syracuse University graduate, is an architect at Miseo Associates in Livingston.
Mr.
Pila, a Boston University graduate, is an account executive with OMR Systems, a designer of bank software, in Princeton, N.J.


At Work; As Seen From a Wheelchair
Like a lot of people, George Biechler takes his physical confidence pretty much for granted.
So when the vice president of the Meridien Bank sat down in a wheelchair recently to get a sense of how it would feel to maneuver through the world from a sitting position, he looked a little tight around the mouth.
Mr.
Biechler pushed clumsily through a swinging door and made it past one orange traffic cone before banking off a wall and onto the rim of a second cone.
Freeing himself, he wheeled with furious inefficiency for the swinging door.
"I haven't felt that uncomfortable since I got my learner's permit when I was 16," he said later, watching another Meridien employee carom between wall and traffic cone.


Dr. Charnley Is to Wed J. L. Humber
Mr. and Mrs.
Bailey W. Brown of Mount Vernon, N.Y., have announced the engagement of her daughter Dr.
Gail Charnley to Jeffrey Lee Humber, a son of John N. Humber and the late Clara G. Humber of Ludlow, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.
Dr.
Charnley, 35 years old, graduated from Wellesley College and has a Ph.D. in toxicology from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She is a consultant in toxicology in the Washington area.
Her stepfather retired as the president of Erkins Studios in New York, a garden ornament firm.
She is a daughter also of the late Louis E. Charnley Jr., a partner in the New York law firm of Reid &amp; Priest.


POWER STRUGGLE
Sam Howe Verhovek's article "Power Struggle" (Jan. 12) reports activists' distortions of the impact of hydropower development in northwestern Quebec.
Such accounts bestow undue status on certain apocryphal stories and flawed analogies that are promoted heavily by opponents of the project.
Writing about them makes good copy; basing decisions on them would make bad public policy.
Hydro-Quebec is committed to sound environmental practices in its hydropower developments.
That is why the company has agreed to participate in five independent environmental-impact analyses to be conducted by the Canadian and Quebec Governments in conjunction with the Crees and the Inuits.
Canada and Quebec have rigorous environmental-impact analysis processes that are equal to or better than any in the world.


Making a Difference; Bombardier Snares de Havilland . . .  . . . While Cessna Goes To Textron
Russell W. Meyer Jr. has spent more than 10,000 hours at the controls of airplanes, and nearly 17 years at the controls of the Cessna Aircraft Company.
Last week, the General Dynamics Corporation sold Cessna to Textron Inc. for $600 million, but Cessna is expected to remain on the same heading, and Mr.
Meyer is expected to remain in the pilot's seat.
Cessna is the world's largest manufacturer of general aviation aircraft.
For most of its 65-year history, the Wichita-based company concentrated on making small piston-driven propeller aircraft.
But since becoming chief executive in 1975, Mr.
Meyer has largely refocused the company on business jets, and Cessna now controls more than half of that market. (Although the company stopped making small piston-engine planes in the early 1980's, it estimates that it built half of all the planes now flying in the Western Hemisphere.)


Texas Remapping Battle Heats Up, Threatening to Singe the Democrats
Historically, the redistricting of the Texas Senate has been a private, gentlemanly affair in which members of that small, powerful chamber looked after their own, but this year it has turned into a raucous political battle that some participants liken to a civil war.
The dispute is increasingly dividing people not just along party lines but also by class and ethnic interests, and it seems likely that the United States Supreme Court will decide the outcome.


A Director Who Pursues the Inner Demons
Volker Schlondorff already had an Oscar-winning movie, "The Tin Drum" (1979), to his credit when he moved to New York, following the trail of many young German directors to the United States.
But by 1987 his career had stalled, his marriage to the film maker Margarethe von Trotta was breaking up, and at the age of 47 he could perhaps identify with a man like Walter Faber.
At this point the idea came to him of filming the tale of Faber, the antihero created in 1959 by the Swiss novelist Max Frisch.
The character is a Swiss engineer who inadvertently falls into a tryst with his own daughter, conceived two decades before, during a love affair with a young Jewish woman in Zurich.
The film, "Voyager," opens in New York on Friday.


Ideas &amp; Trends; 'Just Following Orders': Nuremberg, Now Berlin
NUREMBERG the city is far removed from Berlin -- 230 miles or so from the spot where, nearly two years ago, 20-year-old Chris Geoffroy was riddled with bullets when he ventured onto the "death strip" that once divided the city.
But Nuremberg the legal principle -- the axiom that underlings accused of crimes cannot hide behind claims that they were following the orders of others -- loomed large last week in a Berlin courtroom, where two East German border guards were convicted of killing Mr.
Geoffroy, the last of more than 200 people killed while attempting to flee from East to West.
Judge Theodor Seidel brushed aside arguments that what the guards had done was proper, even required, under the old East German law.
"Not everything that is legal is right," he declared.
"At the end of the 20th century, no one has the right to turn off his conscience when it comes to killing people on the orders of the authorities." He sentenced Ingo Heinrich, the 27-year-old guard who fired the fatal shot, to three and a half years in prison, more than the prosecution had sought.
A second guard received a two-year suspended sentence; two others were acquitted.


GOING BY THE NUMBERS
Devra Lee Davis, a resident scholar at the National Academy of Sciences, points out that the 20- year war on cancer has failed, and her work is attacked as "boring" and "old junk" by some of the scientists who developed strategy for that failed war ("Going by the Numbers," by Karen Wright, Dec. 15).
Perhaps it is time for these experts to step aside to allow a new emphasis on prevention to emerge.
If nothing else, our 20-year search for a cancer cure tells us this: prevention is the only solution we can afford.
PETER MONTAGUE Research Director, Environmental Research Foundation
Washington


A Perfect Match
People like to say that for every woman who wants to marry, there's a man out there who will make the perfect husband.
It follows that for every bride-to-be, there's a dress with her name on it -- and perhaps it will be easier to find than the man.
The dreamy bride will choose a romantic confection of tulle and lace; the no-nonsense bride might opt for a tailored suit.
Whatever her inclination, a bride can spend anywhere from a few hundred to several thousand dollars. (Or if she wants to wear her mother's dress, she can get away with the price of a dressmaker.)
Wedding dresses run the gamut, but one thing remains constant: rarely will attention be focused so closely on a woman's appearance as on her wedding day.
It is not only the dress but the details -- a pair of opera-length gloves, a dramatic choker, a whimsical hat -- that make the difference between a beautiful bride and a memorable one.


If You Need a Reason, Now's the Time for Meatloaf
RECESSION, nostalgia and winter invariably add up to meatloaf on the menu.
The traditional meatloaf is made with ground beef or a combination of beef, veal and pork.
But today, it might even mean turkey loaf or chicken loaf as the anti-cholesterol squad keeps careful watch over the diet.
Regardless of the basic material, meatloaves are appealing because they are easy to prepare and to eat.
They can be made in advance and reheated or sliced and used in sandwiches.
What is pate but a sophisticated meatloaf?
Like pates, meatloaf mixtures can be wrapped in pastry or used to stuff vegetables.
Meatloaf mixtures can even be formed into small, individual portions.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Basking Ridge 288,000
33 Bullion Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 27-year-old expanded ranch; patio, eat-in-kitchen, 1 acre plus; taxes $4,785.
Bergenfield 170,000
28 Dojean Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 43-year-old colonial; 1-car garage, pool, full basement; taxes $4,643.
Bernardsville 160,000
44 Pill Hill  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 44-year-old ranch; fireplace, 0.5-acre wooded plot, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,635.
Englewood 320,900
73 East Linden Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 79-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, front porch, skylight; taxes $6,359.
Newark 72,000
414 Summer Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 51-year-old colonial; eat-in-kitchen w/pantry, 2 fireplaces, large rooms; taxes $1,529.
Warren 432,000
128 Old Stirling Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; master suite w/den, full basement; taxes $6,500.
OTHER AREAS Wilton, Conn. 525,000
86 East Meadow  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 52-year-old Cape Cod; stone facade, double-sized lot, 2.3 acres; taxes $5, 194.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 400,000
25 Hardscrabble Hill  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, dining room; taxes $6,925.
Williston Park, L.I. 163,000
68 Broad Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old, legal 2-family colonial; basement, attic, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.


Bangkok Delays
To the Editor: We are giving the 1991 award for needlessly long queuing to the immigration officials at Bangkok's International Airport.
Recently, my family and I arrived at Bangkok at midnight after a long flight from Narita Airport in Tokyo.
All the passengers were then assembled, as is usual, in long lines, to pass through immigration.
Perhaps we all resembled the "most wanted" on Interpol's list, or maybe the new junta is wary of travelers, but it was 90 minutes before this planeload of exhausted passengers finally cleared.
Our inspector, I noted over an hour's time, spent a great deal of time leafing through each passport and immigration card, looking up toward the ceiling and checking to his right and left to see how the other inspectors were doing.


If You Need a Reason, Now's the Time for Meatloaf
RECESSION, nostalgia and winter invariably add up to meatloaf on the menu.
The traditional meatloaf is made with ground beef or a combination of beef, veal and pork.
But today, it might even mean turkey loaf or chicken loaf as the anti-cholesterol squad keeps careful watch over the diet.
Regardless of the basic material, meatloaves are appealing because they are easy to prepare and to eat.
They can be made in advance and reheated or sliced and used in sandwiches.
What is pate but a sophisticated meatloaf?
Like pates, meatloaf mixtures can be wrapped in pastry or used to stuff vegetables.
Meatloaf mixtures can even be formed into small, individual portions.


But Look Out For a Blizzard From Buffalo
Last year, the worst thing the Buffalo Bills did was destroy the Los Angeles Raiders, 51-3, in the American Football Conference title game.
That gave everyone the idea that they had a monster offense that couldn't be stopped by the Giants in Super Bowl XXV.
This year, Buffalo barely beat Denver, 10-7, in the A.F.C. championship game, with its vaunted offense scoring only three points.
Now, as the Bills prepare to take on the Redskins this evening in Super Bowl XXVI, everyone thinks Buffalo suddenly has a flawed offense that will crumble at the first sign of a blitz.


The 'Village'
To the Editor:
I was delighted to read on Jan. 5 your "Art for Artist's Sake" item in your Gazetteer accompanying your Greenwich Village article on Jan. 5.
The item dealt with Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney's activities in the Village, specifically the founding in 1930 of the first museum anywhere dedicated to 20th century American art, the Whitney Museum of American Art.
The buildings at 8, 10, 12 and 14 West Eighth Street, and the buildings which backed on them on MacDougal Alley, comprised the Whitney Museum.


Peter Metaxas to Marry Lisa Fluhr
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Fluhr of Great Neck, L.I., have anounced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Dale Fluhr to Peter Stephen Metaxas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher Metaxas of Great Neck.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fluhr, 24 years old, graduated from George Washington University and is a research analyst in international human resources for Chemical Bank in New York.
Her father is an executive vice president of the Martin E. Segal Company, an employee benefits consulting concern in New York.
Her mother, Margaret Fluhr, directs intensive services to families at the Spence-Chapin social services agency in New York, and is a doctoral candidate in social work at New York University.


Lori Sue Unker, Analyst, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Unker of North Caldwell, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lori Sue Unker to Scott David Bohrer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas C. Bohrer of Short Hills, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Unker, 24 years old, is a senior systems analyst in the New York office of Systematics Inc., a data processing company in Little Rock, Ark.
She graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis, as did her fiance.
Her father is the executive vice president of the Carlisle Collection, a manufacturer of women's sportswear in New York.


The 1992 Campaign: Republicans; Bush Camp's Primary Fear: A Buchanan Moral Victory
Ron Christian, the tax collector in the town of Peterborough, southwest of here, is a George Bush man.
He voted for Mr.
Bush in the Republican Presidential primary four years ago and thinks he has "done a good job in the White House," especially in the Persian Gulf war.
"But I'd be interested in hearing what George is going to do for the economy in general and for jobs in New England in particular," he said on Friday as he waited for Barbara Bush to arrive for a campaign appearance.
"He let the economy get away from him. It's important for him to come to New Hampshire to talk to us."


Q.&amp; A.: Ralph J. Marino; Where Republicans Stand On Hate-Crime Legislation
THE recent rash of hate crimes in New York City, including a pair of incidents in which black and Hispanic children were smeared with white paint, has revived the debate over the bias-related crime bill first proposed five years ago by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
The bill would create a new classification of crime and specific penalties for any violent or intimidating act committed with the intent of denying civil rights to an individual or group.


Jennifer Medoff To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Medoff of Port Washington, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Ellen Medoff, to Gregory Lawrence Klainberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Klainberg of Manhasset, L.I.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Medoff, 23 years old, is an assistant to the registrar at the College for Human Services in New York.
She is a graduate of Boston University.
Her father is a managing partner in Weber, Lipshie &amp; Company, a New York accounting firm.
Her mother, Francine Medoff, is a painter and sculptor.


Attacking the Messenger
To the Editor:
As an accountant with more than 20 years of experience in the insurance industry, I read "The Bad Boy of Insurance Ratings" with considerable interest.
The situation described in the industry attack on Mr.
Weiss reminds me of the old tactic of attacking the messenger when you can't attack the message.
R.
J.
WALLACE  Rocky Point, N.Y., Jan. 7, 1992


Technology Gives the Charts a Fresh Spin
It was an odd mixture of country crooners, rappers and punk revivalists who worked their way to the top of the Billboard charts in 1991.
Garth Brooks, Hammer and Nirvana would appear to have little in common, except for the fact that their success coincided with the use of a new computerized system developed by Soundscan, a Westchester company that supplies its findings to Billboard magazine.
"The new chart shows that there are more and different kinds of artists finding and holding an audience than ever before," says Timothy White, editor-in-chief of Billboard.
"The old chart couldn't begin to touch the democracy of this chart."
Soundscan represents a source of hard data in an industry that has demonstrated a preference for hype.
What Soundscan does is eliminate the influence of record store clerks and managers who, under the old system, were simply asked: "What's selling?"
"There's no question," says Mr.
White, "that our old system was subject to manipulation and that people abused it. Store reporters could be bribed with clock radios and all sorts of amenities and favors." (Billboard dropped stores if improprieties were found.)


Making a Difference; Bombardier Snares de Havilland . . .
LAURENT BEAUDOIN, chairman and chief executive of Bombardier Inc. of Montreal, is a former chartered accountant who apparently knows a bargain when he sees one.
He's also a committed federalist, not at all averse to giving French and English Canada bigger commercial stakes in each other to further the cause of national unity.
These two traits were evident last week when Bombardier, which Mr.
Beaudoin has built into a $3 billion-a-year transportation giant over the past decade and a half, acquired the Boeing Company's ailing de Havilland division, Ontario's largest industrial employer.


Craig Sirianni and Dolores Galdi Plan to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Galdi of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter Dolores Angela Galdi to Craig Paul Sirianni, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Sirianni of Watertown, N.Y.
Ms.
Galdi, 29 years old, is the assistant director of membership for the American Guild of Musical Artists in New York.
Mr.
Sirianni, 29, is an operatic tenor.
He graduated from the State University of New York College at Fredonia.


While Bridge Is Fixed, Businesses Waste Away
Arkady Osnis stood in his small shoe-repair shop in Kew Gardens, Queens, and rued the ruinous impact of the big project outside his door.
"Business is 30 to 40 percent lower," he said, fretting about how much longer he could survive.
Across the street on the torn-up block of Lefferts Boulevard, Ruth and Aleta Vahlsing said that plunging patronage had already driven them to shut their gift and candy shop.
The mother and daughter dolefully de-nuded their shelves and packed up picture frames, ceramics and other gift items.


Corrections
A report on the Business Diary page on Jan. 12 about automobile sales in the United States misstated the decline in sales for Mazda Motor of America during 1991.
It was 1.9 percent, not 19 percent.


Take This Job and Love It
With profits declining and competition on the rise, the International Business Machines Corporation wants to make sure all of its employees are pulling their weight.
So the computer giant is making it easier for its people to get fired.
Under one of the most intricately structured appraisal systems in the nation, 10 percent of Big Blue's vaunted work force will get flunking grades in their annual reviews this year, marking for many the first step toward dismissal.
Another 10 percent, deemed by their bosses to be superstars, could earn bonuses of $50,000 or more.
By contrast, Eastman Kodak's Eastman Chemical Company has stopped grading employees.
To eliminate a tier of managers and push responsibility down the line, Eastman recently did away with the top jobs in marketing, production and product development.
Now, decisions in manufacturing, for instance, and solutions to, say, waste treatment problems, are hammered out in monthly meetings by the heads of the company's three major plants.
Because the new team structure makes it difficult to evaluate individual performance, Eastman Chemical is likely to adopt a system of peer review.


The Nation; Where 'Buy American' Is More Than a Slogan
MOTOWN'S emotions have been rubbed raw by disparagements of American cars and the workers who build them.
But the latest crack by a Japanese politician may have pushed Detroit to a new level of irritation.
A Chevrolet dealer invited shoppers to pound a Japanese-made truck with sledgehammers.
Flag-waving members of the United Automobile Workers picketed Toyota dealerships.
The exhortation to "buy American," increasingly chorused around the nation in recent weeks, has always been part of Detroit's credo and is being sounded here more insistently than ever.


Changing Some Habits Can Help Clivias
ALTHOUGH they may be rather dull looking now, clivias are sure to bloom in a few months, if all goes well, and then their owners will be rewarded.
The house plant is one of the finest known, but it demands patience.
Unlike African violets, which bloom almost continuously even in the darker winter months, clivia has one dramatic moment of glory with a magnificent display of amaryllislike clusters of flowers.
The flowers have a bright orange-red hue that is glorious to see, and the best part is that the flowers last two to three weeks or more.


Candidates Playing to Mood of Protectionism
With New Hampshire's economy on the rocks and few points of disagreement on other emotional issues like crime, race and abortion, the Democratic Presidential candidates are vying over who can deliver the harshest words and strongest promises about giving America a leg up in world economic competition.
What the candidates are offering in their commercials and on the stump is more emotion than logic, more oratory than substance.
But they are exploiting the sense that many voters have that Americans are being treated unfairly in international trade, especially by the Japanese.


Echo of Gould: The Treasury Intervenes
The politicians are again trying to fix the nation's economic problems.
And Wall Street is a bit nervous about the prospect.
Last week share prices gyrated and bond prices fell as investor attention began to focus on just what President Bush will propose Tuesday night in his annual State of the Union Address.


Public &amp; Private; The Adultery Watch
I'm going to go out on a limb here and predict that the next spokeswoman for No Excuses jeans will be a woman named Gennifer Flowers, described as a television reporter turned nightclub singer.
How do you go from being a television reporter to being a nightclub singer?
And whose idea was it to spell Gennifer with a G?


Dana Shonfeld, Manager, to Marry
Dr. and Mrs.
Edwin Shonfeld of San Francisco have announced the engagement of their daughter Dana Torrey Shonfeld to Dr.
James Bruce Tananbaum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David J. Tananbaum of New York.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Shonfeld, 25 years old, is the manager for Mark Cross, a leather goods store in San Francisco.
She graduated from Wellesley College.
Her father is an associate clinical professor of medicine at the University of California Medical School in San Francisco.


Protesters Try to Block Sales of Irradiated Strawberries


Headliners; Deep in the Heart
Dallas took a hard look at itself last week and decided not to change -- at least on the question of allowing homosexuals to join the police department.
It started with a suit by Mica Englund, an avowed lesbian who was denied a job on the Dallas force.
After failing to agree on terms for settling the suit, the Dallas City Council last week held a raucous debate -- almost 300 citizens turned out to speak -- on the banning of homosexuals.
Councilman Chris Luna, who opposed the ban, said Dallas was the only city in Texas whose police applicants were asked about their sexual orientation.
Nor could an Associated Press poll of 11 major cities outside Texas find one there.
But another testifying Texan warned that lifting the ban would invite "the destruction that God visited on Sodom and Gomorrah." After one councilman noted that there was also the matter of a 112-year-old state statute outlawing sex between people of the same gender, a City Council majority voted to keep the ban.


'A Chinese Odyssey'
To the Editor:
Judith Shapiro is wrong to suggest that Anne F. Thurston wrote "A Chinese Odyssey: The Life and Times of a Chinese Dissident" (Jan. 5) to give Ni Yuxian another opportunity to "clear  [ his ]  name" or to make him a hero central to China's democratic movement.
Ms.
Thurston tells the story, good and bad, of one (not
the
) Chinese dissident. Ms. Shapiro's anger is reminiscent of the fury the Chinese Communist Party displayed when the journalist Liu Binyan told a different story about the same man. What is baffling about Ms. Shapiro is that she plays the Chinese game, seeing the world in black and white, accusing those (Ni Yuxian) she does not like of being "thoroughly unpalatable."


THREE MEN ESCAPE BRIDGEPORT JAIL
Three men, including one charged with a murder in the Bronx, escaped from the Bridgeport Correctional Center here Friday night in what was the second escape at the center in 10 weeks.
The escape, which happened between 9 and 11 P.M., occurred without any apparent damage to windows, bars or 12-foot razor wire fences at the medium security jail, according to prison officials.


Basketball Star Shoots at a Record
AT 5 feet 2 inches and about 125 pounds, Darrin Robinson did not look like much of a basketball prospect when he came out for the basketball team at Central High School in Bridgeport during his sophomore year.
"He was very small and scrawny," said Mark Lauretti, who was then the Central coach and is now the Mayor of Shelton.
"But the reason I cut him was because I didn't think he was as good as the other kids. I also didn't think he was physically capable of going against bigger, stronger players.


IN SHORT: FICTION
WOMEN OF THE SILK By Gail Tsukiyama. St. Martin's, $18.95.


Caelie McPherson to Marry in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth F. McPherson of Sebasco Estates, Me., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Carol Sutherland McPherson, to Derek Elston Smith, a son of Mrs.
Lewis R. Smith of Kennebunk, Me., and the late Comdr.
Smith, U.S.N.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss McPherson, 31 years old, is known as Caelie.
She is an advertising representative for The Times Record, a newspaper in Brunswick, Me., and is a graduate of the University of Maine at Orono.
Her father retired as the director of the Morris County Library in Whippany, N.J.
Her mother retired as a librarian at the Kent Place School in Summit, N.J.


G. J. Minetree Is Engaged to Donna Martineau
Mr. and Mrs.
Paul A. Martineau of Armonk, N.Y., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Donna Ellen Martineau and Garner Jay Minetree, a son of Judith G. Minetree of East Hampton, L.I., and Harry E. Minetree of Los Angeles.
Ms.
Martineau, 28 years old, graduated from Lehigh University and is a cash management analyst at the Crane Company in New York.
Mr.
Minetree, 28, is studying architecture at the Pratt Institute in New York.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Named Rico Petrocelli manager of Pawtucket of the International League.


With a Bit of Blarney, They Made 'Hear My Song'
Adrian Dunbar, the co-writer and star of the new movie "Hear My Song," has this story about being stuck to a pig.
It was in his hometown, Enniskillen, in Northern Ireland, at a time when he was playing bass in a rock band at night and working in an abattoir by day.
"One morning I was pushing these pigs into the freezers, and I actually fell asleep," he says.
"And my cheek stuck to a pig. There was a thermometer in the pig, and in the office, where they were monitoring the temperature, they saw one of them going up. So they sent somebody in who woke me. They actually had to cut a piece of the pig off around my cheek."


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Jan. 12 about Casa Blanca, the oldest Colonial building in Old San Juan, P.R., misstated the cost of restoring the house, gardens and fountains.
It was $275,000, not $275 million.


Let His Children Go
LAST ONE OVER THE WALL
The Massachusetts Experiment in Closing Reform Schools.
By Jerome G. Miller. 279 pp.
Columbus: Ohio State University Press. $35.


Hartford Stage Company's 'Virginia Woolf'
IN case you're wondering whether "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" retains the power to jolt after 30 years, you'll have to wait.
All the Hartford Stage Company production proves is the play's capacity to annoy.
Since Edward Albee's most famous work is so overtaxed by an air of self-importance, it needs to be validated, or camouflaged, by theatrical force.
Concentrating on the specific dynamics between the hapless George and Martha and their helpless guests, Nick and Honey, can heighten combustability.
Forget what it is all supposed to mean.


Turn Deadly Plutonium to the World's Benefit
To the Editor:
What are we to do with the tons of plutonium now in the 40,000 nuclear warheads spread all over the world, with the tons of plutonium in the weapons complexes in a dozen countries, and with the tons of plutonium mixed in irradiated fuel pieces in temporary storage facilities at all of our present reactor sites worldwide?


Rypien, Thanks to Plenty of Time, Is the Redskins' Man of the Hour
Mark Rypien was the picture of composed confidence on Thursday morning as he held court here for wave after of wave of reporters.
Although Rypien is not known for a sparkling personality, the Redskins' quarterback was upbeat, even humorous, as he described how, before Washington's National Conference championship game against Detroit, he went to a hockey game and went onto the ice to shoot some pucks.


Mutual Funds; Closed-End Rebound Abroad
In 1991, the Herzfeld closed-end single-country fund average, which measures changes in share prices of 20 closed-end funds that invest in stocks of specific foreign areas, rose 28 percent.
Prices for closed-end funds, which trade on exchanges like common stock, are set by supply and demand so fund shares can trade at a premium or discount to the value of the securities they own.
Last year's gain was in sharp contrast to a drop of 32 percent in 1990, though still less than the average 41 percent gain for domestic closed-end funds.
The biggest winners were the funds that invest in Latin America.
The top-performing Latin American Investment Fund almost tripled.


Ms. Bednarz To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Almon F. Townsend 3d of Boxford, Mass., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Townsend's daughter Jennifer Ann Bednarz to Glenn Edward Cruger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin E. Cruger of Fort Collins, Colo.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bednarz, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and is pursuing a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Her late father, Dr.
Brian E. Bednarz, was a general surgeon at Memorial Hospital in Worcester, Mass.
Mr.
Townsend is a vice president with Meredith &amp; Grew, commercial real-estate brokers in Boston.


Laurie Harding To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Alan Harding of Wolfeboro, N.H., have announced the engagement of their daughter Laurie Ann Harding to James Sargent Polese, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James K. Polese of Beverly Farms, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Harding, who is 25 years old, as is her fiance, graduated from Hartwick College and is an account manager at Godwins Inc., an employee benefits consulting company in Boston.


Disappearance of Atomic Official Stirs Beijing
The mystery began when Hua Tianqiang, a senior engineer who had access to secrets about China's nuclear program, disappeared while hiking in a sacred mountainous area, a place that has inspired poets and painters for centuries.
Now, after a three-month search that has apparently turned up no trace of Mr.
Hua, there are suspicions that he either died or was smuggled abroad by a foreign intelligence service.


On the Street; For Putting On and Putting Off
There's no sameness of dress for some young people around town.
Their style is more likely to be derived from their music -- rap, country, heavy metal -- than from fashion magazines.
The results are bold and individual and, yes, loud.
Sometimes the clothes are funky (upper left) and sometimes saucy (upper right).
It's all in the combination of the unexpected and the attitude of the wearer.
Trousers might be cut off or cuffed above the ankle.
The distinctive shoes and boots definitely set the generations apart.
And accessories like the scarf that could pass for an airplane propeller have a life of their own.


Streetscapes: 41 Convent Avenue; Pride as a Landmark Criterion?
THE Landmarks Preservation Commission looks for significance in the past -- but should it also consider the present as well?
That question is raised in the continuing case of 41 Convent Avenue, where community groups seek designation for a building that has middling historical interest but that may have great current importance.
A year ago, when the commission calendared 25 properties in upper Manhattan for designation, it thought it was doing the right thing.
After years of indifference, there has been a resurgence of interest in Harlem and other neighborhoods in protecting historic buildings.


A Little Hollywood, a Little Opera
THURSDAY -- A Hollywood costume party at Planet Hollywood on West 57th Street benefited the Parks Council, a civic group that devotes its energies to New York City's parks.
The event drew about 250 guests.
WEDNESDAY -- Mayor David N. Dinkins and his wife, Joyce, celebrated the 100th telecast of "Live! From Lincoln Center" with a reception at Gracie Mansion.
The guest of honor was Luciano Pavarotti, who will appear on the show on PBS on Feb. 24.


New &amp; Noteworthy
FEMALE PERVERSIONS: The Temptations of Emma Bovary, by Louise J. Kaplan. (Anchor/Doubleday, $14.) Men may have cornered the market on fetishism, pedophilia, transvestism, sadism, masochism, voyeurism and exhibitionism, but women, the author argues, have subtle perversions of their own.
Last year our reviewer, Michael Vincent Miller, said this "fascinating and ambitious new study . . . is filled with provocative new ideas cast up like marine life in a surf of enthusiastic speculative energy."
A SCANNER DARKLY, by Philip K. Dick. (Vintage, $10.) In a novel originally published in 1977, a policeman addicted to a powerful narcotic that slowly splits its users' minds in two gradually discovers that the drug dealer he has been chasing all this time is really himself.
In UBIK ($10), a 1969 novel about the horrors of America in 1992, corporate executives hire psychics and plot to blow one another up.


Tanzania Bans Camping In Crater
Tour companies that operate safaris in East Africa have been informed by the Tanzanian Government that it has decided to end tented camping on the floor of the Ngorongoro Crater, where for years tourists have gone to sleep listening to the calls of distant lion and hyena.
No official statement has been issued by the Tanzanians, except that the ban begins March 31, but tour operators say they assume the reason for the decision is to protect the crater's ecology.
Camping on Ngorongoro's circular floor, which is 2,000 feet below the 7,000-foot-high rim, has been a highlight of some safari tours for many years.
The floor covers about 125 square miles, with a lake and forests, and has a resident animal population that includes elephant, wildebeest, monkeys and hippopotamus.
There are lodges and camping sites on the rim, and visitors will continue to go down into the crater on half-day and day game-viewing trips from these.


Forums Are Seen as Way to Defuse Chaotic Nationalism After Communism
It was Jan. 10 in Brussels, the first meeting of a high-level working group bringing together representatives of eight former Soviet republics, Eastern European countries and members of the NATO alliance.
The Russian delegate, Vladimir F. Petrovsky, a veteran Soviet diplomat, greeted the American and Western European delegates as old friends and, in the opinion of one of the Westerners, rather patronizingly welcomed the other members of the former Soviet Union as junior partners in a new strategic dialogue with the West.


Labor Raises Its Voice On L.I. Sound
THE environmentalists inside the Stouffer Westchester Hotel last weekend called their gathering a citizens summit to clean up Long Island Sound.
The construction workers marching outside called it a conference to ban all building projects along the Sound.
Carrying signs like "Labor Votes. Crabs Don't," about 1,500 steamfitters, carpenters, plumbers and electricians demonstrated for two hours in cold winds.
A balloon floating 40 feet overhead capsulized their message: "A Sound Economy Needs Jobs, Not Sewer Bans."


Corruption and Waste Clog Aid Pipeline to Russia
As the United States and other Western nations get ready to send large amounts of aid to the former Soviet Union, people here are struggling to overcome inexperience and disorganization at both ends of the pipeline, as well as a strong temptation to divert scarce food, clothing and medicine to a hungry black market.
Rushing to stitch together some kind of safety net for the needy and to keep up with the foreign response to their country's growing emergency, Russian Government officials have created a Ministry for Social Protection.


Rose Write-In: Thumbs Down
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson promotes the removal of Pete Rose's name from major league baseball's ineligible list ("Write-In for Rose: 3 Years Are Enough," The Times, Jan. 5).
In lobbying for Rose's reinstatement, Anderson is wide of the mark on several grounds.


Results Plus
N.H.L. 3 Goals for LaFontaine Pat LaFontaine scored three goals and the Buffalo Sabres played short-handed for the last four and a half minutes of their 4-3 road victory over over the Montreal Canadiens yesterday.
Jays Wells took a slashing penalty, forcing Buffalo to play the final 4 minutes 39 seconds a man short.
The Sabres won on the road for only the second time in their last nine games while handing the Canadiens, who were missing five regular forwards, their first home loss in nine games. (AP)


Corrections
An essay on Dec. 29 about train travel misidentified the type of accommodations occupied by a family on a journey from California to St.
Louis; it was a bedroom, compartment or drawing room, not a roomette, which has only one berth.
The essay also misstated the train's power and its route; it is diesel-powered and does not leave from San Francisco.
The essay referred incorrectly to a line on which the Olympian Hiawatha train used to run from Chicago to Seattle; it was the Milwaukee Road.
The essay also referred imprecisely to Cannonball conductors; they were former conductors on the Cannonball train, which was discontinued many years ago.


The Trials Never End For One Marathoner
Kim Jones of Spokane, Wash., the leading American female marathoner in 1991, will compete in Sunday's Olympic women's marathon trials with several good luck charms, including a peace ring made by her 10-year-old daughter.
"They may weigh me down," said Jones, "but I need all the luck I can get."
In her latest misfortune, Jones, 33 years old, suffered a severe sprain to her left ankle during a training run in the snow on Dec. 20.
She continued to run but the pain worsened, and on Jan. 3 Jones was told by her doctor to cease running.


The Price of Playing Is a Lasting One, but Worth It
To the Sports Editor:
After reading the "Savage Pleasures of Football," by Ira Berkow (The Times, Nov. 26, 1991), and with the sport's ultimate game, the Super Bowl, being played today, I couldn't help but reflect on my own football experiences.
In fact, I think about them every day as I struggle out of bed desperate for the shower to relieve my chronic aches.
I have had three knee operations and a spinal fusion.
My back is now held together by titanium bolts.
I have a pinched nerve in my neck, the bursa sac in my elbow exploded while I was playing, and I broke four fingers.
I'm arthritic, and doctors say I'll need knee-replacement surgery by the time I'm 50.


How Safe Are the Rails? Depends on Who Is Asked
He already reigned as the king of New York jockeys, but when his mount went down in a four-horse tangle at Aqueduct two weeks ago today, Angel Cordero Jr. became even more: the symbol and even the martyr of the explosive issue of safety at the race track.
"We've been taking it on the chin," said Joe King, superintendent of the New York Racing Association and the main keeper of its three tracks, Aqueduct, Belmont and Saratoga.
"Our interest in safety is being questioned. But we know it's a dangerous profession, and we care about the rider."


GOING BY THE NUMBERS
I disagree with Davis when she says that there's no constituency for research into cancer prevention.
There's a huge constituency -- one that eventually will be joined by one out of every nine American women.
It's made up of the women who have had breast cancer.
Many of them are mothers who desperately hope that their daughters and granddaughters will not have to go through what they did.
This constituency is easy to find.
There are hundreds of grass-roots organizations across the country made up of breast-cancer survivors.
I belong to one in New York called SHARE.
SUE MCCAIN
New York, N.Y.


A la Carte: Having Dinner Delivered
TWO new at-home dining companies are serving the East End, meaning that Long Islanders can have a restaurant meal delivered to them whether they live on the Nassau-Queens border, in Montauk or most places in between.
One service, a la Car of Southampton, delivers meals, food baskets and snacks in the Southampton-to-East Hampton area.
The second new company, Dial-a-Dinner of East Hampton, operates from Westhampton to Montauk.


Unblocking Bathtubs and Toilets
CALLING a plumber to clear a clogged toilet or other drain in an emergency can be a nuisance, but most homeowners and apartment dwellers can usually repair such problems themselves.
To clear a blocked toilet, use a flange-type plumber's plunger.
Its cup has a projecting sleeve that fits snugly into the opening at the bottom of the bowl.
Never use chemical cleaners.
They can cause injury if splashed onto the skin.


The 'Village'
To the Editor:
Your interesting article on Greenwich Village, on Jan. 5 might have mentioned St.
Luke's School, at 487 Hudson Street, in the discussion of private schools in the neighborhood.
St.
Luke's School is a coeducational, elementary school (pre-k-8), sponsored by the Church of St.
Luke in the Fields (Episcopal) and welcoming families of all faiths.
Our facility occupies the block between Christopher and Barrow Streets and includes gardens, playground, a gym and classrooms for our two hundred students.
JOHN M. BARRETT Manhattan The writer is director of external affairs for St.
Luke's School.


Wall Street; Hot Times for a Hybrid
Convertible subordinated debentures.
No other phrase seems to capture quite so perfectly the essence of Wall Street jargon.
Indeed, comedians poking fun at the financial world have long known that they could simply pronounce that term, in slowly rounded tones, and rest their case.
Well, it looks as if Wall Street will get the last laugh.
With yields at rock-bottom levels and with stocks soaring into regions that only an astronaut could love, some savvy investors are taking a fresh look at these obscure securities.
The reason lies in the neat parlor trick they perform: in a soaring stock market, they act like a stock, but when stocks slump, they act like a bond.


Ms. Mewshaw To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Mewshaw of Las Vegas, Nev., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Robyn Frances Mewshaw, to Ben Aaron Indek, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Indek of Teaneck, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mewshaw, 37 years old, is an assistant vice president in securities research at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She is a cum laude graduate of the University of New Mexico.
She and her fiance are night students at New York Law School.
Her father retired as the director of mail processing in Albuquerque, N.M., for the Postal Service.
Her mother, Blanche R. Mewshaw, retired as a pediatric nurse at Bataan Memorial Hospital in Albuquerque.


Miss Rockwell to Wed A. D. Strauss
Bishop and Mrs.
Hays H. Rockwell of St.
Louis have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah McFarland Rockwell to Andrew Dennis Strauss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis Strauss of Vero Beach, Fla.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Rockwell, 27 years old, is a recruiting officer in the investment banking division of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father, an Episcopal bishop in the Diocese of Missouri, is a former rector of St.
James Church in New York.


Syria's Game
At a school in Damascus on a rainy day in early December, a well-dressed young woman stepped up to the ballot box to vote on whether Hafez al-Assad, Syria's sole ruler for 21 years, should be given an unprecedented fourth seven-year term as President.
Smiling broadly, she withdrew a safety pin from her purse, pricked the index finger of her right hand and marked the green circle labeled "Yes" on the ballot in her own blood.
Not all Syrians were as enthusiastic.
At the school that day, two hapless voters filled in the black "No" circle instead of the green, the color of Islam.
But members of the President's ruling Baath Party overseeing the balloting quickly detected the mistakes.
Surely, the officials asked the befuddled pair, they had intended to vote for the President?
Yes, indeed, each rapidly agreed.
The ballots were promptly discarded and replaced by Syria's version of politically correct votes.


GOING BY THE NUMBERS
Your account of Davis's professional experience had a unique impact on the very small group of female scientists from earlier generations.
We read familiar words to describe Davis and her work -- "out for publicity," "she's not that reliable," "unoriginal," "wrong." They were such devastating words for us 30 and 40 years ago.
They seem so trite and inconsequential today, now that we know what those words really mean.
VILMA R. HUNT
Magnolia, Mass.


A Scarsdale Collector, at Home With About 2,000 Dolls
JOCELYN ADELAAR was given her first doll by a neighbor when she was 5 years old.
It had ringlets and wore a bonnet and dress, but the little girl wanted a boy doll.
So she cut off its hair and named it Billy and has kept it to this day.
Now Mrs.
Adelaar is a mother with two nearly grown children and almost 2,000 dolls.
She says collecting dolls and their accouterments is an obsession that keeps her sane.
She claims she buys what moves her, but other collectors are struck by her sharp eye and uncanny sense of the rare and valuable.


If You Need a Reason, Now's the Time for Meatloaf
RECESSION, nostalgia and winter invariably add up to meatloaf on the menu.
The traditional meatloaf is made with ground beef or a combination of beef, veal and pork.
But today, it might even mean turkey loaf or chicken loaf as the anti-cholesterol squad keeps careful watch over the diet.
Regardless of the basic material, meatloaves are appealing because they are easy to prepare and to eat.
They can be made in advance and reheated or sliced and used in sandwiches.
What is pate but a sophisticated meatloaf?
Like pates, meatloaf mixtures can be wrapped in pastry or used to stuff vegetables.
Meatloaf mixtures can even be formed into small, individual portions.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Missing Flowers
Q.
I would like to know where I might obtain seeds for the wildflower called lady's-smock
or cuckooflower
.
I understand it naturalizes well and might be a wonderful blue woodland carpet. -- Rose Anne Colavito, Oxford, N.J.


The 'Village'
To The Editor:
Your article on Greenwich Village on Jan. 5 highlights public and private schools in the area, but fails to mention the four Catholic schools, with a total enrollment of nearly 1,000 children.


POWER STRUGGLE
Verhovek's fine article on the Quebec power problem doesn't fully portray the New York Power Authority's aggressive efforts to insure a thorough environmental review of the proposed Great Whale project and to reopen our Hydro-Quebec contract to reflect current economic realities.
Largely at my urging, Hydro-Quebec agreed not to begin construction of roads and other ancillary features until the entire project has undergone review -- a major victory for those who feared that such work would make the project itself inevitable.
I have personally advised Hydro-Quebec that we will not buy a single kilowatt of its power unless environmental and native peoples' concerns receive full scrutiny under Canadian procedures.
To facilitate this process, I negotiated an 11-month extension, through next Nov. 30, in the deadline for a decision on the contract.


Tracey Stelzer Wed in Boston
Tracey Jane Stelzer, a graduate student at Harvard University, and Andrew Leon Hyams, a lawyer and health policy consultant in Cambridge, Mass., were married last evening in Boston.
Rabbi David Wolfman officiated at the Harvard Club.
Mrs.
Hyams, 31 years old, graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and has a law degree from Emory University.
She is studying for a master's degree in public health.


Brian Lynch to Wed Ms. Diefenbach
Missy Egan Wey of Larchmont, N.Y., and Richard P. Diefenbach of Novato, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lynn Mary Diefenbach, to Brian Anthony Lynch, a son of Robert C. Lynch of Stony Brook, L.I., and the late Helen Brendel Lynch.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Diefenbach, 31 years old, is the director of sales in Los Angeles for the Morgans Hotel Group, which owns the Royalton and Paramount otels in New York.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Cortland.
Her mother owns a public relations firm in Larchmont.
Her father is the president of the San Francisco Shade Company, a maker of window shades in San Rafael, Calif.


At Cold War's End, Whither the Missile Monitors?
Inside a small metal building at the Hercules rocket motor factory here, a handful of Russian missile inspectors post a 24-hour vigil listening for the tune of "Moscow Nights" from a small speaker.
That is their signal that the factory gates are opening, possibly for a missile-bearing truck to be inspected under a 1988 treaty between the United States and the former Soviet Union that bans specific rocket motors used on intermediate-range nuclear missiles.


Tea's Free, Music's Hot: Wouldn't Any Fox Trot?
The time, a recent Saturday afternoon; the place, the spacious lobby of the Park Avenue Plaza building, on 52d Street between Madison and Park Avenues.
There are signs that say No Smoking, No Alcoholic Beverages, No Sleeping.
There are no signs, however, to discourage Dancing.
And 150 or so men and women are doing just that, swirling, genteelly stomping, two-stepping and cheek-to-cheeking it on the marble floor.
The Richard Sudhalter Quintet swings into the likes of "Where or When" and "Have You Met Miss Jones?" Open to the public at no charge, the scene is repeated the third Saturday of each month, free tea included.
After all, what's a tea dance without tea?


Helping Hand, Heavy Foot: Both Are the Real China
THERE is a country in East Asia that imprisons and tortures dissidents, that sells missiles and nuclear technology to unstable third-world regimes, that exports prison-made products, that fires on Buddhist monks who demonstrate to demand freedom for Tibet.
There is also a country in East Asia that has revolutionized its economy along market lines, that provides free prenatal checkups for expectant mothers, that is rapidly extending the web of roads and electricity lines to remote villages, that provides wheelchairs and other help to the disabled, that offers Tibetans and other ethnic minorities preferential university admission -- that, in short, is raising standards of living of most inhabitants about as fast as any society in the world.


Editors' Note
A review of "Seize the Moment," by Richard Nixon, last Sunday listed Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia in some copies among Presidential candidates who might profit by reading Mr.
Nixon's book.
On Jan. 8, after the issue had gone to press, Mr.
Wilder withdrew as a candidate.


Jostling To Catch The Wave
PRESIDENT F. W. de Klerk had little new to say when he addressed Parliament last week, but perhaps it didn't much matter.
The place where the pace of change in South African politics is being decided had already shifted from Parliament to the Convention for a Democratic South Africa, a multiracial forum of political parties that was launched on Dec. 20 and 21 to lay groundwork for a new constitution and a post-apartheid South Africa.
In 1990 and 1991, President de Klerk used the opening of South Africa's Parliament as the theater for dramatic initiatives that enhanced the credibility of his promise to end apartheid.
Two years ago he legalized the African National Congress and other banned organizations and promised the imminent release of Nelson Mandela.
A year ago he announced the repeal of the Population Registration Act, which classified all South Africans by race, and the other basic laws mandating racial segregation.


Ms. Alter Plans June Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Alter of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Deborah Alter to Ramon Keith McMillan, the son of the late Delores T. Rasnake and the stepson of Charles T. Rasnake of Bristol, Tenn.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Alter, 36 years old, teaches art at Nyack (N.Y.) High School.
She graduated from Connecticut College, and received a master's degree in education from Manhattanville College.
Her father is the vice chairman of the Cabletelevision Advertising Bureau, a national trade association .


Sports of The Times; Coaches Tango Separately Before Their Teams' Super Tangle
YESTERDAY, the last day of news media interviews before the Super Bowl, the players rested, but the coaches were brought into the ring for one more round of sparring before the Titanic Struggle.
It is commonly believed among Football Experts that teams reflect their head coaches.
So an eye was narrowed in the large room in the Park Inn Hotel to seek Insights into which team will win today based on this performance, concluding a long, long week of interviews that have inspired, if not awe, then certainly ennui.


Technology; Bombproofing the Skies
Since a terrorist bomb weighing less than a pound destroyed Pan American flight 103 over Scotland in 1988 and caused 270 deaths, the Federal Aviation Administration and research firms have been trying to figure out how to make planes immune to such explosives.
One answer might be to harden a plane's removable luggage containers so they could absorb a portion of a blast.
"It appears that this offers the near-term solution," said Paul A. Polski, director of the F.A.A.'s Aviation Security Research and Development Service in Atlantic City.


Figure Skating: Art or Sport?
To the Sports Editor:
George Vecsey's article "Skating's Double Standard" (The Times, Jan. 12) highlights the frustration that competitors naturally feel at the preferential scoring accorded established performers at prestigious competitions.
My problems center more on figure skating's double nature: is it art or sport?


New Yorkers, etc.
In certain situations, there are two types of people: those who bow gracefully to the inevitable, with scarcely a second thought, and those who insist on jousting with the inevitable and accept it only grudgingly.
A good many of these situations are related to weekends, a period of time that, ideally, should be devoted to changing pace, to putting projects and business on hold and to relaxing into into a more leisurely and generally less harried frame of mind.
On some weekends, the ideal actually happens.
On others, the ideal is apt to be short-circuited either before the weekend-proper starts or just as it dawns.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  RUSSIA WORKS ON AID DISTRIBUTION


CHIEFS OF MOLDOVA AND ROMANIA MEET
President Ion Iliescu of Romania and President Mircea Snegur of Moldova met in this former Soviet republic today to promote closer economic and cultural ties between their countries, but they issued no call for restoring the political unity that existed between the world wars.
Meeting in the Moldavan border town of Ungheni, the two leaders promised to deepen their countries' economic cooperation, proposing a free trade zone between Ungheni and Iasi, the Romanian town just across the Prut River, as part of a broader agreement on cultural integration and economic partnership scheduled for March.


Bettina L. Chow, Model and Designer, Dies at 41
Bettina Louise Chow, an internationally acclaimed model, restaurateur, jewelry designer, sculptor and fashion collector, died on Friday at her home in Pacific Palisades, Calif.
She was 41 years old.
Her death resulted from complications of AIDS, her family said.
She worked with AIDS organizations and talked openly of her illness, which she attributed to heterosexual transmission.


Mutual Funds; How to Tote Up Your 1991 Results
By now, many investors know that 1991 was a terrific year for mutual funds.
Stock funds rose an average of 30.7 percent while bond funds gained 18.2 percent, according to Lipper Analytical Services, which tracks mutual funds.
But investors may not know exactly how their own funds did, and if forced to guess, they tend to overestimate.
"Generally, investors guess high and wrong," said John Markese, director of research for the American Association of Individual Investors in Chicago.


Helping Rookies Cope With Unseen Pitfalls
When Tommy Hawkins, a strapping 6-foot-5-inch, two-year all-American out of Notre Dame checked into the National Basketball Association in 1959 with his 23-point, 16-rebound-per-game credentials, he thought he had it made.
But what Hawkins came to realize after joining the Minneapolis Lakers was that all he had for sure was a spot on the end of the bench and sobering obscurity.
He had entered the world of a rookie and was enduring one of the more lonely and mentally grinding rites of passage that existed in sports.


Cannot Tell a Lie: Washington's Great
There are reasons why, in some circles, the Washington Redskins are favored to trash the Buffalo Bills by a couple of touchdowns -- or even more -- in Super Bowl XXVI on Sunday evening here at the Metrodome.
After all, this is the National Football League team with the best record (14-2 in the regular season, plus two playoff victories so far).
Only twice this season have the Redskins been held under 20 points; in three games they posted shutouts, and in 11 others they limited teams to 17 or fewer points.


Michael Shields Engaged to Jennifer Ressler
Jennifer Ressler, a manager at the Van Den Bergh Foods Company in Lisle, Ill., and Michael Ray Shields, a product sales analyst for Lever Brothers in Westmont, Ill., are engaged to be married in June.
Miss Ressler, 24 years old, graduated from Boston University and is the daughter of Barry Ressler of Weston, Conn., and Charlotte Ressler of Norwalk, Conn.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Universal Voltronics, a maker of energy and medical research products in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
Her mother is a psychologist in Norwalk for the Connecticut Mental Retardation Department.


Law on Disabled
To the Editor: Betsy Wade's article "Hotel Chains Move to Meet New Law on Disabled" (Practical Traveler, Dec. 22) was an encouraging report on the hotel industry's response to the Americans With Disabilities Act.
As a representative of Advocates for Better Communication, I was pleased to see that the article did mention accommodations for the hearing-impaired, but feel it is important for the public to know that hotels are required to provide hearing-impairment aids such as visual alerts, flashing lights for emergencies, caption decoders for televisions, hearing-aid compatible and volume-control telephones, and provision for TDD telephones.
ARLENE ROMOFF New York, N.Y.


The Preservation Movement Is Making Headway
THE little Catskills town of Hurley, N.Y., in Ulster County, has the largest concentration of antique stone houses in the country.
Built between 1684 and the early 1800's, the 25 houses line both sides of Main Street, leading to the town's 19th-century Dutch Reformed Church.
All were placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1963 and last September Hurley rewrote its zoning to create a historic district that encompasses all 25 houses, now privately owned and occupied.
Previously, only about half the houses were within a historic district created in 1967.


Sunday Dinner; Soup and Sandwich, Simple Pleasures
Brisk winter days are the perfect time for the universal antifreeze of childhood, steaming soup and a sandwich.
Soup provides warmth, the sandwich substance.
Here are three places to pause at during a brisk Sunday stroll in Manhattan.
Joe Allen
326 West 46th Street (212) 581-6464 -- This fast-paced and casual hangout in the theater district serves everything from soups and sandwiches to full meals.
The perpetually packed bar, decorated with framed Broadway posters and other theater memorabilia, is a diverting spot to spend some time before or after the show.


Lebanon Troops Replace a United Nations Battalion


Wedded to Details


Sudan Is Seen as Safe Base for Mideast Terror Groups
The United States and other Western Governments are becoming increasingly alarmed by evidence that international terrorist organizations that once operated from Lebanon and Libya are now using the Sudan as a safe haven, foreign diplomats here say.
The Western nations also fear that the Islamic military Government formed here after a coup in 1989 is intent on exporting its brand of fundamentalism, threatening secular Governments in Egypt and other countries in the region, the diplomats say.
The Sudan has been forging an increasingly close alliance with the Islamic Government of Iran.


The Sins Of the Children
To the Editor:
I'm not sure what Edward Rothstein means by Nazism, but his meaning certainly does not accord with mine when he associates it with "Tristan and Isolde's" "endlessly enlarging and engulfing, self-generating and self-involving . . . desire"  [ "What Is the Politics of 'Tristan'?" Jan. 12 ] .
Totalitarianism, it seems to me, is the antithesis of anything self-involving.
The unfulfillable love of Tristan and Isolde, which is embodied not only in the libretto but also so spectacularly in every aspect of the score, is an antitotalitarian love in the most profound sense.


Spanish Police
To the Editor: It might interest your readers, particularly in the year of the Columbus Celebration and the Olympic Games in Barcelona to hear of the hazards we encountered on our fall trip to Spain.
We were arrested by the Guardia Civil in our rental car for an alleged violation on the road northwest from Madrid.
In our opinion there was absolutely no violation involved.
My husband passed a slow-moving truck at legal speed on a straight section of dry road on a clear day with plenty of visibility.


Who Needs $9 Million To Fix a School?
The article on the renovation of Hewlett Elementary School  [ "Should District Renovate '29 School?" Dec. 22 ]  cries out for clarification.
Those of us who have come together in opposition to gutting this 60-year-old building do so not because we are oblivious to the repairs that should be made, necessary alterations that would cost a fraction of the proposed $9 million bond issue, but because nowhere in this planned overhaul is there so much as a hint of the real necessity for Hewlett -- relieving its overcrowding.
It is simply too small to accommodate 540 children.


Loft-Living, Southern Style, Catching On
THANKS to an abundance of old warehouses and the arrival of new residents who have experience with loft living, Georgia has become home to a growing number of loft conversions.
"This is sort of a Southern-fried SoHo," said Bruce Gallman, one of the original developers of this city's Castleberry Hill, which has the state's largest concentration of loft apartments.


Life in the Theater (and What a Life)
"Two Shakespearean actors" may be Richard Nelson's love letter to the theatrical profession, but he has written it with a poison pen and sealed it with a Judas kiss.
What starts out apparently as an affectionate celebration of 19th-century troupers ends up, two and a half hours later, as a rather stinging critique of their irresponsibility.
I'm reminded of those ersatz Victorian valentines that look properly warm and sentimental until you open them and get hit with an insult.
Mr.
Nelson's tactics aren't quite so abrupt.
In fact, his episodic play dawdles terribly in the second act before it comes to the point.
But you can't pretend that the playwright's affections are pure.
There's bile in this tribute, which Lincoln Center Theater has lavishly produced at the Cort Theater on Broadway.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
There is a lot of sorting out to do as the reader gets under way in SANDSTORM by Laurence Gough (Viking, $20).
The action shifts from Egypt to Colombia and elsewhere with no perceptible design.
Are we into drugs?
Espionage?
Adventure?
Then things begin to clear up, kind of.
At the end the travels have been well worth it.
Mr.
Gough is a skillful writer with a fine knack for characterization, even if a couple of his figures are somewhat larger than life.
His two black soldiers of fortune who work for the C.I.A. are out of this world.
They are heroic in physique, quick with witty repartee, fearless, lethal, smart as they come.
They should capture the fantasies of any couch potato who dreams of being the ultimate man's man.


Magic's Image: Changing Index
To the Sports Editor:
Harvey Araton in "Advertisers Shying From Magic's Touch" (The Times, Jan. 1) derides some advertisers' reluctance to use Magic Johnson as a spokesman and speaks of this as "shameful" behavior.
Johnson's squeaky clean image is part of what made him a valued advertising spokesman.
Now, as an admitted promiscuous heterosexual who frequently had unprotected intercourse, Johnson's image is tarnished.
The mistakes that he made in his private life have cost him his valued advertising image, his career and probably his life.
Reluctance to use Johnson as a spokesman is a prudent business practice and in no way reflects an unenlightened advertiser.
An advertiser should be able to express sympathy for the infected Johnson, wish him well in his campaign to inform the public about AIDS, and simultaneously deem that his image is no longer effective in promoting the product -- all without being labeled inhumane by Araton.
DEBRA GOLDMAN-WOHL New York


The Lamb of God in England
DAUGHTERS OF ALBION
By A. N. Wilson. 287 pp. New York: Viking. $21.


The Himalayas As a Crossroads Of Vision and Craft
Although the number of noteworthy shows of Western art has been small of late, this is turning into a good season for anyone interested in Asian art -- especially the art of cultures that look to India for inspiration.
The impressive "Wisdom and Compassion" at the I.B.M.
Galleries has come and gone; "The Lotus Transcendant" continues at the Metropolitan Museum; the Asia Society in New York will build a show around one of its South Indian bronzes in the spring.
The most recent arrival is at the Newark Museum and runs through March 1.
Called "Art of the Himalayas," the exhibition is organized by the American Federation of Arts under the direction of Pratapaditya Pal, senior curator of Asian art at the Los Angeles County Museum.
In it are more than 115 paintings, sculptures and ritual artifacts from Nepal and Tibet, all drawn from an American private collection.


7 Nations Say Drag on Growth Is Dissipating
Seeking to raise consumer and business confidence, the finance ministers of the Group of Seven industrial nations said today that the conditions slowing worldwide economic growth were dissipating and that the seven nations would step up their cooperation to stimulate expansion.
After a seven-hour meeting here, the ministers issued a statement saying that economic output should soon increase because inflationary pressures have eased and long-term interest rates have begun to fall.
In an apparent response to American pressure to put more emphasis on growth, the ministers said they were convinced "that the forces that have been inhibiting economic activity in many countries are dissipating and that the conditions for improved global growth exist."


When Form Exceeds Function
David Hockney's Stage designs have a way of sticking in the mind, which is one reason we can speak so casually of the Hockney "Magic Flute" or the Hockney "Rake's Progress." These productions often capture, in some clever, playful way, a sensibility -- the mock-picaresque irony of Stravinsky, the exuberant innocence of parts of Mozart.
So strong are some of the artist's designs, in fact, that they can dominate a work the way a colored light shining on an object can determine how we see it.
The only problem may be uncertainty about what is being attended to: the object or the imposed sensibility of the designer.
This is not Mr.
Hockney's problem alone; designers and directors have been becoming the stars of their own productions for quite some time.
But Mr.
Hockney's new "Turandot," now at the Chicago Lyric Opera, may shed additional light on this issue.


Companies Find Fresh Ways to Donate to the Neediest
Is Troy Kelley the first Neediest Cases Comedian?
The 23-year-old salesman from New Jersey got his break last month by winning the Corporate Comedy Laugh-Off at a Secaucus nightclub that raised $275 for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
But in a telephone interview he acknowledged that his material, which centers on picking up women in bars, is a little off color to be repeated here.


Art in San Diego
To the Editor: "What's Doing in San Diego" (Jan. 12) omitted an important cultural event of the America's Cup competition.
The San Diego Museum of Art has organized a major exhibition of marine art taken from the collections of the National Maritime Museum in Greenwich, England,the largest maritime museum in the world.
The show, "The Great Age of Sail: Treasures From the National Maritime Museum," marks the first time this collection of 80 paintings and 20 nautical objects has traveled to the United States.
The exhibition will be at our museum, in Balboa Park, from March 7 through Oct. 11.
The exhibition is then expected to travel to the Chrysler Museum in Norfolk, Va., and the Peabody Museum in Salem, Mass.
MARDI SNOW Public relations coordinator, San Diego Museum of Art


Pacific Gets New Coach
Utah State Coach CHUCK SHELTON has been named head coach of the University of the Pacfic, replacing WALT HARRIS, who resigned to become quarterbacks coach of the Jets. (AP)


Unpredictable Races, Predictable Finishes
Racing started off at a snail's pace today in the first matches of the America's Cup challengers' trials.
But as the wind picked up, so did a series of wind shifts that turned the tables on two of the early leaders.
The result was an unpredictable set of races with predictable finishes.
The two cup boats that have been the pre-regatta favorites -- the Italian yacht Il Moro di Venezia and New Zealand -- proved to be worthy of their reputations.
Il Moro di Venezia defeated Spirit of Australia by 2 minutes 23 seconds.
And New Zealand beat Ville de Paris of France by 56 seconds.


GOING BY THE NUMBERS
I disagree with Davis when she says that there's no constituency for research into cancer prevention.
There's a huge constituency -- one that eventually will be joined by one out of every nine American women.
It's made up of the women who have had breast cancer.
Many of them are mothers who desperately hope that their daughters and granddaughters will not have to go through what they did.
This constituency is easy to find.
There are hundreds of grass-roots organizations across the country made up of breast-cancer survivors.
I belong to one in New York called SHARE.
SUE MCCAIN
New York, N.Y.


Kashmir Caravan by Hindus Is Halted
Faced with the threat of violence from militant Kashmiri separatists, Hindu nationalists today called off plans to drive a large motorcade through the Vale of Kashmir to demonstrate the unity of India.
The procession, which began in December from India's southernmost point, was curtailed in an atmosphere of rising tension a day after Kashmiri militants bombed the regional police chief's office in Srinagar, the Kashmiri summer capital, as he discussed security for the Bharatiya Janata Party, the Hindu nationalist party that organized the caravan.
Five senior police officials were seriously wounded.


Tanzania Bans Camping In Crater
Tour companies that operate safaris in East Africa have been informed by the Tanzanian Government that it has decided to end tented camping on the floor of the Ngorongoro Crater, where for years tourists have gone to sleep listening to the calls of distant lion and hyena.
No official statement has been issued by the Tanzanians, except that the ban begins March 31, but tour operators say they assume the reason for the decision is to protect the crater's ecology.
Camping on Ngorongoro's circular floor, which is 2,000 feet below the 7,000-foot-high rim, has been a highlight of some safari tours for many years.
The floor covers about 125 square miles, with a lake and forests, and has a resident animal population that includes elephant, wildebeest, monkeys and hippopotamus.
There are lodges and camping sites on the rim, and visitors will continue to go down into the crater on half-day and day game-viewing trips from these.


Negotiators Expect Macy to File for Bankruptcy Protection Soon
Participants in the negotiations to resuscitate R. H. Macy &amp; Company said yesterday that the retailer was almost certain to file for bankruptcy protection soon, possibly as early as Monday.
One of them said Macy had told some important creditors to expect a bankruptcy filing early next week.


As Zaleski Settles In, the Mayoral Profile Changes in Yonkers
TERENCE M. ZALESKI stood in the original mayor's office in City Hall, his words echoing off the unadorned walls of the empty room.
"This was where the Mayor sat decades ago," he said.
"We're restoring it, hopefully permanently."
Mr.
Zaleski, who became the first executive mayor of Yonkers in 50 years by winning a closely contested three-way race last November, pointed out the architectural details of the room and the magnificent view it afforded.
Then he strode briskly into a cluttered adjacent room, where the work of his first month in office was piled high on chairs, desks and even the floor.


Questions Raised on Ability of F.D.A. to Protect Public
Consumer groups and Federal officials are raising disturbing questions about whether the Food and Drug Administration has adequate powers to protect the public from dangerous drugs and devices.
Recent cases involving silicone breast implants, the sleeping pill Halcion and the sedative Versed suggest that the agency and the public are sometimes the last to learn of reports of dangerous side effects.
The Federal agency does no testing of its own, and in making decisions it must rely entirely on the test results submitted by manufacturers.
Officials of the agency and consumer advocates both say that the F.D.A. lacks the subpoena power, which virtually every other Federal agency has, to obtain drug company documents when suspicions are aroused.


A.M.A. Says Johnson Can Play in Olympics
Two days after an Australian doctor said that MAGIC JOHNSON would pose a realistic threat of passing on the virus that causes AIDS if he plays in the Olympics, the American Medical Association issued a statement castigating that view.
"The controversy over Magic Johnson's participation in the Summer Olympic Games is another example of panic and prejudice toward H.I.V.-infected people," said the statement issued by the organization's senior vice president, M. ROY SCHWARTZ.


Camera
When a picture of the new Nikonos RSAF, the first self-contained single-lens reflex underwater camera, flashed on the screen at the news conference announcing it on Jan. 13, the reporters and editors gathered at Nikon House in Rockefeller Center reacted with surprise.
Usually, the press is prone to say, "If you've seen one, you've seen them all." But here was a camera with a difference.
Twenty years in the making, it looked intelligent and ready for serious action.


Miss Brahs Affianced
Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart J. Brahs of Potomac, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Victoria Louise Brahs to Simon Herries Monk, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis H. Monk of Ruskington, Lincolnshire, England.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Brahs, 23 years old, graduated from Boston University and is in a teaching certification program at Bishop Grosseteste College in Lincoln, Lincolnshire.
Mr.
Monk, 24 years old, graduated from Buckinghamshire College and is a sales analyst at G. W. Padley Ltd., a chicken producer in Sleaford, Lincolnshire.


The Executive Life; Those Giving the Word Also Suffer in Layoffs
Don't call them executioners. They feel bad enough already.
Nothing, of course, can match the shock of losing one's job.
The body blow to self-esteem, as well as financial well-being, that comes with being laid off is nearly always traumatic.
But handing out the pink slips can take a toll, too.


Fugard's Treaty for the Warring Sexes
The war between men and women is often interpreted as a struggle for power.
But to the South African playwright Athol Fugard it is more poignantly about the desire of women to be heard and understood by their men, who, he is convinced, often fail them.
In his 1969 play "Boesman and Lena," Mr.
Fugard presents a man and a woman brutalized as much by their inability to communicate as by the tragedy of apartheid.
Mr.
Fugard is directing a revival of the play at the Manhattan Theater Club, with Keith David as Boesman, Lynne Thigpen as Lena and Tsepo Mokone as Outa, an old Xhosa tribesman who comes to their campfire after their shantytown has been bulldozed by white police.
Once the production, now in previews, opens on Wednesday, Mr.
Fugard will return to South Africa to finish a new play.
He says it is about what South Africans are trying to deal with
now,
and it is scheduled to open in June at the Market Theater in Johannesburg with the actor Zakes Mokae, a longtime friend and collaborator.


The Art Behind Nirvana's Ascent to the Top
Millions of Americans must have been surprised when Nirvana appeared on "Saturday Night Live" recently.
The Seattle trio wore all the vestments of the underground music scene, from which they had so quickly risen.
The lead singer Kurt Cobain's ratty jeans and paper-thin T-shirt looked as if they hadn't been washed in weeks, and his hair was dyed a flaming red usually reserved for high-top sneakers or lumberjack coats.
Dave Grohl, the flagellating drummer, was nearly invisible behind tatters of long hair.
Chris Novoselic, the bassist, was bouncing around the stage as if he were about to jump out of his skin.
These grungy punks showed an astounding lack of musicianship.
At the end of their second song they trashed their equipment -- Mr.
Novoselic actually seemed to bean Mr.
Grohl with a drum stand -- and the cameras hastily cut away to a commercial.


BEST SELLERS: January 26, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
16
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
1
HIDEAWAY, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died finds himself and his family haunted by visions of evil.
3
3
15
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
4
2
10
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the life of Edwina Winfield.
5 *
4
5
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
6
6
17
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II. (LP)
7
8
2
BLINDSIGHT, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $21.95.) A woman physician seeks to find the cause of a series of strange deaths of Manhattan yuppies.
8 *
5
23
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
9
9
46
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
10
5
LILA, by Robert M. Pirsig. (Bantam, $22.50.) On a sailboat cruise down the Hudson, a philosopher reflects on the nature of our society.
11
14
95
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
12
1
LINE OF FIRE, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $21.95.) The fifth volume in the series "The Corps" tells of an attempt to rescue two marines on an island in the Solomons during World War II.
13
7
20
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate an accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force. (LP)
14
1
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $16.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
15
1
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $21.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware to the rescue of an actress menaced by a man recently released from prison.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
15
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
2
2
8
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
3
6
10
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
4
3
19
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
5
4
8
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A reporter's account of an N.B.A. championship season spent with Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls.
6
7
2
PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, by Mark Lane. (Thunder's Mouth/Publishers Group West, $22.95.) A lawyer's presentation of the case for believing that the C.I.A. was involved in the death of John F. Kennedy.
7
12
11
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
8
5
22
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies. (LP)
9
11
4
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning from the 19th-century American Indian.
10
9
60
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures through the centuries.
11
10
6
THE WORLD IS MY HOME, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) The autobiography of the popular novelist. (LP)
12
13
32
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
13
8
12
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel, with his view of the Iran-contra affair.
14
18
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
15 *
9
J.
EDGAR HOOVER, by Curt Gentry. (Norton, $29.95.) The career of the longtime Director of the F.B.I.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
4
8
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
2
1
8
THE BEST TREATMENT, by Isadore Rosenfeld. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Advice from a physician on a host of medical problems.
3
3
3
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
4
2
2
FRENCH FOR CATS, by Henry Beard and John Boswell. (Boswell/Villard, $9.95.) A cat's life, told in French, English and pictures.
5
18
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE LETTERS OF EVELYN WAUGH AND DIANA COOPER, edited by Artemis Cooper. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $27.50.) A wonderfully entertaining exchange of observations and entertainments over some 34 years between the novelist and the almost unimaginably golden aristocrat Lady Diana Cooper.
A WOMAN, A MAN, AND TWO KINGDOMS: The Story of Madame d'Epinay and the Abbe Galiani, by Francis Steegmuller. (Knopf, $23.) A colorful, lively, teasing, often moving account of an 18th-century friendship (much of it by correspondence) between a female
philosophe
and a Neapolitan intellectual, diplomat and spy.
SEIZE THE MOMENT: America's Challenge in a One-Superpower World, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A forceful argument for a classical, geopolitical American internationalism.
WISE CHILDREN, by Angela Carter. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Ms.
Carter's 11th work of fiction is a mock memoir narrated by an endlessly imaginative post-modernist old woman.
CAT SCRATCH FEVER: Fictions, by Robert Kelly. (McPherson &amp; Company, cloth, $20; paper, $10.) Some 30 stories that rummage brilliantly in post-apocalyptic fantasy or shroud preoccupations with sheltered boyhoods, mythology, sex and demonology.
THE LOVE POEMS OF MAY SWENSON, by May Swenson. (Houghton Mifflin, paper, $9.95.) A sexy book, discovering a ravenous erotic drive in all natural processes and transfigurations, by an American original who died at 76 in 1989.
STILL LIFE WITH A BRIDLE: Essays and Apocryphas, by Zbigniew Herbert. (Ecco, $19.95.) Restless essays and sublime short fictions celebrating and revivifying the Dutch 17th century, by one of Poland's most distinguished writers.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Candidates Court Jackson Supporters


If You're Thinking of a Commercial Spot . . .
The struggle to fill the Super Bowl broadcast on CBS (from pre-game through post-game) with 30-second commercials ended late Friday when General Motors bought the remaining five spots at the price CBS insisted it was holding fast to: reportedly $850,000 per spot.
General Motors bought two 30-second spots and a 90-second spot, which was sold as the equivalent of three.
Dishing Out the Sound
If you look closely at the sidelines during the Super Bowl today, you will see four people carrying small plastic dishes up and down the field and behind the end zones.
No, they're not beaming the game to another planet.


Kuwaitis Urge U.S. to Press Iraq on P.O.W.'s
A delegation of Kuwaiti human-rights advocates spent the last week in Washington urging the United States to step up efforts to win the release of Kuwaitis still held captive in Iraq, and to determine the fate of other missing Kuwaitis.
The group won a promise from Army Secretary Michael Stone to lend forensic specialists from military laboratories to aid in the identification of bodies buried in Kuwait.


Sunday Outing; Roaming the Wilds of Seaford, L.I.
The Tackapausha Museum and Preserve on the South Shore of Long Island serves as an introduction to the ecology and natural history of the Northeast's coastal woodlands.
Most of the Eastern part of the United States was once covered with forests, which in urban areas has been reduced to a few protected areas.
The Tackapausha (pronounced tack-a-PAW-sha) preserve is a narrow strip about a mile and a half long on Seaford Creek, which divides the Towns of Seaford and Massapequa.
It includes 80 acres of wildlife sanctuary traversed by five miles of nature trails.
There is also a small museum, a welcome warming-up pause in cold weather.


Chile's Army Stands Tall, and Casts a Shadow
HE stepped down as leader of Chile nearly two years ago, but Gen.
Augusto Pinochet has hardly faded away.
In allowing Chile to move from a military dictatorship to an elected government, the general was sure to retain for the military, and thus for himself as commander in chief of the army, a good measure of authority.
Every few months, he likes to demonstrate the point.
The most ominous exercise was in December 1990, when General Pinochet, under pressure to resign, flexed his muscle by calling his troops to barracks, in effect putting them on alert.
Then last March, he rejected findings by a blue ribbon commission on human rights abuses during the 17 years of his regime.
He continues to defy any attempts to prosecute military officers.


'I'm One of the Ones It Was Done To'
VIOLENCE
By Richard Bausch. 293 pp. Boston: Seymour Lawrence/ Houghton Mifflin. $19.95.


Research on Finding Ninas Yields Gains in Medical Screening
To the Editor:
I am the professor referred to in "Knowledge of Nina Reached the Pentagon," by Howard Benedict (letter, Jan. 12).
I would like to set the record straight at least with respect to my role in studying Nina under Pentagon funds.
There was an earlier study involving speed of detection of Ninas by pilots that was performed under Defense Department support cited in "The World of Hirschfeld," which Al Hirschfeld is confusing with my study.


Deborah Smiley to Wed Ira Kerner
Mr. and Mrs.
Marshall E. Felenstein of New York have announced the engagement of her daughter, Deborah Rose Smiley, to Ira Glenn Kerner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Kerner of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Smiley, 25 years old, graduated from Syracuse University, as did her fiance.
She is an account executive at Diane Terman Public Relations in New York, of which her mother, Diane Terman Felenstein, is the president.
Ms.
Smiley is also the daughter of Robert M. Smiley of Scarsdale, a principal in Smiley Associates Inc., insurance consultants in New York.


Cynthia Boles to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Sol Boles of Syosset, L.I., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Cynthia Meg Boles to Scott Douglas Dailard, the son of Kay Keaty and Douglas Dailard, both of San Diego.
The couple, both 23 years old, graduated cum laude from Harvard University and are studying law at the University of California at Berkeley.


Vision of Rail and Office Complex Moves Nearer to Reality
STANDING at the window of his fifth-floor office in Rutherford, William E. McCann looks out over an expanse of rooftops and meadow grass to a spot nearly four miles away in Secaucus.
There, amid a jumble of railroad tracks and swaying cattails, he imagines a gleaming oasis of glass and steel rising above the marshlands.
In his mind's eye, Mr.
McCann sees five office towers set atop a sprawling train station that would serve nearly 70,000 commuters a day and create thousands of new jobs for New Jersey residents.


Perspectives: The Owners' Outlook; Sounding the Alarm on Mortgage Loans
THE normally ebullient Bernard H. Mendik seems an unlikely messenger for unpleasant news.
"I try to be upbeat," he says.
He usually is.
But as the new chairman of the Real Estate Board of New York, Mr.
Mendik deems it a duty to deliver woeful news to Washington.
This is that owners of investment property are being driven into a corner by the unrealistically harsh standards of banks on mortgage refinancing.
He wants a relaxation of rules that he says are obliging banks to judge value on the basis of current rents only, rather than projected rents after building improvements or market gains.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THREE GOAT SONGS By Michael Brodsky.
Four Walls Eight Windows, Cloth, $18.95; Paper, $9.95.


Making a Difference; Plenty of Pain for the Gain
Robert F. Daniell tried to put an upbeat spin on the announcement last week.
The United Technologies Corporation, he said, was embarking on nothing less than a "sea change" that would produce a "leaner, tougher-minded company" capable of enduring the current recession and seizing opportunities as they arise in the future.
Then came the bad news.
United Technologies plans to eliminate almost 14,000 jobs over the next few years, with the heaviest cuts falling on its Pratt &amp; Whitney jet engine subsidiary -- and its home state of Connecticut.
To pay for the cutbacks and for environmental problems, the Hartford-based company took special charges of $1.53 billion, producing a loss of $1.22 billion in the fourth quarter and $1.02 billion for the year.


SUPER BOWL XXVI


Elizabeth Sweet Has Wedding
Elizabeth Adams Sweet, the daughter of Howard C. Sweet Jr. of Charlestown, R.I., and Melinda Sweet Held of New York, was married yesterday in Sharon, Conn., to Timothy Redmond Dowling, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Dowling of Ridgewood, N.J.
The Rev.
James Pilon performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Bernard's Church.
Mrs.
Dowling, 31 years old, graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father practices law in Charlestown.
Her mother is the associate general counsel of Lever Brothers Inc. in New York.


Candidates Playing to Mood of Protectionism
With New Hampshire's economy on the rocks and few points of disagreement on other emotional issues like crime, race and abortion, the Democratic Presidential candidates are vying over who can deliver the harshest words and strongest promises about giving America a leg up in world economic competition.
What the candidates are offering in their commercials and on the stump is more emotion than logic, more oratory than substance.
But they are exploiting the sense that many voters have that Americans are being treated unfairly in international trade, especially by the Japanese.


Ms. Landman to Wed
Robert E. Landman of Glen Rock, N.J., has announced the engagement of his daughter Julie Kay Landman to Devon Engel, the son of Herbert Engel of Westport, Conn., and Lee Reitman of Atlanta.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Landman, 25 years old, is an accountant and a financial management associate at the Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation in Washington.
She graduated from Emory University, as did her fiance.
Mr.
Engel, 25, who received a law degree from George Washington University, is an associate at the Washington law firm of Crowell &amp; Moring.


Jessica Saal to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Harry J. Saal of Palo Alto, Calif., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Jessica Lynn Saal, and Jonathan Michael Goldman, the son of Susan Williams of Dix Hills, L.I., and Kenneth Goldman of Smithtown, L.I.
Miss Saal, 22 years old, is a senior at Tufts University, from which Mr.
Goldman, 22, graduated.
He is a manager at the International Center Au Bon Pain in Boston.


The High Costs of Xenophobia
Japan-bashing has suddenly become a frenzy, at a terrible toll to America's best interests.
In one short week: A Japanese offer to help Seattle keep major league baseball was doused with cold water by Baseball Commissioner Fay Vincent.
Los Angeles County canceled its order for Japanese mass-transit rail cars.
And the town council of Greece, N.Y., voted not to buy a
used
Japanese dirt mover.
Everyone benefits from free and open international commerce.
But while Japan's cars and electronic gear have been a boon to American consumers, its barriers to foreign products and investment are an endless frustration to Americans who want to do business there.


Pavilion Themes at Expo
Entertainment ranging from Spanish dancing and opera to rock groups as well as exhibits about history and technology have been scheduled for Expo '92 in Seville.
Some 55,000 performances at 16 venues will be staged during the international exposition's six-month run on the island of La Cartuja between two branches of the Guadalquivir River.


The Cold War of Cuba and the Miami Exiles Heats Up
THE cold war may be over in Washington and Moscow, but it rages on in Florida and Cuba.
The execution in Havana by firing squad last week of a Miami man recently captured with two other exiles after landing on the Cuban coast in a dinghy quickly produced angry demonstrations in front of the Bay of Pigs Monument here and defiant rhetoric from Fidel Castro and his increasingly beleaguered Communist regime.
On both sides of the Florida Straits, any relaxation of tensions now seems more remote than ever.
In the past, Mr.
Castro might have dealt less harshly with an infiltration episode.
But with the Soviet Union gone, and billions of dollars in subsidies vanishing with it, the Cuban leader is looking unusually vulnerable.
So Eduardo Diaz Betancourt, a 38-year-old mechanic who confessed to joining a shadowy Miami paramilitary group called Commandos L after fleeing Cuba on a boat last April, was deemed to have betrayed "the fruits of the revolution." He was made an example and executed.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PLAYING FOR KEEPS How One Man Kept the Mob From Sinking Its Hooks Into Pro Football.
By Chris Mortensen.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.


CAMPUS LIFE: Rice; Cheating Case Ignites Debate Over Athletics
When 28 Rice University students were found guilty of cheating on a quiz last October, the incident caused widespread debate on the Texas campus about the efficacy of the university's 75-year-old honor code.
The incident was the largest reported case of cheating in Rice history, and it took on extra significance because of subsequent allegations that many of the students were members of the university's athletics program.
Although university officials, citing the privacy of the honor code, have refused to confirm or deny the allegations, students appeared quite willing to accept reports of athletes' involvement, published in the undergraduate newspaper, The Rice Thresher.
This willingness and pursuant criticism of athletes and the athletics program, some say, has served to drive a further wedge between two social groups on this strongly academic campus: the student athletes and the non-athlete students.


At Home Abroad; The Younger Begin
"If you are talking about relinquishing territory in the Golan Heights or Judea or Samaria or Gaza," Ze'ev Binyamin Begin said, "the answer is a resounding no. We shall not tolerate foreign sovereignty on our Jewish soil."
Mr.
Begin is the son of former Prime Minister Menachem Begin, and he has the same strong nationalist beliefs.
One of "the young princes of the Likud," as they are called, 48 years old, he has been in the Knesset for just three years but has already declared his candidacy for leader of the party when Prime Minister Shamir retires.


Bush Digs In; Abortion Case Adds an Edge To the Election
POLITICIANS are instinctively drawn to compromise, which helps explain their discomfort with the issue of abortion.
Even a master strategist like the late Lee Atwater had a hard time managing the abortion issue, when he tried to recast the Republican Party for the 1990 elections as a "big tent" where both sides could feel at home.
Last week, the Supreme Court might have guaranteed that the issue will be even hotter in 1992.
The court set the stage for an election-year ruling that could further weaken or even overturn Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 case recognizing a constitutional right to abortion.


August Bridal For Miss Rowe
Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Edward Rowe Jr. of Weston, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Deborah Elizabeth Rowe, to John Andrew Marchiony, a son of Lawrence Marchiony Jr. of Montclair, N.J., and the late Eve Marchiony.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Rowe, 27 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and teaches history at the Chapin School in New York.
Her father is the president of Sigarms Inc., an arms maker in Exeter, N.H.
Her mother, Elizabeth Rowe, is the manager of the Boston Financial Tax Credit Fund Plus, a public fund of the Boston Financial Group.


On Perception and the C.P.A.
To the Editor:
At long last, someone has stood up in defense of the accounting profession ("Let's Have Fair Play for the C.P.A.," Forum, Dec. 29).
Certainly bad apples exist in any profession or occupation and C.P.A.'s are no exception.
But I challenge any other profession or occupation to demonstrate a level of commitment to quality that is equal to that of C.P.A.'s.
Mandatory quality review (essentially, an audit of the auditor) and continuing education are two of the profession's many requirements instituted to insure a high minimum standard of quality.


Andrea Malkin Plans to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Martin F. Malkin of Cranford, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Andrea Susan Malkin, to Dr.
Richard Vernon Brenner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Brenner of Woonsocket, R.I.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Malkin, 23 years old, is the director of career and leadership development at Mount Vernon College in Washington and the project coordinator of the National Women's Student Leadership Project of the National Association for Women in Education.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and has a master's degree in higher-education administration from Boston College.


As Ugly Feelings Grow, It's Hard To Separate Fact and Friction
IN asserting last weekend that America can't compete because its workers are "lazy" and a third of them "cannot even read," a Japanese legislative leader violated Japan's first rule of engagement with the United States: Never criticize America in any harsher terms than America criticizes itself.
In normal times, such indiscretions by Yoshio Sakurauchi, even with their edge of racial superiority, probably would have been written off as the ramblings of an aging and largely powerless legislator.
But given the level of American anger now directed at Japan, these times are hardly ordinary.
Last week a legion of spin-controllers led by Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe raced to assure the American public that the comments by Mr.
Sakurauchi, the speaker of Japan's lower house of Parliament, do not "reflect the way of thinking of the Japanese people in general."


Give the Information to Customers
To the Editor:
"The Bad Boy of Insurance Ratings" (Jan. 5) seems to implicitly accept the idea that a simple letter grade, if "accurate," gives insurance consumers all they need to know about the financial reliability of a company.


10,000 Marchers Protest Manhattan Rally to Ease Cuba Policy
With Cuban flags fluttering above them, a crowd of 10,000 anti-Castro marchers made their way yesterday from Times Square to the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center to counter a rally by people calling for improved relations between the United States and Cuba.
Chanting "Cuba si, Castro no," marchers from as far away as Miami and Spain carried signs criticizing President Fidel Castro and his supporters.


Amy Press to Wed
Amy Leigh Press and Allen David Friedman, both recent law school graduates of the State University of New York at Buffalo, are to be married in April.
Ms.
Press, 25 years old, as is her fiance, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliott Press of Rochester.
Mr.
Friedman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark H. Friedman of Valley Stream, L.I., is legal counsel at Towers Airport Business Park in Rochester.


Hype Over, CBS Gears Up for Game
The days of watching practices, viewing films and enduring rehearsals are over.
So are the Schwarzkopf-like briefings (complete with extensive play diagramming) to the CBS crew by John Madden to prepare them for what the Bills and the Redskins will do on the Metrodome's artificially painted artificial turf.
Also gone are the dozens of interviews by Madden and play-by-play man Pat Summerall, and pre-game show stars Terry Bradshaw, Greg Gumbel, Lesley Visser and Pat O'Brien.


All About/Dealer Auto Repairs; Turning a Source of Headaches Into a Source of Profits
For most car owners, there are few events that provoke greater anxiety than a trip to the dealer or local garage for service or repairs.
A phone call from the service manager often means news of unforeseen and costly problems.
Because drivers rely so much on their cars, a less-than-perfect repair can be a significant irritation.
Many service visits are less than perfect.
Almost a third of all trips to the dealer for repairs require a repeat visit, according to J. D. Power &amp; Associates, the automotive consulting firm.
And some auto repairs are never done right.
The Better Business Bureau says poor service for cars consistently rates as one of the top five consumer complaints.


Jane Licciardello, Student, to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas Licciardello of Trumbull, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jane Billings Licciardello to James Andrew McIntyre, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Angus P. McIntyre of Huntington, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Licciardello, 28 years old, graduated from Harvard University, where she is a graduate student in education.
Her father is a cardiologist in Stratford, Conn.


Too Few Wilkins Votes
He has been named to six National Basketball Association All-Star teams and he's currently the league's second-leading scorer, so what does it tell you when forward DOMINIQUE WILKINS of the Atlanta Hawks doesn't even place among the top 10 players in voting for the 1992 East team?
What it tells the Hawks is that something is amiss.
As a result, the team asked for a review of the computer vote count.


Namath Sues Pro Set
It might be considered an honor having your picture on a "Super Bowl Supermen" series of trading cards, but JOE NAMATH has doesn't see it that way.
He filed suit against Pro Set, charging that the Dallas company used his picture in the 160-card set without his permission.
The suit seeks $15 million in damages.
The company said it had been authorized to produce the cards by the National Football League and had assumed the N.F.L. had received the players' permission.
It said it would consult with N.F.L. lawyers before filing a response to the suit. (AP)


Old Movies Add to the Pleasure of the New
A man runs down narrow, shadowy, cobblestone streets, pursued by other men in long overcoats and wide-brimmed hats.
Those streets are all the more sinister for their ornate, looming buildings, which are elegantly filmed in black and white.
Our hero is investigating the mysterious death of a friend and discovers that the dead man left behind some serious political enemies as well as a beautiful lover.
The hero is clearly enamored of this woman, but nothing happens between them.
At the end, one question remains: Why don't they ever notice that tinkling, gypsy-sounding music in the background?
Is this "Kafka," Steven Soderbergh's mordant new film based on the writer's obsession with sinister bureaucracy and personal alienation?
Or is it "The Third Man," Carol Reed's classic 1949 suspense movie, starring Joseph Cotten and Orson Welles?
It is, of course, both.
And just as Huck Finn once said, "You don't know me without you have read a book called 'The Adventures of Tom Sawyer,' " so Jeremy Irons as Kafka might say, "You don't know me without you have seen a movie called 'The Third Man.' "


Making a Difference; 100 Cents on the Dollar
Last spring, upon learning that he would be in charge of rehabilitating the troubled Executive Life Insurance Company of New York, Kevin E. Foley was immediately apprehensive.
For one thing, the office Mr.
Foley runs, the New York State Insurance Department's Liquidation Bureau, had never attempted to rehabilitate a life company, only property-and-casualty insurers.
Moreover, when compared with other insurers that had failed, Executive Life was huge; its 118,000 customers reside in 23 states.
"We all felt a tremendous sense of responsibility," Mr.
Foley said in a telephone interview.
Last week, however, the 41-year-old Mr.
Foley announced the details of a plan that should pay every one of Executive Life's customers 100 cents on the dollar.
Holders of deferred annuities and life insurance would turn in their policies in exchange for new policies from the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.


Judith Parker Weds
Judith Joanne Parker, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Royal Parker of Gahanna, Ohio, was married yesterday to Daniel Karl Zenowich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Zenowich of Bantam, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles Amstein performed the ceremony at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Zenowich, 37 years old, is a first vice president of finance at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Grove City College.
Mr.
Zenowich, 36, is a freelance journalist and advertising copywriter in New York.
He graduated from Wesleyan University.


Bridge
Any bridge player would gain substantially if it were possible to look through the backs of the cards or read the mind of one of the other players at the table.
Does that happen?
Probably not, although there are times when something close to extrasensory perception seems to occur without any dishonesty.
More than 40 years ago, John Crawford suspected telepathy when playing against twin brothers in England.
His opponents were Robert and James Sharples, one of the best British pairs of the period.
Robert Sharples made a remarkable lead that was highly successful, and Crawford was not pleased, although he later conceded that the lead was entirely logical.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Chappaqua, N.Y. 400,000
25 Hardscrabble Hill  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, dining room; taxes $6,925.
Katonah, N.Y. 400,000
29 Quicks Lane  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 63-year-old Tudor; sunken living and family rooms, stone fireplace, beamed ceiling, breakfast room; taxes $6,373.
Mamaroneck, N.Y. 310,000
624 Forest Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 53-year-old colonial; fireplace, new kitchen, breezeway, playroom; taxes $6,813.
Cos Cob, Conn. 275,000
9 Kent Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 70-year-old colonial; wraparound porch, walk-up attic; taxes $1,868.
New Canaan, Conn. 950,000
152 Lambert Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; greenhouse, pool, 2 acres; taxes $8,706.
Wilton, Conn. 525,000
86 East Meadow  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 52-year-old Cape Cod; stone facade, double-sized lot, 2.3 acres; taxes $5, 194.
OTHER AREAS Nesconset, L.I. 231,250
12 Bonarck Lane  5-bedroom, 3-bath, year-old colonial; den w/fireplace, basement, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $6,400.
Nissequogue, L.I. 340,000
158 Long Beach Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old Tudor; den, office, fireplace, beach and mooring rights; taxes $6,400.
Warren, N.J. 432,000
128 Old Stirling Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; master suite w/den, full basement; taxes $6,500.


Unblocking Bathtubs and Toilets
CALLING a plumber to clear a clogged toilet or other drain in an emergency can be a nuisance, but most homeowners and apartment dwellers can usually repair such problems themselves.
To clear a blocked toilet, use a flange-type plumber's plunger.
Its cup has a projecting sleeve that fits snugly into the opening at the bottom of the bowl.
Never use chemical cleaners.
They can cause injury if splashed onto the skin.


Of Voodoo And Animal Sacrifice
Re: "Fighting the Stereotypes of Voodoo," New Jersey Q &amp; A (Jan. 12):
It is disturbing to learn that an individual "enthralled" by voodoo animal sacrifice ceremonies is using Drew University as a bully pulpit to promote what is to most a cruel, bloody and barbaric ritual.


Indignant Indians Seeking Changes
When Washington Redskins' fans crowd the Metrodome here on Sunday, many of the most zealous will be wearing war paint or feathers.
Outside the Super Bowl stadium, real Indians, just as zealous but in ordinary dress, will be marching in protest.
What they want is to get the Redskins and every other sports team with an Indian-related name to find some other identity and thus to put an end to stereotypes that have haunted Indians for generations.
It is part of a cultural reawakening sweeping reservations and Indian community centers, a kind of nationalism that has made many Indians less forgiving of the routine use of their names and symbols for things like automobiles and sports teams.


Miss Halpern, Law Student, to Wed
Dr.
Peter Halpern of Villanova, Pa., and Sylvia Morrison of Rockville, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Carolyn Halpern to Fabrice Braunrot, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bruno Braunrot of Atlanta, Ga.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Halpern, 26 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She attends law school at New York University.
Her father is an international management consultant in Villanova.
Her mother is an economist at the Library of Congress.


Kristine Zabriskie to Marry in June
Dr.
John L. Zabriskie of Bernardsville, N.J., and Madelaine DeMelle of Gillette, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kristine Busch Zabriskie, to Robert L. Constable, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Constable of Montclair, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Zabriskie, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from Colby College and is a senior publicist for the Crown Publishing Group in New York.
Her father is a senior vice president of Merck &amp; Company, the pharmaceuticals company, in Rahway, N.J.
Her stepfather, Arthur DeMelle, is the senior vice president of finance at Chep-U.S.A., a pallet manufacturer in Park Ridge, N.J.
Her stepmother, Adelaide Zabriskie, is a securities analyst for Lloyd, Leith &amp; Sawin, an investment management group in Philadelphia.


Recognizing Some Of Psychiatry's Errors
Dr.
Marc Waldman, a resident in psychiatric training, claims that psychiatry is as much a science as any medical specialty  [ Jan. 5 ] , but his letter criticizing Grace Ann Inyard's earlier comments  [ Dec. 8 ]  demonstrates that sometimes it is not.
Science demands recognition and correction of past errors.
Ms.
Inyard emphasized how lobotomies, so perceptively described in "Lingering Effects of Lobotomies of 40's and 50's"  [ Nov. 3 ]  were among psychiatry's worst errors.
Dr.
Waldman responded by erroneously equating intent with effect and then denying harmful psychiatric intent, thus ignoring the harm which psychiatrists had in fact inflicted.


Q and A
Walking in Provence
Q.
Do you have information regarding a walking tour of Provence, either on my own or as part of an organized tour? -- Nidia Besso, New York, N.Y.


Cathy Hahn Marries
Cathy Joy Hahn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Hahn of Old Westbury, L.I., was married in Lawrence, L.I., last evening to Steven David Tabak, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Tabak of Highland Park, N.J.
Rabbi Yakov Hilsenrath performed the ceremony at Temple Israel.
Mrs.
Tabak, 30 years old, graduated from the New York School of Interior Design.
Mr.
Tabak, 31, is a manager of Beehive Beverage, a distributor in Long Island City, Queens.
He graduated from Syracuse University.


The 1992 Campaign: Democrats; Candidates Court Jackson Supporters
Six Democratic Presidential candidates met with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's National Rainbow Coalition today, hoping to tap the grass-roots support that fueled Mr.
Jackson's own 1988 bid for the nomination.
But if any hoped to capture the whole rainbow, he was disappointed, as support was fragmented.
All the candidates had a similar message but spent considerable time trying to demonstrate their differences, and that led to some prickly responses.


Under Cover


Alicia Markey To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Markey of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alicia Louise Markey, to Robert Philipp Hutter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Heinz Hutter of Minneapolis.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Markey, 24 years old, graduated from Sweet Briar College.
Her father is a vice president in the Stamford, Conn., office of Smith Barney, Harris Upham.


How the Japanese Learned to Drink Bourbon
To the Editor:
President Bush's recent trip to Japan is symptomatic of what is wrong with our society.
To take 18 overpaid executives from corporations that are losing billions of dollars is ludicrous as well as insensitive.
I would like to put forward the modest suggestion that next time Mr.
Bush take every top executive in the country who speaks Japanese and who can provide research and a business plan showing how his product or service could be successful in Japan.


Changing Some Habits Can Help Clivias
ALTHOUGH they may be rather dull looking now, clivias are sure to bloom in a few months, if all goes well, and then their owners will be rewarded.
The house plant is one of the finest known, but it demands patience.
Unlike African violets, which bloom almost continuously even in the darker winter months, clivia has one dramatic moment of glory with a magnificent display of amaryllislike clusters of flowers.
The flowers have a bright orange-red hue that is glorious to see, and the best part is that the flowers last two to three weeks or more.


For Health: Healthy Competition
Bill Clinton has a five-point plan to reform health care.
Jerry Brown's plan has four, Tom Harkin's eight.
A lot of points but, on inspection, little substance.
For these candidates, health care reform comes out sounding like politics as usual: Promise anything, but hide the costs.
Two other Democratic candidates are not playing it so safe.
Bob Kerrey and Paul Tsongas have proposed thoughtful, detailed reforms.
Senator Kerrey backs a form of national health insurance under which Government pays the bills and controls costs by setting fees for physicians and hospital reimbursement.


The Price of a Good Night's Sleep
THE night before her mother's 83d birthday, Ilo Grundberg of Hurricane, Utah, shot her mother eight times and then placed a birthday card in her hand.
Claiming that Halcion, the world's most popular sleeping pill, made her do it, the 57-year-old Mrs.
Grundberg not only escaped prosecution but went on to win an out-of-court settlement against Upjohn, the drug's maker.
As is common in such matters, the amount of the settlement was not disclosed and Upjohn denied that Halcion was to blame.
But the company was less successful in suppressing previously undisclosed data about the drug's side effects, which the company was required to turn over to Mrs.
Grundberg's lawyers as part of the discovery process.


FOCUS: Georgia; Loft-Living Southern Style, Catching On
Thanks to an abundance of old warehouses and the arrival of new residents who have experience with loft living, Georgia has become home to a growing number of loft conversions.
"This is sort of a Southern-fried SoHo," said Bruce Gallman, one of the original developers of this city's Castleberry Hill, which has the state's largest concentration of loft apartments.


Review/Opera; Gwyneth Jones as the Met's Turandot
Much maligned for its ostentation, Franco Zeffirelli's five-year-old production of "Turandot" may actually have dressed Puccini's last opera in the clothes that fit it.
This gaudy, gleaming "Turandot" returned to the Metropolitan Opera on Thursday night.
To say that it got what it deserved may be taken as equal parts of malice and good will.
The story of a homicidal ice princess and her suitor from the ranks depicts an ancient China that only a provincial Italian might have dreamed up.
For Puccini, international success that he was, still viewed the world from within the medieval walls and encircling mulberry trees of his native Lucca.
It was the kind of small-town sophistication that at the end of "Manon Lescaut" could establish -- without tedious recourse to a world atlas -- a desert in the midst of Louisiana's swamps.


Bracha Goldsmith to Wed in August
Rabbi and Mrs.
Sheldon D. Goldsmith of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Bracha Goldsmith to Jonathan Paul Stefansky, the son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Bernard Stefansky of Medford, Mass.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Goldsmith, 20 years old, is a student at Yeshiva University in a joint bachelor's and master's degree program in Jewish studies.
Her father is the director of chaplaincy services at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.
Her mother, Zelda Goldsmith, is the administrative associate to the president of Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion in New York.


3 Long Shots Finish 1, 2, 3
The three highest-priced horses on the odds board finished first, second and third this afternoon as the 39-1 shot My Luck Runs North won the $91,680 Hutcheson Stakes, the first of Gulfstream Park's three top races for 3-year-olds.
Less than five weeks out of the claiming races, My Luck Runs North, purchased in 1991 for $5,200, took the $55,008 first place purse by three lengths over Sneaky Solicitor, who was a nose in front of a 154-1 shot, Frosted Spy.


MacPhail Isn't Fazed by the Championship Hype
The last time a championship game was played at the Metrodome in Minneapolis, Andy MacPhail was sitting in the stands with a vested interest.
He became especially ecstatic when Dan Gladden stepped on the plate with the only run in the 10-inning Game 7 of the World Series.
MacPhail, general manager of the Minnesota Twins, plans to be at the Metrodome today, but only as a curious observer.


Daniel Kanter to Wed Ms. Rubens
Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Rubens of Rochester have announced the engagement of their daughter Suzanne Dale Rubens to Daniel Kanter, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alan Kanter of Chicago.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Rubens, 25 years old, is an associate in the Chicago law firm of Mayer, Brown &amp; Platt.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received a law degree from Northwestern University.
Her father owns Monroe Securities, a brokerage in Rochester.


'Death Is Nothing, Once It Has Arrived'
JOURNEYS IN DREAM AND IMAGINATION
By Artur Lundkvist.
Translated by Ann B. Weissmann and Annika Planck.
Introduction by Carlos Fuentes. 129 pp.
New York: Four Walls Eight Windows. $17.95.


POSTINGS: New York City Growth Symposium; Planning the Use of Land
You won't be able to attend -- it's already playing to a sellout crowd.
But it's worth noting, in part because the issue is so important, and in part because you can catch it on television some weeks hence.
On Thursday, from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., 16 lawyers, city planners, architects and academics, among them such notables as Peter Salins, an urban affairs professor; Michael Kwartler, an architect, and R. Susan Motley, a former City Planning Commission member, will gather at the New York University School of Law to present -- and debate -- papers about land-use plans and rules for New York City.


Knicks Go to Ewing and Bench And Manage to Get the Job Done
Patrick Ewing was his old dominant self, with 35 points and a season-high 21 rebounds.
The Knicks' defense was solid, holding the Warriors 10 points under their league-leading average.
And for a second consecutive game, Anthony Mason was a big contributor off the New York bench.
All of this added up to a 114-109 victory for the Knicks on Friday night over Golden State, the hottest team in the Western Conference.


Business Diary/January 19-24
COMPANIES Prudential Puts a Stop to Laurence Tisch's Miracle on 34th Street


Cuomo's Budget; Plenty of Pain To Go Around
IN proposing his $30 billion budget for the coming fiscal year, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said last week that he had designed a financial plan with dual purposes: to preserve his vision of an activist and compassionate New York State government and to generate a quick agreement with the Legislature.
Quick budget agreements have been as rare here as balmy Januarys in recent years.
The state has missed its April 1 budget deadline -- the start of the fiscal year -- for seven consecutive years and has set new records for tardiness in each of the last two.
But there may be some reason for hope this year.
Legislators are eager to get out of Albany as early as possible to begin campaigning for re-election.
Neither the Republican-led Senate nor the Democratic-majority Assembly wants to face the voters after another budget delay.
Dangling Carrots
Mr.
Cuomo used his budget proposal to dangle a few carrots before the Senate Republicans, including an offer to produce more than $1.1 billion in savings from the Medicaid and welfare programs, which holds great election-year appeal.


Queens Man Robbed and Killed Aboard Subway
Minutes before he died on Friday night, a Transit Authority bus dispatcher whispered to paramedics, "I gave them the money and they shot me anyway."
The dispatcher, Arthur Young, 40 years old, was shot as he rode to work aboard a subway train bound for Manhattan from Queens.
He became the first homicide victim in the city's subway system this year.


Funeral Services for Slain Cambodian Official


Michael Kestan and Nancy Schreiber to Marry
Joel S. Schreiber and Susan Schreiber, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nancy Pam Schreiber, to Michael David Kestan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hymie G. Kestan of Johannesburg, South Africa.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Schreiber, 24 years old, graduated from Emerson College and is a graduate student in public administration at New York University.
Mr.
Kestan, 28, graduated from the University of Witwatersrand and received a law degree from Seton Hall University.
He is an associate at the New York law firm of Cyperstein &amp; Gerstner.


Beverly Kupiec To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Emil S. Kupiec of Lawrenceville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Beverly Ann Kupiec to John Mark Scagnelli, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Scagnelli of Morris Plains, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kupiec is a nurse consultant in Trenton for the New Jersey State Department of Health.
She graduated from Trenton State College and received master's degrees in health administration from Rider College and in nursing from the University of Pennsylvania.


Buying a Home: Who Works for Whom?
WHILE speaking of the rigors of house hunting, a young woman, whose husband was recently transferred from Dallas to the Westchester home office of his company, said:
"The agent who took me around was terrific. She was so helpful in trying to find us what we wanted and what we could afford. I honestly felt she had our best interests at heart."


Gibsonton Journal; Carny Performers Build a Haven by Tampa Bay
"The World's Only Living Half Girl" was working in a circus sideshow with her soon-to-be-husband, an 8-foot-4 1/2-inch giant, when she first came here in 1936.
The moment Jeanie Tomaini set eyes on what was then a small and isolated fishing settlement, she knew that she had found her home.
"When you work seven months a year in front of the public, you need a little rest and quiet," said Mrs.
Tomaini, who was born without legs and toured for many years with her husband, Al, as part of the "World's Fair Freaks" troupe.
"It was peaceful, and there was good fishing here, so one by one, the word of mouth got out and a lot of us drifted down here in winter and built houses."


A Showy Staging of 'Three Sisters'
IT'S easy to be taken in by Emily Mann's tactile and showy staging of Chekhov's "Three Sisters" at the McCarter Theater.
The look of it brings to the senses the "ambrosial air" of which Thoreau wrote.
Behold the startling contrasts between the white expanse of wheat fields in the first scene and the burnt orange sunset blazing through an oval window in the third.
And listen to the lucid translation by Lanford Wilson, commissioned in 1984 by the Hartford Stage Company.
Like the divergent backdrops (by Michael Yeargan) and the subtle shifts in lighting (by Pat Collins), the language crystallizes the coexistence of the humor and the sadness in Chekhov's words.


Housing for 10,000 Is Urged for New York City Homeless
Accusing New York City of failing to address how budget cuts are affecting the growing problem of homelessness, an advocacy group yesterday proposed housing 10,000 homeless people in new or reconstructed buildings over the next two years.
Peter Smith, the head of the nonprofit Partnership for the Homeless, called on the city to immediately begin an "aggressive purchase of single room occupancy units now available at bargain basement prices" and to follow that with the construction of new permanent units.


Much Talk, Little Action; A Plan for Getting the New Countries Through Winter
PARTLY because nobody knows what shape the republics of the former Soviet Union will be in six months or a year from now, it has been hard to decide just how much assistance, and of what sort, the United States and its partners should offer them.
Last week some halting steps were taken in Washington, but they offered only a tantalizing hint of what the future may hold.
At a conference, 47 nations decided to speed up and coordinate emergency aid designed to help the republics through this winter, and they put forward five "action plans" to enlarge the transfer of food and medicine, as well as assistance in providing shelter and in energy and technical matters.
The Bush Administration also announced it would airlift 54 shipments of food and medical supplies beginning Feb. 10 -- including some 16 million packaged meals left over from the Persian Gulf war.


Well-Dressed Animals Keeping Sales High
SALES of clothing for men and women at the tonier stores may have fizzled this last holiday season, but at the K-Marts, Woolworths and Jamesway stores, sales of sporty sweaters and nappy raincoats for four-legged customers did especially well.
"Even when times are bad, people somehow keep buying for their children and their pets," said Robert Kastner, a manufacturer of dog sweaters, dog T-shirts and dog and cat beds.
"People with pets, especially, find it emotionally satisfying to buy them something for the holidays."


Lisa M. Greenburg to Wed in August
Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Greenburg of Clifton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lisa Mae Greenburg, to Dana Ross Clyman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard Clyman of Boynton Beach, Fla.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Greenburg, 32 years old, is the clinical coordinator of residential services at the Walker School in Needham, Mass.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received a master's degree in social work from Boston University.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm of Klein Chapman in Clifton.


Going to School On Delta Queen
A chance to learn about the South from a team of experts during a cruise on the Mississippi aboard the Delta Queen steamboat is being offered by the University of Mississippi.
The school's Center for the Study of Southern Culture has scheduled its second annual Mississippi Voyage between Memphis and New Orleans from April 9 to 17.
On the trip passengers will study the South and discuss its history and nuances with experts in the fields of literature and music.
Among the speakers will be: the writers Alex Haley, William Styron and Eli Evans and the musicians Billy Taylor and Mose Allison.


BUSH BUDGET SEEKS AID FOR CHILDREN AND END OF A TAX
Sprinkling largess among diverse constituencies at the start of an election year, President Bush wants to repeal the luxury tax on yachts and will propose a substantial increase in the Federal budget for feeding and vaccinating poor children.
Confidential galley proofs of the budget, to be sent to Congress on Wednesday, show that Mr.
Bush will also propose a doubling of Federal spending to control tuberculosis, as well as a public housing initiative to let tenants oust bad managers.


Beauty and the Broadcast
Is it permissible in this era of exquisite sensitivity for a reviewer to mention that the women featured on television magazine programs are good-looking?
Anyone who watched the recent celebration of the 40th anniversary of NBC's "Today" show must have been struck by the contrast between Jane Pauley, Katie Couric and Faith Daniels on one team and Gene Shalit, Joe Garagiola and Willard Scott on the other.
It was the cuties confronting the clowns.
Yes, I have omitted Bryant Gumbel, the program's head man, who is as handsome as they come.
He is the exception in the morning, and he presents a similar problem for a reviewer: if noticing that the women are generally better-looking than the men opens one to charges of sexism, drawing attention to Mr.
Gumbel's looks might be interpreted as racism.
One could be suspected of saying that just as the women owe their jobs at least in part to their shapes and complexions, so the one black morning anchor owes something to features that are pleasing to white folks.


World Markets; A Long Ride on Tokyo's Turmoil
The dismal performance of the Tokyo stock market -- especially while the rest of the world has rallied -- has been a pesky irritant to those money managers who have been positive on Japan.
It has not been fashionable to be, as it is often put in the industry, "constructive" on Japan, but there are those who are.
"I think about it every day," said Richard H. King, the manager of the Counsellors International Equity mutual fund, which is managed by Warburg, Pincus Counsellors Inc. in New York.
"I look every day and wonder if the policy is right. I read conflicting views and wonder if the policy is right."


Martin L. Scheiner Is Dead at 69; Invented Devices Used in Medicine
Martin L. Scheiner, an inventor of electronic medical devices, entrepreneur and supporter of social causes, died on Tuesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 69 years old and lived in Pleasantville, N.Y.
He died of leukemia, his family said.


Social Events
Aid for Learning
Jan. 30 -- The National Center for Learning Disabilities, which provides educational programs and promotes legislation to help children with learning disabilities, is holding its annual fund-raising event at the Marriott Marquis hotel.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. and dinner at 7:30 precede dancing, a raffle and an auction of large heart-shaped boxes made by a score of celebrities, including Robert Rauschenberg and Whoopi Goldberg.
Tickets, $375, or $100 for those under age 35, from (212) 687-7211.
New Year's Party
Jan. 30 -- A 10-course Chinese banquet at the Silver Palace Restaurant, 50 Bowery, south of Canal Street, will ring in the Chinese New Year 4690 on behalf of the Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund.
The annual Lunar New Year Banquet starts with cocktails at 6 P.M., dinner at 7:30.
Tickets, $75 for members of the fund, $125 for nonmembers, from (212) 966-5932.
Benefit for Lenox Hill
Jan. 30 -- To raise funds for improvements in emergency treatment areas of Lenox Hospital, the hospital auxiliary will hold a theater benefit starting with a 5:30 P.M. dinner at the Tower Suite in the Time and Life Building, Avenue of the Americas at 50th Street.
Guests will then cross the street for an 8 P.M. show with Liza Minnelli at Radio City Music Hall.
Tickets, $60 for dinner, $175 or $250 for performance only, from (212) 439-2544.
Church Auction
Jan. 30 -- The Unitarian Church of All Souls is holding an auction to benefit its programs for children and for people who are homeless or have AIDS.
Jewelry, cruises, stays in European hotels, opera tickets and hair styling, among other items, will be sold to the highest bidders at the law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling, Lexington Avenue and 53d Street, at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 535-5530.
Revolutionary Hero Award
Jan 30 -- The Thomas Paine National Historical Association, which maintains the home of Paine, the great American Revolutionary thinker, and a museum in New Rochelle, N.Y., will benefit from a reception and dinner honoring Robert MacNeil.
Mr.
MacNeil will be presented with the annual Thomas Paine Award, a bronze medal recognizing commitment to free speech.
The event will take place at Iona College on North Street in New Rochelle.
Tickets, $25 for reception and award presentation starting at 6:30 P.M.; $10 for students; $150 to include an 8:15 P.M. dinner; all from (914) 632-5376.
Sloan-Kettering Benefit
Jan. 31 -- The first preview performance of the Gershwin musical "Crazy for You" at the Shubert Theater will benefit the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
The evening starts with 5:30 P.M. cocktails, followed by dinner at the "21" Club and the show at 8.
Tickets, $500, or, for the performance alone, $175, from (212) 355-6110.
Show for Franklin Furnace
Jan. 31 -- Eric Bogosian will present some old and new monologues at a benefit for the Franklin Furnace, the experimental arts center.
The 8 P.M. performance in the Great Hall at Cooper Union, 7 East Seventh Street, will be followed by a reception with Mr.
Bogosian.
Tickets, $100, or $20 for the performance alone, from (212) 925-4671.
Opera Ball for Cancer Center
Jan. 31 -- The 37th annual Viennese Opera Ball will be held at the Waldorf-Astoria starting with cocktails at 8 P.M.
The white-tie benefit for the Margit Boker-Norman Scott Memorial Fund, named after opera singers who died of cancer, helps support the Comprehensive Cancer Center at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 819-0158.
Evening for Rye Arts Center
Feb. 1 -- "The Stardust Ball," a black-tie dinner, dance and auction to benefit the Rye (N.Y.) Arts Center, will be held at the Rye Town Hilton on Westchester Avenue.
Cocktails at 7:45 P.M.
Tickets, $130, from (914) 967-0700.
Actors Try Bowling
Feb. 2 -- Some 40 actors and actresses from six soap-opera serials will compete in the fifth annual Soap Opera Bowl-a-Thon, a tournament to benefit the Manhattan Class Company, a theater company.
From noon to 3 P.M., guests may watch or bowl with the actors at the Leisure Time Bowling Recreation Center on the second floor of the Port Authority Bus Terminal, Eighth Avenue at 42d Street.
Tickets, $25 to watch, $65 to bowl, from (212) 727-7722.
Cocktails in a New Store
Feb. 2 -- A 6 P.M. cocktail party in the Ann Taylor store that is soon to open at 87th Street and Broadway will benefit the Children's Hope Foundation, which helps children with AIDS or HIV.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 243-1910.
In Russian and English
Feb. 2 -- A theater performance benefiting the Tel Aviv Foundation, which helps Russian artists settling in the Tel Aviv area, will be held at the Brooklyn Academy of Music at 7 P.M.
"Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead," an adaptation of the Tom Stoppard play by Joseph Brodsky, the poet laureate of the United States, will be performed in Russian by a Soviet emigre troupe, the Gesher Theater Company, with simultaneous translation into English.
A reception honoring Mayor Shlomo Lahat of Tel Aviv follows the performance.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 447-6070.


UConn Marks 100 Years of Women
A CENTURY ago the president of Storrs Agricultural School, Benjamin Koons, felt so strongly about enrolling a student named I. Lee that he skirted the law and kept the admission secret from the school's trustees.
The student's first name was Ida, but state law prohibited women students at the school.
Mr.
Koons did not accept fees from Miss Lee and could not give her academic credit, but she got her education.
Ida Lee Hale's obituary cited her as the first woman enrolled at the school that grew into the University of Connecticut.
Researchers have found five other women who were also enrolled surreptitiously at the school during the 1891-92 academic year.
The law was changed to allow women to enroll in 1892-93, and Ida Lee was officially accepted as a second-year student.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE FAMILY READ-ALOUD HOLIDAY TREASURY.
Selected by Alice Low.
Illustrated by Marc Brown.
Joy Street/Little, Brown. $19.95. (All ages) A calendar of celebration -- birthdays and holidays from the beginning of one year to the next.
Poems, stories, excerpts from novels, bubbly illustrations.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Freehold Borough
A "HOLE in the doughnut" municipality, the historic Borough of Freehold, is surrounded by the township of the same name.
Settled in the late 17th century by Scots, it was a center for Monmouth County as early as 1715, when the first courthouse was built at what is now the intersection of Main and Court Streets.
A stone's throw away, at Court and Monument Streets, is the Monmouth Battle Memorial, a granite obelisk commemorating the Revolutionary War battle fought in June 1788 in neighboring Freehold Township and nearby Manalapan.


The 1992 Campaign; Clinton Deflects Questions on Personal Life
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas made campaign appearances before Democratic groups in Washington and Boston today and continued to deflect questions about his personal life.
Asked in Washington whether assertions in the tabloid newspaper Star that he had a 12-year romantic affair would hurt his campaign, Mr.
Clinton responded, "No real voters talk about it."


Political Memo; Sharpton Bidding to Draw Votes as Well as News
In the days since the Rev.
Al Sharpton announced that he was going to "throw his hair into the ring" and enter the Democratic primary for the United States Senate, the reaction -- as always seems to be the case with Mr.
Sharpton -- has been divided.
From the camps of the four previously declared candidates -- all longtime Democratic standard-bearers, none of whom is black -- the public response has not risen above the shrug level.
"As a practical matter, we don't see Sharpton's entering the race as making a difference one way or the other," said John E. Burke, the campaign manager for state Attorney General Robert Abrams, in a typical comment.
"He is a person who is adept at attracting publicity to himself and will do everything to do that, but we don't think he will attract that many votes."


Commercial Property: Retail Space; For Retailers, It's Space-Sale Season Hard-Put Landlords
FILA SPORTS, the high-priced Italian sports clothes company, just opened its first New York boutique, at 831 Madison Avenue near 69th Street, in the heart of designer row.
"We've always wanted to be associated with the likes of Ralph Lauren and Armani, but it took until now to find exactly the space we want," said Christine A. Massetani, advertising and promotions director at the company's American headquarters in Brisbane, Calif.


Chess
A compressed schedule that lets layers save on hotel and meal expenses has become an option available recently in some Swiss-system tournaments.
Here is how it went in the Second Annual North American Open at Bally's Casino Resort in Las Vegas, Nev.:
The normal schedule, Jan. 3-5, called for six games played at the rate of two a day with the usual time control of 40 moves in two hours.
But players in a hurry could start on Jan. 4 and play their first three games at a time limit of all moves in one hour per player.
They would then play their fourth game of the day at the usual time control.


A Game Plan for Investors
Having trouble figuring out where the stock market is headed?
Relax.
Don't call your broker.
Forget about Alan Greenspan.
Just sit back and enjoy this evening's Super Bowl, and watch the financial future magically unfold.
If the Washington Redskins win, the market is likely to rise.
If the Buffalo Bills win, the market is likely to fall.
That's what the Super Bowl stock market theory says.
And it's usually right.


Making a Difference; Fighting Back at Lotus
John Landry has been running hard since joining the Lotus Development Corporation late last year.
The software company had been going through a tough time.
The introduction of its long-awaited 1-2-3 spreadsheet package for the popular Windows program had met with mixed reviews and disappointing sales.
And some key executives had left, including Frank King, its highly respected technology chief.


'Is This Guy Nuts?'
To the Editor:
Reconciliation and reorienting do no good to those who survive a layoff ("Help for the Post-Layoff 'Survivors,' " Forum, Jan. 5) if management is as fog-bound as it was before the heads began to roll.


The Royal Sculpture of Benin: Beyond African Folk Art
The profound impact African art had on Picasso and other artists at the turn of the century appealed to modern-art collectors 30 years later.
Among the earliest of these buyers was Klaus G. Perls, a Berlin-born art dealer who came to New York in 1935, opened his gallery two years later and then began acquiring African art because, he said, "I liked to see it with the works of the Picasso generation of artists."
By the mid-1950's, Mr.
Perls and his wife, Amelia, had narrowed their search to metal, wood and ivory objects produced from the 16th to the 19th centuries in the kingdom of Benin, now Southern Nigeria.
Until last winter, these courtly works, depicting medieval-looking warriors, kings, Portuguese merchants, leopards and crocodiles, crowded a room above the Perls Gallery, which is in the couple's Madison Avenue town house.
They were then donated to the Metropolitan Museum of Art where they went on view this month in an exhibition, "Royal Art of Benin From the Perls Collection: Treasures From an African Kingdom," remaining through Sept. 13.


Changing Some Habits Can Help Clivias
ALTHOUGH they may be rather dull looking now, clivias are sure to bloom in a few months, if all goes well, and then their owners will be rewarded.
The house plant is one of the finest known, but it demands patience.
Unlike African violets, which bloom almost continuously even in the darker winter months, clivia has one dramatic moment of glory with a magnificent display of amaryllislike clusters of flowers.
The flowers have a bright orange-red hue that is glorious to see, and the best part is that the flowers last two to three weeks or more.


With Tyson's Arrival, A Day of Departures
It looks like a driver's license number: 49G049109CF116245.
But in actuality it is the official designation of what, with very little hyperbole, a local television news anchor described Friday night as "one of the most anticipated rape trials ever."
It is the case of the State of Indiana versus Michael G. Tyson, the former heavyweight champion.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Consumer confidence index
52.4
55.0
Wednesday
Gross domestic product, in percent
1.8
0.0
Gross national product, percent change
2.0
0.1
Thursday
Durable goods orders, percent change
1.2
0.0
Personal consumption, percent change
0.7
0.1
Personal income, percent change
-0.1
0.5
Friday
Leading indicators, percent change
-0.3
0.0
New home sales, percent change
flat
0.1
Chicago purchasing survey, in percent
46.0
45.8
Tuesday: President Bush's State of the Union address.
Thursday: Import and export prices.
Friday: Agricultural prices.  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Recitals Offer Songs And Period Instruments
THIS afternoon at 3 the soprano Ruth Golden and the pianist Levering Rothfuss are performing songs by Peter Warlock, Roger Quilter and Frederick Delius in a free program at the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven. (For information call 432-2800.) At 4 P.M.
Thomas Crawford leads a period instrument ensemble from within the Fairfield Orchestra in works of Bach, Beethoven, Franz Josef Haydn and his brother Michael Haydn (972-7400).
On Tuesday evening at 8 the violinist Anne Akiko Meyers will playing Sonatas of Handel, Strauss, Janacek and Ravel with the pianist Rohan de Silva at Jorgensen Auditorium in Storrs (486-4226).
Also at 8 on Tuesday a Philharmonia Hungarica, under guest conductor Yehudi Menuhin, will play Franz Josef Haydn's Symphony No. 83 ("The Hen"), Dvorak's Eighth Symphony and Mozart's Two-Piano Concerto, with Ralph Markham and Kenneth Broadway as soloists, at Woolsey Hall in New Haven(486-4226).
The Philharmonia arrives at the Jorgensen on Thursday at 8 P.M. with a different Haydn Symphony, No. 103, the so-called "Drum Roll," Bartok's Concerto for Orchestra and a repeat of the Mozart Two-Piano Concerto.


Sports of The Times; Super Bowl's Northern Exposure
BEFORE I tell you who is going to win the Super Bowl today, let me first tell you who came out a winner this last week:
Any northern city not named Detroit with a domed stadium has a very good chance of playing host to a Super Bowl of its very own somewhere around the turn of the century.


Judith Schuler To Wed in June
Prof. and Mrs.
Richard E. Schuler of Ithaca, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Judith Mary Schuler to Joseph Harold Miller 3d, a son of Joseph H. and Barbara A. Miller of New Caanan, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Schuler, 24 years old, is a consultant at Stone &amp; Webster Management Consultants in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University, as did her fiance, who also received an M.B.A. there.
Her father is a professor of economics and civil engineering at Cornell University.


Of Mud and Deals and Warmth and Wet
THERE are driving schools, and then there are driving schools.
I've been to a lot of them.
There was racing school in Canada.
Ice school in Steamboat Springs, Colo.
BMW's advanced driving school at Lime Rock, Conn.
And that truly wonderful school, taught by Sandy Stevens up in Vermont, the one that shows state cops how to pursue high-speed miscreants.
But now there is a new possibility for those of us who think that being behind the wheel means more than just getting to work.


Sports of The Times; When Mantle Had to Battle for a Raise
WHILE the nation's economy dwindles, baseball's economy still soars upward.
For hitting 18 homers, driving in 66 runs and batting .259 for the Chicago White Sox last season, Dan Pasqua, once a Yankee outfielder, recently signed a three-year, $6 million contract.
And in the first season of his three-year, $6 million contract, Franklin Stubbs of the Milwaukee Brewers batted .213, hit 11 homers and drove in 38 runs.


Producers As Drama Coaches
To the Editor:
A footnote to Walter Goodman's essay "For $64,000: Who Lost in the Big Fix?"  [ Jan. 5 ]  about the "American Experience" documentary on the quiz-show scandals of the 1950's.
As a junior representative of the sponsors on a number of quiz shows (i.e., an ad agency employee), I was pretty close to what was going on, although not a participant.


This Week: Mail
Many nurseries are now selling quality native seeds and plants, so choose the ones most suitable for your region.
Some accept mail orders; some do not.
Many design gardens in addition to offering valuable advice to do-it-yourselfers.
Here are a few I like:


Miss Goodman To Wed in June
Eileen and Dr.
Kenneth Goodman of Livingston, N.J. have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Henderson Goodman, to Robert Thompson Gorman, the son of Lynne Gorman of New Vernon, N.J., and the late Paul T. Gorman.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Goodman, 30 years old, graduated from Syracuse University and is a law student at Seton Hall University.
She works as a law clerk at the Livingston, N.J., firm of Morgan, Melhuish, Monaghan, Arvidson, Abrutyn &amp; Lisowski.
Her father is a physician in private practice in East Orange, N.J.


Sunday Menu; Color and Flavor: Fish Marinara and Spinach Noodles
Choose the fish you wish to use with this marinara sauce based on what is available and reasonably priced.
Perch and flounder work as well as snapper, which can be expensive.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 26, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
38
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
2
4
COYOTE WAITS, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The murder of a Navajo tribal policeman involves an ancient artifact.
3
1
TWILIGHT'S CHILD, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) When she becomes owner of the Cutler's Cove hotel, a woman finds herself haunted by heartaches and scandals from the past.
4
10
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
5
1
DAZZLE, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $5.99.) The familial, professional and romantic life of a woman who becomes a celebrity photographer.
6
9
COLD FIRE, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A reporter tracks the course of a good Samaritan.
7
6
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Plume, $15.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
8
5
MURDER AT THE NATIONAL CATHEDRAL, by Margaret Truman. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A professor investigates the death of a priest.
9
1
ETERNITY, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.50.) The experiences of a mail-order bride in 19th-century Maine.
10
3
SLIVER, by Ira Levin. (Bantam, $5.99.) An editor is watched, haunted and menaced by the man who owns her apartment building.
11
13
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $6.99.) The adventures of a couple on a trek across Europe during the ice age.
12
5
THE WITNESS, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $4.99.) A Philadelphia cop finds himself on the hit list of a band of robber-terrorists.
13
1
PHULE'S PARADISE, by Robert Asprin. (Ace, $4.99.) Capt.
Willard Phule is assigned to guard an intergalactic casino from a criminal takeover.
14
1
THE CAT WHO KNEW A CARDINAL, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) To save a friend who is a prime suspect, Jim Qwilleran investigates the murder of a town's most despised man.
15
9
POSSESSION, by A. S. Byatt. (Vintage, $12.) A pair of British academics pursue the relationship between two Victorian poets.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
5
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
2
36
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
3
429
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
4
28
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
5 *
114
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.
6
29
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
7
13
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, touch, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
8
44
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
9 *
12
A LIFE ON THE ROAD, by Charles Kuralt. (Ivy, $5.99.) The memoirs of the television newscaster.
10 *
55
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
24
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
7
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1992. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
3
53
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
72
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
5
17
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Lucy B. Baker, A Banker, Wed
Lucy Barry Baker, a daughter of Francis E. Baker of Avon, Conn., and Patricia Barry Baker of Newburyport, Mass., was married yesterday in New York to Steven Lawrence Patricola, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dominick A. Patricola of Whiting, N.J.
The Rev.
J.
John Keggi performed the ceremony at St.
Bartholemew's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Patricola, 34 years old, is a vice president of the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. from the University of Connecticut.
Her father is the president of Andersen Group Inc., an investment company in Bloomfield, Conn.


Page Alexandra Andes Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles L. Andes of Villanova, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Page Alexandra Andes to Christopher Steven Morocco, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. Morocco of Athens, Ga.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Andes, 26 years old, graduated from Furman University and is an account executive in Atlanta for marketing and promotions at MTV Networks, a cable television company.
Her father is the chairman of the Franklin Institute Science Museum and president of the Technology Council of Greater Philadelphia, and a former chairman and chief executive of the Franklin Mint in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Dorothea Andes, is president of Sanderling Interiors, an interior decorating company in Villanova.


Ball Is Bouncing Funny as Ex-Soviets Make Effort to Regroup
The Commonwealth of Independent States soccer team that represented the former Soviet Union in a ballyhooed exhibition match tonight at Joe Robbie Stadium against the United States national team is a product of the commonwealth's first attempt at capitalism.
According to Aleksandr Tukmanov, head of the commonwealth's delegation here, some 30 of the former Soviet team's top players have been sold to top professional teams and, he said, about 100 others are playing abroad.


Sarah Cohen Plans a May Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard G. Cohen of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah Jane Cohen to Dr.
Michael Lawrence Grossbard, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lionel Grossbard of Ridgewood, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cohen, 25 years old, is a cum laude graduate of Harvard University and a doctoral candidate in physical chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts.
Her mother, Evelyn S. Cohen, is a marriage counselor in private practice in New York.


How the Japanese Learned to Drink Bourbon; Corporate Complacency
To the Editor:
The outcome of the recent United States trade mission to Japan and the forceful statements of the American auto industry executives who participated recalls my experiences in the early 1960's at Forbes Inc.


Mount Vernon Law Should Be Changed
As a tax-paying homeowner in the city of Mount Vernon, I go along with the city officials quoted in your article of Jan. 5, "Mount Vernon Challenges Definition of a Family," when they express their eagerness to protect their cities against increased density and other housing evils.
However, as a member of the board of directors of Genesis Housing Corporation, the not-for-profit organization that was denied a building permit for a two-family shared-dwelling unit for seniors, I disagree strongly with their method of attaining their stated goals.
A little history is in order.


Think White (Mostly) for Lying in Sun
If you are one of the lucky few heading for a holiday in a warm corner of the world, you're probably thinking about what to pack.
It's really quite simple.
Unless you're planning to hit the charity ball circuit in some place like Palm Beach, Fla., you're not likely to need anything really dressy.
Besides, the place to go this year is South Miami Beach, which is more funky than fancy.
Anyway, you go to a resort to relax, right? So the watchword is "casual."


The Evolution of Billy Graham
To the Editor:
As a student of American religious history, I found Tom Wicker's review of "A Prophet With Honor" (Dec. 22), William Martin's biography of the Rev.
Billy Graham, altogether unfair.
Mr.
Wicker rehearses Billy Graham's oft-cited sins -- his courting of the powerful, his support of the Vietnam War, his ambivalence toward the civil rights movement, his indifference to the intellectual problems of faith -- and justly faults the evangelist's shortcomings and Mr.
Martin's occasional failure to be more critical of his subject.
But Mr.
Wicker fails to see Mr.
Graham in anything but crudely polemical terms.


Nancy Gillen To Wed in May
May wedding plans for Nancy Louise Gillen and Matthew Colin Difazio, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rudolph Difazio of Royal Oak, Mich., have been announced by the parents of the future bride, James R. Gillen of Morristown, N.J., and Rita W. Gillen of Mendham, N.J.
Miss Gillen, 23 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan.
She does liaison work with publishers for Book Inventory Systems, a wholesale distributor in Ann Arbor, Mich.
Her father is a senior vice president and the general counsel for the Prudential Insurance Company in Newark.


Seeking Laws to Deal With Sleep Disorders
Re: "Center Helps Those for Whom Sleep Is an Enemy" (Dec. 29), about sleep disorders and Newark Beth Israel Hospital's Sleep Disorders Center:
Many Americans are unaware of the prevalence and seriousness of sleep disorders, and many are not even aware that they might have a disorder like sleep apnea.


Longevity Thanks to Skiing and Oatmeal
LIKE sentries, skis flanked the doorway in the small foyer of the Great Neck apartment.
Next to the umbrella stand stood his and hers, waxed shiny and ready to go.
Another skiing season awaits Dr.
A.
J.
Snow and his wife, Aida.
They will soon pack their car and be on their way to Canada.
She will drive.
He doesn't anymore.
At 98 years of age, Dr.
Snow has given up some activities.
Skiing is not one of them.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
HUNGARIAN ENSEMBLE
The Philharmonia Hungarica conducted by Sir Yehudi Menuhin will make a swing through the state this week, performing in New Haven, New London and Storrs.


POSTINGS: Gramercy Park; A Hybrid
The goal was to restore the town house at 145 East 19th Street near Gramercy Park to its authentic appearance.
The question was, which one?
Was it to be Greek Revival, the style in which the house was built in 1843?
Or vaguely Mediterranean, as it was remodeled in 1911 as part of a group of houses known as the "Block Beautiful"?


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the difficulty of obtaining convictions under obscenity laws rendered the name of the executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union incorrectly.
He is Norman Siegel.


World Markets; A Long Ride on Tokyo's Turmoil
The dismal performance of the Tokyo stock market -- especially while the rest of the world has rallied -- has been a pesky irritant to those money managers who have been positive on Japan.
It has not been fashionable to be, as it is often put in the industry, "constructive" on Japan, but there are those who are.
"I think about it every day," said Richard H. King, the manager of the Counsellors International Equity mutual fund, which is managed by Warburg, Pincus Counsellors Inc. in New York.
"I look every day and wonder if the policy is right. I read conflicting views and wonder if the policy is right."


Albelin Knows the Value of Numbers
Tommy Albelin's arithmetic has made him accept his situation with the Devils.
The Swedish defenseman looks around the team's dressing room and counts six solid defensemen before he counts himself.
The 27-year-old Albelin, in his fourth season with the Devils, is the seventh defenseman on a team that may very well have the best first six defensemen in the National Hockey League.


Planes and Trains
To the Editor:
As the president of the Air Transport Association, I would like to respond to your review of "Supertrains: Solutions to America's Transportation Gridlock." It failed to mention that the author, Joseph Vranich, is a consultant to the High Speed Rail Association.
That's an important omission, because the review strongly implies that Mr.
Vranich is on to an exciting new idea.
What he's on to is something he has a vested interest in seeing succeed, and which most people believe will succeed only with government subsidy.
That's what bothers the airlines about this growing bandwagon touting high-speed rail.
Its advocates want the use of public money to build these expensive new systems -- so they can compete with unsubsidized airlines.
High-speed rail, while potentially attractive, should pay its own way.
It should rise on its own merits.
If the concept makes sense economically, the private sector will build it.
ROBERT J. AARONSON Washington


From the Archives of Gordon Parks: Artifice and Reality
THE photographers Irving Penn and Richard Avedon became famous for their shots of fashion and high society before turning their attention to real life.
But for Gordon Parks, artifice and reality have been intertwining themes from the beginning.
While making his first money as a photographer of fashionable women, in the Chicago of the late 1930's, Mr.
Parks was also at work on a project of his own -- life in the Chicago slums.
It was this project, in fact, that got him his first big break -- a Julius Rosenwald Fellowship and the chance to work for the Farm Security Administration under Roy Stryker.


If You Need a Reason, Now's the Time for Meatloaf
RECESSION, nostalgia and winter invariably add up to meatloaf on the menu.
The traditional meatloaf is made with ground beef or a combination of beef, veal and pork.
But today, it might even mean turkey loaf or chicken loaf as the anti-cholesterol squad keeps careful watch over the diet.
Regardless of the basic material, meatloaves are appealing because they are easy to prepare and to eat.
They can be made in advance and reheated or sliced and used in sandwiches.
What is pate but a sophisticated meatloaf?
Like pates, meatloaf mixtures can be wrapped in pastry or used to stuff vegetables.
Meatloaf mixtures can even be formed into small, individual portions.


Discovery Museum Offers Works by a Storyteller With a Brush
AS far as popularity goes, there is no art like folk art.
A genre that contributed to Modernism and was at the same time legitimized by it, folk art now seems to be the embodiment of political correctness.
But as evidenced by the paintings of Malcah Zeldis, at the Discovery Museum in Bridgeport, the mode can still provide pleasure.
Ms.
Zeldis explains that Malcah is Hebrew for queen, and that she substituted it for her given name, Mildred, when she was a teen-ager living on a kibbutz.
She was born, however, in New York City and raised in Detroit, where her father, a Sunday painter, saw to it that she visited the Detroit Institute of Arts.


When an Emergency Arises, Nets Just Call for a Red Alert
To the outside world, they are known as the scrubs, or more politely as the bench or reserves.
For games they dress in the same uniforms as the Nets' starters: Sam Bowie, the center, the forwards Derrick Coleman and Chris Morris, and guards Mookie Blaylock and Drazen Petrovic.


Fear of a New Terrorist Haven
The United States and other Western governments are worried by evidence that international terrorist organizations that once operated from Lebanon and Libya are now using the Sudan as a safe haven.
Page 12.


Aquino Endorses Ex-Army Chief in Vote
President Corazon C. Aquino announced today that she was endorsing the former Defense Secretary Fidel Ramos, a leader of the 1986 uprising that brought Mrs.
Aquino to power, as her choice to succeed her in Philippine elections in May.
The endorsement by Mrs.
Aquino, who is not running for re-election, widened a split among her supporters and appears to increase the chances that the presidential election could be won by a close associate of the late President Ferdinand E. Marcos -- perhaps even his widow, Imelda, who declared her candidacy this month.


POSTINGS: N.Y.U. Purchase; Refashioning
The Fairchild building at 7 East 12th Street in Manhattan, once home to such fashion publications as W, Women's Wear Daily and M. Inc., has been sold to New York University, which intends to use it for administrative offices.
The university paid $5.8 million to Capital Cities/ABC, Inc., for the 12-story building and began moving people in this month.
John O'Connor, an N.Y.U. spokesman, said the purchase will help provide additional space for student and faculty activities in other buildings on the university's Greenwich Village campus.
"It is really in the neighborhood because our campus extends from Washington Square to residence halls in Union Square," Mr.
O'Connor said.


VOLVO MERGER SET IN $6 BILLION DEAL
In what would be one of the biggest mergers in Europe, A.B.
Volvo, the Swedish car and truck giant, and Procordia A.B., a Swedish food and drug company, announced today that their boards had agreed to combine the companies through a $6.6 billion deal.
The agreement calls for Volvo shareholders to receive Procordia shares and would create a company that would be called Volvo and would have 105,000 employees and revenues of about $20 billion.
The deal comes at a time when the European car, food and drug industries are consolidating -- a development driven by trends in Europe as well economic forces throughout the world.


Get Ready for a Less-Than-Super Morning After
LIKE spectral blimps, three big heads haunt the Super Bowl.
When the game is over, we will have Iron Mike, the Owner from Hell and Tark the Shark back in our faces.
Mike Tyson's trial begins tomorrow in Indianapolis and the basic beef -- did the 25-year-old former heavyweight champion rape an 18-year-old woman who was a beauty-pageant contestant -- may get lost in the sauce.
Commentators are already loading the plate with discussions about the difficulty of communication between men and women, the entitlement of Powerboys to grab and squeeze, and the danger of greedy girls who kiss and sue.


Naomi Mezey, Student, to Wed
Naomi Jewel Mezey, a graduate student at the University of Minnesota, and Matthew Eric Paul, a graduate student at the University of Virginia, are engaged to be married.
Ms.
Mezey, 26 years old, graduated from Wesleyan University and was until recently a legislative aide to Senator Alan Cranston, Democrat of California.
She is studying for a master's degree in American studies and plans to enter the Yale University Law School next fall.
She is the daughter of Olivia Simpson Ellis and Robert Mezey, both of Claremont, Calif.
Her father is a poet and an English professor at Pomona College.
Her mother is a learning specialist at Oakmont Elementary School in Claremont.


Manhattan Transplant Makes the Grade
GATHERING, a Chinese restaurant in Wantagh, is a Manhattan transplant.
The original was an inexpensive island in a high-priced sea of restaurants in the Lincoln Center area.
When its rent went through the roof about a year ago, Gathering gathered its gear and headed east.
It has duplicated its big-city sophistication in a strip stopping center on Wantagh Avenue.
Outside, Gathering is emblazoned in red on an impressive awning.
Within, it is track lighting, spare gray walls, brass railings, deep-red ceiling and arresting graphics and posters by the Japanese artist Kozo.


Robin Wolaner Has a Wedding
Robin Peggy Wolaner, the founder and president of Parenting magazine, and Steven Jonathon Castleman, head of the environmental protection unit in the San Francisco District Attorney's office, were married last evening.
Rabbi Jerry Winston officiated at the Flood Mansion in San Francisco.
Ms.
Wolaner, 37 years old, graduated from Cornell University and is a vice president of Time Publishing Ventures Inc., a division of Time Warner in New York.
She is a daughter of Harriet Wolaner of Lenox, Mass., and Boynton Beach, Fla., and the late David H. Wolaner.
Her mother is a retired first-grade teacher at Lakeside Elementary School in Merrick, L.I.
Ms.
Wolaner's previous marriage ended in divorce.


A New Curator Confronts The Legacy of a Legend
Peter Galassi is learning what it's like to follow a legend.
Named director of the Museum of Modern Art's department of photography in October, the 40-year-old Mr.
Galassi has the unenviable task of following the renowned John Szarkowski in a post that has traditionally exerted great influence within the narrow bounds of fine-art photography.
At present, though, Mr.
Galassi is concentrating on getting things in the photography department back to normal.
Mr.
Szarkowski's retirement, and the long process of naming his successor, had put business on hold for the better part of two years.
Mr.
Galassi is now moving quickly to put his own stamp on the museum's photography program and is planning his first show as director.


The American Dream: Back at the Bunkers'
"All in the Family," which ran from 1971 to 1979, is back in reruns Saturday nights at 10:30 on CBS.
In his book "Honey, I'm Home! Sitcoms: Selling the American Dream," to be published next month by Grove Press, Gerard Jones offers this analysis of the appeal of the Norman Lear series:
After a few years "All in the Family" fell prey to its own sentimentality and repetition.
But in its moment of gutsy, self-contradictory glory, it changed American mass culture.
It was the first postcorporate sitcom.
It dared state that the culture of assimilation and consensus wasn't working, that communication -- that most sacred process in the creation of the postwar, postideological commercial utopia -- did not dissolve our differences.
In the Bunker household, communication didn't create Pat Weaver's "cybernetic civilization." It just created a lot of yelling.


Carol Harding To Wed in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Harding Jr. of Airmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Carol Ann Harding to Thomas E. Martin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew T. Martin of Edison, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Harding, 28 years old, graduated from Purdue University and is a coordinator in the actuarial department of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield in New York.
Her father retired as an engineering manager for A.T.&amp;T. in Basking Ridge, N.J.
Her mother, Dorothy Harding, retired as a nurse at the Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, N.Y.


All About/Dealer Auto Repairs; Turning a Source of Headaches Into a Source of Profits
For most car owners, there are few events that provoke greater anxiety than a trip to the dealer or local garage for service or repairs.
A phone call from the service manager often means news of unforeseen and costly problems.
Because drivers rely so much on their cars, a less-than-perfect repair can be a significant irritation.
Many service visits are less than perfect.
Almost a third of all trips to the dealer for repairs require a repeat visit, according to J. D. Power &amp; Associates, the automotive consulting firm.
And some auto repairs are never done right.
The Better Business Bureau says poor service for cars consistently rates as one of the top five consumer complaints.


Walker Is Now Cheaper
His price seems to have gone down a bit since 1989 when HERSCHEL WALKER was traded to the Minnesota Vikings for five players and seven draft picks.
Now the 29-year-old running back is the subject of new trade talks, with the Atlanta Falcons, but the Vikings aren't asking for a whole team.


Japanese Urge Early Booking
Drop-in visitors seeking accommodations through Japan's Welcome Inn Reservation Center offices in Tokyo and Kyoto have sometimes been turned away, says an official of the Japan National Tourist Organization.
Americans planning to stay in the accommodations listed by the center -- set up last spring to provide rooms at no more than $62 a night -- are advised to reserve at least two weeks in advance by mail or fax.
The Tourist Organization says that planning ahead gives travelers a better than 90 percent chance of securing a room through the center, established to serve foreign tourists looking for inexpensive accommodations.
Those in Tokyo and Kyoto are often booked solid.
About 270 accommodations in various cities belong to the center.
They range from Japanese-style inns (ryokan), family-run bed and breakfasts (minshuku) and government-sponsored lodges (kokumin shukusha) to Western-style pensions.
A free directory of Welcome Inns and reservation request form are available from the Japan National Tourist Organization, 630 Fifth Avenue, Suite 2101, New York, N.Y. 10111; (212) 757-5640.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
WHEN the wrecking ball slammed into the big brick buildings at the river's edge in Hoboken a few years ago, one man stood watching from behind the tall iron gate the German steamship lines had built.
Occasionally, moved by some new angle or suddenly revealed interior space, he snapped a photograph, all the while chewing a worn-down pipe.
His name is Donald Barrett.
He was a longshoreman.
He worked Hoboken for 15 good years until that one black Monday in 1970 when he walked up to River Street and found the gate to the pier padlocked, the shipping company gone without warning.
He recrossed River Street to the Seven Seas, one of a dozen shot-and-beer joints, and toasted destiny.


Robyn Arnberg To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Arnberg of Dix Hills, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Robyn Beth Arnberg to Richard Lawrence Cotler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie B. Cotler of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Arnberg, 24 years old, graduated from the University of Maryland, as did her fiance.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in nutrition at New York University.
Her father is the president of the Hirsch International Corporation, a textile equipment distributor in Hauppauge, L.I.
Her mother, Lynda Arnberg, is the president of Timely Travel Inc., a Hauppage travel agency.


In Options Trading, Volatility Is a Virtue
Richard Witten, who is in charge of foreign exchange sales at Goldman Sachs, is sitting at the computer terminal in his office.
He taps some keys and the screen blossoms with a colored display that reveals the details of a "plain vanilla" option -- in this instance an option to buy American dollars with Canadian dollars next June.
Because Mr.
Witten, or a customer, needs to know more, the computer displays the welter of currency options arcania: the strike price, the premium, the delta and the volatility.


Headliners; Bowing Out
When J. Carter Brown became director of the National Gallery of Art in Washington in 1969, he presided over a small collection of Old Masters that some 1.3 million visitors a year came to see.
Last week, Mr.
Brown announced that by the end of the year he will retire from the gallery, which has grown under his reign into a wide-ranging institution known for its imposing East Wing, designed by I. M. Pei, and its blockbuster exhibitions, like the recent "Circa 1492: Art in the Age of Exploration," which help draw between 5 and 7 million visitors a year.
"I've spent over half my life at the National Gallery," said Mr.
Brown, who came to the museum in 1961 as assistant director.
"I only started thinking about retirement a month ago." Mr.
Brown, who is 57 years old, said he intended to become more involved in Brown University, which his family has long supported.
"I have had no full-time employment offers or plans," he said.
"I already have too many irons in the fire and the minutes are scarce."


Notes With Pleasure
The Lost Connection
The novelist and critic John Berger argues that zoos are an especially poignant reminder of a now-vanished intimacy between humans and animals.
This is from "About Looking" (Vintage International, paper).


Judith Victor, Actress, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Victor of Great Neck, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Judith Robin Victor, to Kenneth Raymond Brown, the son of Miriam Sents of Palmyra, Pa., and the grandson of Catherine Livering and the late Raymond Livering of Annville, Pa.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Victor, a graduate of New York University, is an actress appearing in "The Actor's Nightmare" at the Pierson Playhouse in Los Angeles.
Her father is a retired lawyer and the acting Village Justice of Russell Gardens, L.I.
Mr.
Brown, a chef, is the president of the Upscale Pedestrian, a catering concern in Los Angeles.


Miss O'Connor Has Wedding
Jeanne O'Connor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. O'Connor of Southampton, L.I., was married yesterday to Don Grolnick, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester Grolnick of Huntington, L.I.
Judge Judith S. Kaye of the New York State Court of Appeals officiated at the Westbury Hotel in New York.
The bride, who is 35 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Brown University.
She is a pop singer and freelance writer.
Her father retired as an executive vice president of the Philip Morris Companies.


The Philosopher Physicist
NIELS BOHR'S TIMES
In Physics, Philosophy and Polity.
By Abraham Pais.
Illustrated. 565 pp.
New York: The Clarendon Press/ Oxford University Press. $35.


Style Makers; Chet Goldstein, T-Shirt Entrepreneur
Laid up for several weeks last spring with a broken ankle, Chet Goldstein spent his time dreaming up new directions for his five-year-old T-shirt company, Campus Collections, in Tuscaloosa, Ala.
He wanted designs with a twist, like the playful mascots on some of his college T-shirts.
And so he came up with an idea to turn the work of Southern folk artists into wearable art.


Correction
A review of "Come From Away" by David Macfarlane on Jan. 12 on the "In Short" page misstated the year and the source for the reward of $:10 given to John Cabot for discovering what later became Newfoundland.
It was 1497, and the donor was the King of England, Henry VII.


For Killy and Old Friend, the Dream Comes True
When the two old friends first joined forces more than a decade ago to try to bring the Winter Olympics to their native Savoy, the fact that one of them was Jean-Claude Killy at least insured they would be noticed, even if they seemed to be dreaming of the impossible.
Now, less than two weeks before the opening of the 1992 Winter Games here, Killy, the 48-year-old former skiing champion, who was a triple gold medalist at the 1968 Olympics, is still drawing the greater share of public attention.
But to those in the know, his partner, Michel Barnier, has played no less a role in organizing the spectacular.


Get Ready for a Less-Than-Super Morning After
LIKE spectral blimps, three big heads haunt the Super Bowl.
When the game is over, we will have Iron Mike, the Owner from Hell and Tark the Shark back in our faces.
Mike Tyson's trial begins tomorrow in Indianapolis and the basic beef -- did the 25-year-old former heavyweight champion rape an 18-year-old woman who was a beauty-pageant contestant -- may get lost in the sauce.
Commentators are already loading the plate with discussions about the difficulty of communication between men and women, the entitlement of Powerboys to grab and squeeze, and the danger of greedy girls who kiss and sue.


Slumping Redmen Let Another 'Get Away'
With four starters returning from a team that lost to eventual-champion Duke last season in the Midwest Regional final of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, this was supposed to be a banner year for St.
John's.
Numerous preseason polls that had the Redmen ranked among the top-10 teams in the country, a panel of coaches picked St.
John's to finish first in the Big East Conference, and many among the Redmen faithful boasted about a possible trip to the Final Four.


Q and A
Eligibility for Housing Question: My sister and I have applied for an apartment in the Penn South co-op in Manhattan.
Our first choice was for a two-bedroom apartment.
But we were told that we would have a better chance if we accepted a one-bedroom apartment and switched to a two-bedroom apartment once we had moved in.


Tech Notes; Robots to Handle the Random
For robots to operate effectively, they need predictability; the pieces to be moved or welded by the robot must be positioned consistently.
Therefore, picking up parts piled randomly inside a bin has long posed a challenge for robot makers.
But Perceptron of Farmington Hills, Mich., has developed a three-dimensional camera system that combines radar and laser technology to make such complex tasks possible.


The Graduate, Circa 1992
To the Editor:
I'd be curious to know how many liberal arts graduates holding only a B.A. in history, English or philosophy Joseph Pichler, president and chief executive of the Kroger Company, has hired recently. ("A Believer in Liberal Arts Tackles Worker Education," Making a Difference, Jan. 12.)


Travel Expenses of Tenant Group Are Scrutinized
The New York City Housing Authority's Tenants Advisory Council was established to create a stronger voice for tenants and to bring democracy to public housing.
But with more money than it knew what to do with, no clear mission and little oversight, the council became a private reservoir for its members, who spent tens of thousands of dollars on travel, meals, hotels and flowers, according to documents and interviews with housing officials and others.


Scott Bush, an M.B.A. Candidate, To Wed Miss Whitaker, Consultant
Mr. and Mrs.
Albert H. Whitaker of Claremont, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lindsay Whitaker, to William Prescott Bush, the son of William H. T. and Patricia Bush of St.
Louis.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Whitaker, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Southern California.
She is a consultant for Ameritech International Corporation, a telecommunications company in Chicago.
Her father is a vice president and the manager of engineering and technology at Martech International Inc., an engineering and construction management firm in Covina, Calif.


'A Chinese Odyssey'
To the Editor:
If Judith Shapiro gets the impression that Ni Yuxian is "a thoroughly unpalatable character -- abrasive, unfaithful, opportunistic and arrogant, a man who even as a dissident disappoints us," she is not too far off the mark.
In the eyes of most Chinese intellectuals in America, Mr.
Ni is but a self-promoting, opportunistic individual who became someone only because Liu Binyan made him a hero in his essay "A Second Kind of Loyalty."


Changing Some Habits Can Help Clivias
ALTHOUGH they may be rather dull looking now, clivias are sure to bloom in a few months, if all goes well, and then their owners will be rewarded.
The house plant is one of the finest known, but it demands patience.
Unlike African violets, which bloom almost continuously even in the darker winter months, clivia has one dramatic moment of glory with a magnificent display of amaryllislike clusters of flowers.
The flowers have a bright orange-red hue that is glorious to see, and the best part is that the flowers last two to three weeks or more.


Year Later, Hellfighters Feel Forgotten
Like many other Harlem Hellfighters, Sgt.
Joe Bradford has found that, one year later, his service in the Persian Gulf war with the famous New York Army National Guard unit holds little cachet with the public.
Mr.
Bradford was a truck driver in New York before he was mobilized.
His company relocated while he was away, so now he is now unemployed.
Eight months ago he passed the postal exam to become a mail handler, but so far he has not heard a word.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
MAURER AND DU BOIS
An exhibition of 10 works by Alfred Maurer (1884-1932) and 10 by Guy Pene du Bois (1884-1958) may be seen at the Nardin Fine Arts Gallery in Yellow Monkey Village in Cross River from Tuesday through Feb. 16.


Get Me to the Reef on Time
YOU CAN GET MARRIED UNDERWATER, WHERE THE vows are written out on a slate; on the vertical face of a cliff, which requires the services of a rock-climbing minister; or while sky-diving from an airplane -- a caterer's nightmare.
After swinging in the direction of tradition and formality, the trend appears to be toward action weddings.
The challenges of modern marriage may actually have a lot in common with an Outward Bound experience.
But in most cases, contemporary couples simply are opting for environments that are close to their hearts.
Don Zimmer, a former manager of the Chicago Cubs and a coach of the Boston Red Sox, was married at home plate in a minor-league baseball stadium.
Lisa Lomas, a swimwear designer whose suits have been featured in Sports Illustrated, had a proper diver's wedding on a boat in the Turks and Caicos Islands.
The bride wore a white sequined wet suit.
After exchanging vows, the couple promptly plunged into the blue.


Fly Fishing Soon To Be Reeled Inside
WHAT is billed as the world's largest show for fly fishermen will be at the Garden State Exhibit Center in Somerset, N.J., Feb. 1 and 2.
There is considerable justification for this claim.
The center has an indoor show area the size of two football fields.
Steve Rajeff, holder of national and international fly casting titles will be among the experts demonstrating their skills, and many superb fly tyers will also be present, including Dick Talleur and Poul Jorgensen.


Once Just a Gunner, Kelly Is Now a Thinker
Yes, Jim Kelly threw 33 touchdown passes this season, more than any other quarterback in the National Football League, while operating in the league's most productive offense.
But Boomer Esiason, the Cincinnati Bengals' quarterback, believes the most dangerous things about Kelly can't be detected in statistics.
Esiason says that characteristics he saw Kelly exhibit during the Bills' 35-16 victory over the Bengals last October should be of utmost concern to Washington on Sunday in Super Bowl XXVI.


Political Talk
Spano's Swing Vote
Many politicians take great delight in defending their votes.
Some, like New York State Senator Nicholas A. Spano, a Yonkers Republican, can get so carried away that they start defending their non-votes.


U.S. Warning On Turkey
The key tourist destinations of western Turkey are relatively safe, but Americans should defer nonessential travel to the southeastern part of the country because of urban terrorist attacks, the Department of State says.
Sporadic attacks against Turkish police and civilians caused injuries and loss of life last year and continue to occur in several southeastern provinces, said a department travel advisory issued Jan. 8.
Three Americans were kidnapped, and held for three weeks, in Bingol province last August, and in Kars province, a group of foreign tourists, including Americans, was attacked by terrorists.
Turkish authorities are working actively to prevent terrorism, the advisory added.


Cuttings; Returning to Wildflowers, but Gradually
Remember a few years back when everybody had to have a wildflower meadow?
That can of seeds with the pretty picture was irresistible.
A lot of us went out and dug up part of the lawn and scattered the seeds over the newly bared earth.
Tra-la-la-la.


With Tyson's Arrival, A Day of Departures
It looks like a driver's license number: 49G049109CF116245.
But in actuality it is the official designation of what, with very little hyperbole, a local television news anchor described Friday night as "one of the most anticipated rape trials ever."
It is the case of the State of Indiana versus Michael G. Tyson, the former heavyweight champion.


The Nightclub Bouncer of the 90's: Evolution of the Grunt by the Door
The skinny guy with the wispy mustache did not look like much, sulking there at 2:15 A.M. at the curb in front of Limelight, the church-turned-thumping-dance-club on West 20th Street.
But Joe Schaefer eyed him with professional concern.
"He says he's going to torch the place," Mr. Schaefer said.


Nina L. Jorgensen to Marry in May
Drs.
Eric and Virginia Jorgensen of Garden City, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Nina Luise Jorgensen to Brian McGuinness, a son of Cornelia and Dr.
William McGuinness of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Jorgensen, 33 years old, is an advertising account executive at Weight Watchers Magazine in New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is an orthopedist and her mother a psychiatrist, both in private practice in Garden City.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending Jan. 11  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 315,000
161 West 15th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a loft building; elevator, 12-ft. ceilings, private roof deck; maintenance $775, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Delson/Ginsberg)  Greenwich Village 493,000
148-150 Waverly Place  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. duplex condo in a brownstone; dining area, 2 fireplaces, 13-ft. ceilings; common charge $336, taxes $4,680 (Brokers: Ambrose Mar-Elia/Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)  Madison Square Area 675,000
5 East 22d Street  (Madison Green)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,650-sq.-ft. postwar duplex condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, fireplace, balcony and terrace; common charge $715, taxes $5,484 (Broker: Newell &amp; Associates)  Upper East Side 1.2 million
850 Park Avenue (77th St.)  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 2,800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, maid's room, library, fireplace; maintenance $2,600, 35% tax-deductible (Broker: William B. May)  Upper West Side 489,000
230 Central Park West (83d St.)  (Bolivar)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, fireplace, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,090, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  West Side 340,000
155 West 68th Street  (Dorchester)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, c/a, Central Park and Hudson River views; common charge $1,002, taxes $9,072 (Broker: R.F. Stuart Real Estate)  BRONX  Baychester 267,000
4048 Baychester Avenue  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  Riverdale 150,000
3725 Henry Hudson Parkway  (Blackstone)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, terrace; maintenance $1,080, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Trebach Realty)  BROOKLYN  Park Slope 116,750
20 Plaza Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, study, renovated kitchen; maintenance $568, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  Sheepshead Bay 195,000
2448 East 18th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, attached, house; dining room, remodeled kitchen, front porch, finished basement, rear deck, 1-car garage, 16- by 100-ft. lot; taxes 1,238 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  Kew Gardens 52,000
83-80 118th Street  (Curzon)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; dinette, remodeled kitchen and bath, 2 exposures; maintenance $328, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Kraham Realty)  St.
Albans 120,000
113-29 197th Street  2-family, detached, Colonial; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath, dining room in each, 2-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Elms Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Great Kills 185,000
191 Sycamore Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached ranch; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage, 64- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $1,647 (Broker: RE-MAX/Preferred)  Oakwood 167,000
74 East Broadway  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 32 1/2 by 86 1/2-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)


POSTINGS: Down on the Farm; Million-Dollar Mansions Near Princeton
As Kevin Dey watched the region's economy unravel in the late 1980's he wondered about the timing of his family's decision to turn Dey Farm, its 78-acre homestead near Princeton, N.J., into a new community of mansions on large lots.
But since then five residences have been built at a cost of about $1 million each at Dey Farms Estates, where lot sizes average six acres, and construction is to start in March on a sixth..
All but five of the development parcels there have been sold.


A June Wedding For Miss Plante
Dr.
Inge Rudloff Plante of Princeton, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter Michele Andre Plante to Eric Richard Kemp, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Kemp of Hartford.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Plante, 31 years old, is also a daughter of the late Dr.
Marc A. Plante.
A graduate of Middlebury College, as is her fiance, she is a national sales executive for the children's clothing division of Adrienne Vittadini in New York.
Her mother is a psychiatrist in Lawrenceville, N.J.
The prospective bride's father also was a psychiatrist.


3 Couples and Many Clashes
SCOTT says that he makes "a lot of money off women" as the president of Slumbertown, a lingerie company, and that his wife, Stephanie ("my little stress factory"), spends twice as much as that.
When she discovers that he has bought his secretary a pair of mink earmuffs, she flushes them down the toilet.
Scott and Stephanie do not have a good marriage, and they cannot work things out.


The World; Independence From Moscow Comes at a High Price
ALL across the former Soviet empire, new governments are learning to their dismay that purported shortcuts to democracy and prosperity can be riddled with hazards.
In Ukraine and Russia, as in Estonia or Georgia, politicians who rode to power on waves of independence fever and nationalism find themselves cornered or toppled by the very forces and illusions they let loose.
The politicians are learning that breaking away from an empire is like running away from home: It's great fun until the canned pork-and-beans run out.
In every case, incipient democracies have been battered by political infighting or reversion to rule by ukase.


The Region; Plenty of Gas Arrives, But at Shortage Prices
ON Tuesday, a new natural gas pipeline from Canada will come to life as an economic anomaly, a megaproject that was planned when energy shortages were still a fresh memory but completed in an era of energy surplus, declining prices and recession.
The pipeline, the Iroquois Gas Transmission System, is by far the largest single new source of energy for the New York region since the 1950's.
It is capable of pumping enough gas yearly to replace 30 million barrels of oil, and nearly double that amount if additional pumping stations are added in upstate New York.


Poll Respondents Favor Redskins
The Washington Redskins are the American public's choice to win the Super Bowl, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
But the people who don't care or don't have an opinion about the outcome of the game outnumber those who favor the Redskins, as well as those who prefer the Buffalo Bills.
Thirty-one percent of the 945 adults interviewed by telephone said they wanted Washington to win.
Buffalo was the choice of 23 percent.


Talking: Home Buying; Helpful Data From The Seller
A HOME is like a boss or a spouse.
Only when you have known one for a few years do you really get to understand its idiosyncrasies and how to live with it.
Many of today's home buyers, having learned this from their experience with other homes, are demanding lots of information from sellers, and because buyers rule the current market, they are getting what they ask for, everything from appliance manuals to lists of skilled service people to guides for reliable car pools.


Gauguin's Mistress
To the Editor: When I read Ronald Bryden's article "Seaching for Gauguin's Tahiti" (Dec. 22), I was quickly bored with the "achievements" of Gauguin and the physical description of Tahiti.
What left a lasting and searing impression was the 13-year-old child that Gauguin used as his mistress.
What happened to her?
This, I think, is a perfect example of the desperate need for inclusion of women and minorities' histories into Western textbooks.
This child's life was treated as an artifact in the life of the "great" white male, and then entirely dismissed as if she never existed.


With Tyson's Arrival, A Day of Departures
It looks like a driver's license number: 49G049109CF116245.
But in actuality it is the official designation of what, with very little hyperbole, a local television news anchor described Friday night as "one of the most anticipated rape trials ever."
It is the case of the State of Indiana versus Michael G. Tyson, the former heavyweight champion.


Wall Street; Minneapolis Looks for a Super Payoff
The winners of the 1992 Super Bowl are: Minneapolis and Minnesota -- hosts to the game.
The Washington Redskins and the Buffalo Bills must still settle the small matter of football supremacy.
But the event should generate about $120 million worth of fresh economic activity and $7 million in new state and local taxes, according to a University of Minnesota study.
Most of the new revenues will go to the state, courtesy of its 6.5 percent sales tax.
Moreover, the city must bear the cost of policing and cleaning up after the event.
But Michael Forrester and Robert Durante, municipal bond analysts at Standard &amp; Poor's, note that many Super Bowl fans are also executives who can steer new convention business to a host city.
Tampa saw such a gain after hosting the 1991 classic, they said.


Headliners; Lost Life
At the stroke of midnight, just as C. Nicholas Conchas of San Jose, Calif., was ringing in the new year by firing a pistol into the air, the the state Children's Firearm Accident Protection Act of 1991 went into effect, making adults criminally liable if a negligently stored firearm causes the injury or death of a child.
The next day, Mr.
Conchas's 4-year-old grandson, Jesus Valencia, who had received two toy pistols for Christmas, picked up the very real .22-caliber revolver and fired a bullet into his heart, and Mr.
Conchas became the first person to be charged under the law.
Jesus's mother, Eva Conchas, says the horror of losing her child is only compounded by knowing her father could face three years in jail and a $10,000 fine if convicted.
"I don't want any more tragedy," she said.
But David Davies, the assistant district attorney who is prosecuting the case, said it is important to set an example.
"I'm being made out to be the heavy here," he said, "but the child can no longer speak."


Currency; Yen Strong Ahead of G-7
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.45
124.45
132.55
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5925
1.5925
1.4905
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1505
1.1505
1.1633
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7960
1.7960
1.9565
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$354.50
$354.00
$375.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Corrections
An article on Jan. 12 about the movie "2001: A Space Odyssey" misstated the flight path of the spaceship whose crew falls victim to HAL, the berserk computer.
The mission in the movie version was headed toward an alien sentinel orbiting Jupiter; in Arthur C. Clarke's novel, the planet was Saturn.


Diane Forese, Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Forese of Franklin Lakes, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Diane Edith Forese to Andrew Weldon Page, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George A. Page Jr. of Marblehead, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.


Honor Asked for Brown
Sure, election to the Pro Football Hall of Fame is a lasting honor, but is it enough?
Not according to DONALD STEINBERG.
He wants to build a museum as a memorial to Paul Brown, the former coach who created both the Browns and the Bengals.
Actually, Steinberg, a retired surgeon who played under Brown at Ohio State in the early 1940's, wants the National Football League to build the museum, or at least to help pay for it by having each of the 28 teams chip in $25,000.
Brown, who died last August at the age of 82, was elected to the Hall of Fame in 1967, but Steinberg says that to insure that his memory and influence is not forgotten, he wants to establish a museum in Massillon, Ohio, where Brown coached powerhouse high school football teams.


Sack the Power Brokers
For fans who aren't trying to figure the spread and who don't live in the cities that claim the teams, the Super Bowl can be a problem: Three hours of not-so-good football (usually) preceded (always) by endless hype.
Deciding which team to support has never been easy.
This year, it will be absurdly simple.
For everyone living outside the Beltway, it is us versus them, baby.
Them being the Redskins, the team from the nation's capital, which, if you didn't already know, is inside the Beltway.
And full of insiders.


Islanders Caught Up Ice by Penguins
In the last minute of a tie game, can there be any sight more unwelcome to a goalie and a defenseman than Mario Lemieux and Jaromir Jagr, barreling down ice for a two-on-one rush?
This was what Mark Fitzpatrick, in goal, and Uwe Krupp, on defense, were faced with late this afternoon as their Islanders were tied, 3-3, with the Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins at Nassau Coliseum.
The Penguins scored and went on to win by 5-3.


Law Students Aid Imperiled Tenants
WHEN Sandra Rector was laid off from her job, she fell behind with her rent payments and feared that she would be evicted from her apartment in Huntington.
Unable to afford a lawyer, Ms.
Rector got in touch with Nassau-Suffolk Law Services and was referred to the Housing Rights Project at the Touro Law School's Law Center in Huntington.


The Executive Computer; Small Business, Handy Tools
Will hourly workers soon be "punching in" on the PC?
Replacing a time clock with Timeclock Plus, a new software product, can streamline paperwork and provide managers with a handy tool for analyzing labor costs, which typically are the bulk of a small business's budget.
Timeclock Plus (list price $149.95, with more expensive programs for Unix systems) uses the built-in clock in an I.B.M.
PC-compatible computer.
The simple opening screen asks the worker to type "1" to clock in or "2" to clock out.
It also asks for the employee's indentification number.


Production of a U.S. H-Bomb to End, Official Says
The Bush Administration will not resume production of the thermonuclear weapons carried by submarine-launched Trident II missiles, a Defense Department official said today.
The decision could result in a permanent stop for the Government's nuclear bomb-building industry, which has been on hold since 1989.


Reservations In Mexico
A telephone reservation service has been created for travelers booking hotel rooms in Mexico City.
The service enables travelers to call a toll-free number in the United States and Canada and reserve rooms in any of the 120 hotels that comprise the Mexico City Hotel and Motel Association.
The number, (800) 866-3942, is in operation from 8 A.M. until 4 P.M. (Eastern Time) and an answering service will take messages at other times.


Susanne Rubenstein to Wed in May
Lois B. Goodman of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Fred V. Rubenstein of Washington, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susanne Renee Rubenstein, to Jonathan Mordoh, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Mordoh of Closter, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Rubenstein, 26 years old, is a producer at Napoleon Videographics, a television commercial company in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University.
Her father owns Targeted Demographics Networks, a publisher of consumer guides in New York.


Unblocking Bathtubs and Toilets
CALLING a plumber to clear a clogged toilet or other drain in an emergency can be a nuisance, but most homeowners and apartment dwellers can usually repair such problems themselves.
To clear a blocked toilet, use a flange-type plumber's plunger.
Its cup has a projecting sleeve that fits snugly into the opening at the bottom of the bowl.
Never use chemical cleaners.
They can cause injury if splashed onto the skin.


Employee Slain in Robbery At Midtown Clothing Store
The assistant manager of a children's clothing store in midtown Manhattan -- a young woman who graduated from college last spring and moved to New York in the fall -- was bound, gagged and stabbed to death in a ferocious attack with a screwdriver yesterday morning in a $7,000 robbery before the store opened.
Investigators said the 22-year-old victim, Lisa Steinberg, of 215 East 95th Street, was stabbed numerous times in the head and torso and was found dead, her hands bound at her back with duct tape, beside an open safe in an office at The Gap and The Gap Kids, adjoining stores at 250 West 57th Street, between Broadway and Eighth Avenue.


How the Japanese Learned to Drink Bourbon; Buy More Sushi?
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb is on target when he writes that President Bush and his advisers do not "know the first thing about Japan" ("Three Whine Mice . . .," column, Jan. 13).
After just returning from teaching two semesters of American history and culture to Japanese students north of Tokyo, allow me to place the recent Bush visit into the Japanese perspective.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Islip 475,000
117 The Helm  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; den, fireplace, screened porch, pool, 2-car garage; taxes $11,400.
Great River 535,000
283 Great River Road  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 50-year-old colonial; Florida room, greenhouse, finished basement, maid's room, boat slip; taxes $9,800.
Nesconset 231,250
12 Bonarck Lane  5-bedroom, 3-bath colonial; eat-in kitchen, den w/fireplace, basement, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $6,400.
Nissequogue 340,000
158 Long Beach Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old Tudor; den, office, fireplace, beach and mooring rights; taxes $6,400.
Smithtown 175,000
79 Laurel Drive  6-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old colonial; family room, finished basement, 2 powder rooms, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300.
Williston Park 163,000
68 Broad Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old, legal 2-family colonial; basement, attic, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.
OTHER AREAS Wilton, Conn. 525,000
86 East Meadow  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 52-year-old Cape Cod; stone facade, double-sized lot, 2.3 acres; taxes $5, 194.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 400,000
25 Hardscrabble Hill  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, dining room; taxes $6,925.
Warren, N.J. 432,000
128 Old Stirling Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; master suite w/den, full basement; taxes $6,500.


Review/Jazz; Dickerson And Vibes, Ruminatively
Jazz performance is so constrained by the rules of its history that an eccentric show becomes startling.
Walt Dickerson, a vibraphonist who opened a six-day stand at the Village Vanguard on Tuesday night, put on a mildly bizarre set that pointed out exactly how jazz performances work.
Mr.
Dickerson played quietly, letting his mallets scurry over the vibraphone like mice on a tin roof.
At times his music dissolved into silence, only to blossom into lush explosions of shining sound.
Everything Mr.
Dickerson did pointed inward, as if he were the most important person in the room.
His ruminations were played for himself; self-expression dominated.


Board Schedules Vote On Jay Condemnation
SIXTEEN months after the County Board of Legislators tried unsuccessfully to condemn the Jay Property in Rye, it plans to initiate the process again at a meeting tomorrow morning.
Last week 13 legislators signed a resolution of intent to condemn the 23-acre site, sufficient votes to pass the measure.
The Board's new Republican chairman, Stephen P. Tenore, had asked his fellow legislators to direct the county administration to "proceed immediately with whatever it takes to condemn" the property.
The 13 legislators, one more than needed, have agreed to approve whatever funds are necessary to meet the purchase price determined by the courts in a condemnation proceeding.


Style Makers; Thomas Hucker, Furniture Designer
Thomas Hucker wants his furniture to be different.
The tables in what he calls his "ambiental series" are about 44 inches square and 16 inches high; each stimulates touch, smell and hearing in its own way.
"The idea of making the tables basically the same was to throw everyone's attention into the ambiental qualities," the 36-year-old designer said.
Two of the seven tables stress tactility and scent.
The first has an herbal fragrance and a smooth ebony finish.
The other is made of neoprene, with the industrial odor replaced with the smell of leather.


James Biddle to Wed Kristin Cater
Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Cater of New Hartford, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kristin Anne Cater to James Copland Biddle, the son of Louisa C. Duemling of Washington and James Biddle of Andalusia, Pa.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cater, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and is an account executive with DKNY, a division of the Donna Karan fashion company in New York.
Her father owns Cater Lincoln-Mercury, a dealership in Utica, N.Y.


Planes and Trains
To the Editor:
Tony Hiss's delightful essay on railroad books ("The Atchison, Topeka and the Bullet Train," Dec. 22) brought to mind the comment of the Englishman Michael Flanders: "If God had meant us to fly, he would never have given us the trains."  (Rev.) HERMAN HARMELINK 3D Poughkeepsie, N.Y.


Unblocking Bathtubs and Toilets
CALLING a plumber to clear a clogged toilet or other drain in an emergency can be a nuisance, but most homeowners and apartment dwellers can usually repair such problems themselves.
To clear a blocked toilet, use a flange-type plumber's plunger.
Its cup has a projecting sleeve that fits snugly into the opening at the bottom of the bowl.
Never use chemical cleaners.
They can cause injury if splashed onto the skin.


Headliners; Political Partying
New York City Council President Andrew J. Stein invited 1,500 well-off supporters to the Waldorf-Astoria last week to celebrate his nativity -- and his mayoral campaign -- and came away with a birthday take of around $2 million.
The campaign contributions, in chunks of up to $50,000, included many gifts from people who do some business with the city and probably wouldn't mind doing more.
After songs by Frank Sinatra and reincarnation jokes by Shirley MacLaine, Mr.
Stein got down to the business of bashing Mayor David N. Dinkins and the public campaign financing law whose $6,500-per-donor limit Mr.
Dinkins is abiding by.
"There is nobody in this city who thinks public financing, which brought us David Dinkins, has made New York a better place," he said.
But critics including the Mayor said Mr.
Stein's fund-raising strategy was unseemly.
Mr.
Dinkins said, "It will not take a rocket scientist to see a person doesn't contribute $50,000 simply for routine access."


Anne F. Kohn, Travel Agent, 68
Anne Frankenthaler Kohn, a retired educator and travel agent, died on Thursday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
She was 68 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of cancer, her family said.
Mrs.
Kohn was born in Manhattan and graduated from the Calhoun School and Vassar College.
During World War II she worked as a mathematician at Columbia University's Statistical Research Group, a secret project to aid the military.


Data Bank/January 26, 1992


'Darling! Listen to Me'
If you ask Julie Kavner to describe the roles she's played during her 18-year career, she sighs and in her honeyed gravel voice says with perfect dispiritedness: "A nice person."
Almost every one of the major roles held by the 41-year-old actress has been a woman who is supportive, sympathetic or self-effacingly funny.
From her first professional acting job playing Brenda, Valerie Harper's younger sister on the sitcom "Rhoda," to her most recent role as the voice of Marge Simpson, the long-suffering mother on the animated comedy series "The Simpsons," Kavner has consistently been the second banana.


Inflation Is One Thing . . .
To the Editor:
Accompanying Frank Rich's article "Previews, That Broadway Malady"  [ Dec. 22 ]  there was a photograph of an ad for "Cabaret" in 1966.
Nearly buried in the small type at the bottom of that ad was one major reason for the collapse of Broadway: ticket prices.


Switzerland's Highest Hotel
MOST visitors to Zermatt stay in the valley and look up at the mountains.
Last summer, we had the opposite experience, staying on a mountain and looking down upon Zermatt and, much more exciting, enjoying a close-up view of the Alpine giants that surround it.
My husband and I were staying at the Kulmhotel Gornergrat, the highest real hotel in Switzerland.
Like the peaks thrusting up around us, we were above the clouds.
In the Alps, an overnight sojourn in the mountains typically means a night at an Alpine Club hut, where thin mattresses are laid side by side on a long wooden shelf and you can count yourself lucky if only one of your neighbors snores.
Rare is the hut with an indoor toilet, and cold water washing is the rule.
Arrival is by foot, usually after a three- or four-hour uphill hike.
The compensation is the scenery, often spectacular.
The glory of the high Alpine landscape, however, can be enjoyed in remarkable comfort at the Kulmhotel, above Zermatt at 10,168 feet.


CAMPUS LIFE: Princeton; Ban on Keg Beer Being Pulled Back But With Limits
Bowing to heavy pressure from students and alumni to alter a semester-old ban on serving keg beer that he himself had termed "silly," Dr.
Harold T. Shapiro, the Princeton University president, has accepted recommendations to allow it at specific university events.
Dr.
Shapiro ratified a unanimous resolution by the Council of the Princeton University Community on Jan. 13 that allows the senior class, graduate students and the alumni council -- the three groups on campus most affected by the keg ban because most of them are above the 21-year-old drinking age -- to begin serving beer from kegs, provided that they limit access to alcoholic beverages somewhat and shift the focus of their parties away from drinking.


U.S. Linked to Iraqi Scud Launchers
America's secret assistance to Iraq may have helped Saddam Hussein carry out one of the biggest surprises of the Persian Gulf war: Using an undetected fleet of mobile launchers to fire dozens of Scud missiles at Israel and Saudi Arabia.
Many of these launchers may have been manufactured for Iraq by an American company.


Miss Dzierzeski Plans June Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward T. Dzierzeski of Southboro, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Deborah Leigh Dzierzeski to William Thomas Wardwell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Wardwell of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Dzierzeski, 27 years old, graduated from Barnard College.
She is a vice president in Seattle in the research department of Dain Bosworth, a brokerage.
Her father is a management analyst with the Defense Department at Bedford, Mass.


Long Island Man Loses His Life While Performing a Good Deed
It must have seemed like a minor good deed to a man who devoted his spare time to fighting fires.
But when John Dell'Olio tried to drag aside a piece of aluminum that was blocking traffic on the Throgs Neck Bridge on Friday afternoon he wound up giving his life.
A large piece of aluminum, about 20 feet by 8 feet, blew off the roof of a tractor-trailer traveling south on the bridge over the East River about 2 P.M.
Friday, the police said.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEARNING TO LIKE DENTISTS
FOR some people it's the drill.
For others, the needle, the chair or that distinctive smell.
For Phil Serniglia of Moriches, it was all of them.
Mr.
Serniglia was a "dental phobic."


Heidi Reavis, Lawyer, Weds
Helen Diana Reavis, the daughter of Thetis Reavis of New York, and John W. Reavis Jr. of Santa Fe, N.M., was married last evening to Steven Michael Engel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Engel of Bloomfield, Conn.
Rabbi Joy Levitt officiated at The Americas Society in New York.
Ms.
Reavis, 32 years old, is known as Heidi, and is keeping her name.
She is a lawyer with the firm of Beldock, Levine &amp; Hoffman in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Smith College and received a law degree from the University of Chicago.
Her mother is the vice president for public affairs at the Foreign Policy Association in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was an independent maker of documentary films.


A Radical Look for Hall of Fame
Judging by the difficulty renegades have faced making it into the Pro Football Hall of Fame, you might think it was the National Football League owners who make the selections.
Actually, the final choices are made by news 31 media representatives, and if their seeming reluctance to honor otherwise worthy rebels suggests that the football writers and broadcasters have been mere lackeys for the N.F.L. establishment, well, the lackeys declared their independence yesterday.


Quotations of the Day
"We're trying to convince people we're human beings and not mascots. They're making fools of themselves and of us in the process." -- CLYDE BELLECOURT, executive director of the American Indian Movement, on sports names like Washington Redskins.  [ 14:5. ] "In the context of sports, those nicknames are extremely positive. You think of great players and great rivalries." -- PAUL TAGLIABUE, commissioner of the National Football League.  [ 14:5. ]


Get Ready for a Less-Than-Super Morning After
LIKE spectral blimps, three big heads haunt the Super Bowl.
When the game is over, we will have Iron Mike, the Owner from Hell and Tark the Shark back in our faces.
Mike Tyson's trial begins tomorrow in Indianapolis and the basic beef -- did the 25-year-old former heavyweight champion rape an 18-year-old woman who was a beauty-pageant contestant -- may get lost in the sauce.
Commentators are already loading the plate with discussions about the difficulty of communication between men and women, the entitlement of Powerboys to grab and squeeze, and the danger of greedy girls who kiss and sue.


The Smile Button For Tragedy
What does comedy have that farce doesn't need?
A heart.
Especially when the farce is by Georges Feydeau.
Not that the French critic of middle-class misconduct was mean.
But he had no illusions about people, according to John Mortimer, who should know.
Mr.
Mortimer, the retired English barrister, playwright, novelist and creator of the TV series "Rumpole of the Bailey," has long been praised for his Feydeau translations.
One of them, "A Little Hotel on the Side," opens today on Broadway in a production by the National Actors Theater at the Belasco.
The cast of 34 includes Tony Randall and Maryann Plunkett, Lynn Redgrave, Paxton Whitehead, Rob Lowe and Madeleine Potter.
In the introduction to "Three Boulevard Farces," his published Feydeau translations, Mr.
Mortimer writes: "Farce is tragedy played at about 120 revolutions a minute." And what is at stake for the characters, he notes, "is not their lives but their reputations."


There's Music in the Ould Sod Yet
THE FIELD DAY ANTHOLOGY OF IRISH WRITING
Edited by Seamus Deane.
Three volumes, 4,044 pp.
New York: Field Day Publications/ W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $150.


Girl in Track Meet Collapses and Dies
In what the police and medical authorities are tentatively calling a freak case of heart failure, a 9-year-old Long Island girl collapsed yesterday while competing in a track meet in Brooklyn and died soon after being taken to a nearby hospital.
The authorities said Jessica Varady, from the Suffolk County village of Selden, collapsed at 10:25 A.M. while running a 55-meter dash at the Colgate Games, a series of women's track meets in the Pratt Institute gymnasium in Clinton Hill.


Krupp's Proud to Wear Islander Label
Of the six players who arrived on the Islanders' roster in the Day of Trades (Oct. 25), the best of the bunch has been Uwe Krupp, a big defenseman who is beginning to show a streak of pride to go with his balanced talents.
Despite the Islanders' 5-3 loss to the Pittsburgh Penguins on Saturday at Nassau Coliseum, Krupp was eager afterward to stress the positive about a team that lacks a positive self-image in its own building and almost any image at all in the greater metropolitan area.


Key Positions Filled at ABC
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. has filled two important management positions with executives from its sales staff.
On Thursday, the company appointed George Cain, who had been senior vice president and national sales manager for ABC's sports, news and daytime programs, to senior vice president of the television network group.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's only auction this week will be its regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills today.
It will offer $20.4 billion in bills.
Late in the day on Friday, the three-month bills were bid at a price that produced a yield of 3.80 percent, and the six-month bills were bid at 3.90 percent.
The following fixed-income issues are scheduled for this week: TAXABLE  MONDAY


Mille Lacs Lake Journal; Minnesota Winter Puts Fishing on Ice
Atop the frozen surface of this expansive lake, Ruthie Stowowy dropped two fishing lines into holes through nearly three feet of ice.
About 30 minutes later, she pulled in her first catch of the day: a three-pound perch, its yellow scales gleaming as it squirmed in her hand.
"That's a keeper," the 64-year-old retiree said.
She returned to watch her lines, sitting on a small couch in her fish house, a small, gas-heated dwelling that had been pulled three miles out on the lake's frozen surface in December by a combination bulldozer-log skidder.


Citizens Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tarkanian Anchors Another Rebel Episode
It seems that every week for Jerry Tarkanian is like the old television show "That Was the Week That Was." Last week was no different.
It started with a reported comment by a member of the Board of Regents, Carolyn Sparks, saying that she was tired of hearing about the Nevada-Las Vegas coach recruiting "ghetto kids." The players' response was to tape a photo of the Regent to the back of their shorts in practice.
For Tarkanian, although the topic was different it was still controversy, nothing new in his 19-year tenure at the school.
This school year alone, the National Collegiate Athletic Association has the school on probation, the school president is pushing Tarkanian out of his job while Tarkanian is trying to rebuild after losing the five starters from last season's 29-1 Rebel team.


Chemical Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


State of the Union: A Statistical Look
Graph: As president Bush prepares to present his State of the Union Message tomorrow, many gauges of the nation's health show reasons for concern.
Median household income in 1990 dollars 1989: $38,493 1990: $37,403
More charts and an article on what the President is expected to say, page A16. (Source: Census Bureau)


Bronx Jail Barge to Open, Though the Cost Is Steep
New York City's most expensive jail -- a $161 million, 800-bed prison barge -- will open in the Bronx next month, 18 months behind schedule and $35 million over its original budget.
Officials in the Correction Department, which operates the city's jail system, attributed the high price tag to unanticipated design and construction problems.
An additional $9 million was spent to prepare a dock site, raising the total cost to $170 million.


BBDO to Assist On Doritos Account
Tracy-Locke, which has spent several months working on changing the creative approach of the advertising for Doritos snack chips, has called in an in-house rival, BBDO New York, for assistance.
The agency said it had not determined exactly what help it would need.
The two agencies, both units of the Omnicom Group, crossed paths four months ago when Frito-Lay, the maker of Doritos, reassigned the regional advertising account for another brand, Lay's potato chips, to BBDO from Tracy-Locke in Dallas.


SUPER BOWL XXVI: Sports of The Times; The Bills Just Loked Like Rank Outsiders
IN the Super Bowl, even the gatecrashers arrive in limousines.
One can imagine chief executive officers drinking vintage wine in the leather-lined sanctuaries of their stretches while their corporate vice presidents work the streets looking for tickets.
No, doctor, there are no underdogs at the Super Bowl, even though the American Conference has now lost eight straight times to the more physical National Conference.
In the latest, the Bills self-destructed, 37-24, to Washington for their second straight Super Bowl loss.


Independence Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Critic's Notebook; For a Change, Popular Films Win Top Prizes at Sundance
Someone must have told the Sundance Film Festival to lighten up.
At the awards ceremony on Saturday night that concluded this festival of independent films -- more noted for their sincerity than their wit -- the major prizes in the drama competition went to two of the most popular and accessible works in competition.
The jury prize, awarded by a panel of four judges, went to "In the Soup," an artsy but crowd-pleasing little black-and-white comedy about a struggling film maker and an aging con man.
The audience award, a better gauge of a film's commercial prospects because it is selected by viewers' ballots, went to "The Waterdance," an autobiographical story of a paraplegic whose tragedy is laced with sharp, engaging humor.
Last year's festival was criticized for being too esoteric.
This year, Sundance came back with a surprising ability to laugh, sometimes at itself.


Accounts
*
Highland Superstores, Plymouth, Mich., is looking for another agency after 17 years with W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Southfield, Mich.
The agency said that it and the consumer-electronics retail chain had mutually agreed to end their relationship after Highland's decision to take a new approach on its advertising. *
The National Guard has renewed its $12 million advertising contract with Bozell Inc., Alexandria, Va., after a review that also included W. B. Doner &amp; Co.
Baltimore; Grey Advertising Inc., New York, and Stackig, Sanderson &amp; White Inc., McLean, Va.


Question Box
Super Bowl Quarterbacks
Q.
In Phil Simms (1987) and Jeff Hostetler (1991), the New York Giants had two Super Bowl winning quarterbacks as teammates for the entire regular season of
1991. Has any other National Football League team been so fortunate?
A.
Having two such qualified passers on one roster is somewhat of a passing fancy, for only one other team can brag about it in the 24 seasons it has been possible.
When the Miami Dolphins opened the 1973 season as defending Super Bowl champions, their starting quarterback was Bob Griese.
He had called the signals in the Super Bowl VII victory over the Washington Redskins eight months earlier.
Behind Griese was the veteran Earl Morrall.
He was the winning quarterback for the Baltimore Colts against the Dallas Cowboys in the 1971 Super Bowl.


Gateway Federal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For Bills, A Bitter Taste Of Defeat
Bills linebacker Darryl Talley, draped in a white terry cloth robe with a blue Super Bowl XXVI insignia on the breast pocket, was one of the first Buffalo players in the interview room after the team's 37-24 loss to the Washington Redskins.
"Start the roast," said Talley, who, along with his teammates, had already been smoked and grilled by the Redskins for three hours.


Kuwaiti Gave Consistent Account of Atrocities
To the Editor:
Hold on to your hats.
The grand campaign to rewrite the history of the Persian Gulf war is on.
And the campaign of revisionist history begins with rewriting the causes of that war.
If you thought that the cause of the war was the brutal invasion of Kuwait by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, you are wrong.
If you thought that the cause was Saddam Hussein's reckless and premeditated aggression that gave him control of Kuwait's vast oil resources and imminent domination of the giant Saudi oil fields -- giving him mastery of the energy jugular of the world -- you are wrong.
If you thought the cause of the war was his horrendous human rights violations -- the verified poison-gassing of his own citizens, and verified torture and murder -- you are wrong.
If you thought the cause of the war was Saddam Hussein's growing nuclear capability, his huge stock of biological and chemical weapons and missile capabilities -- you are wrong.


Kuwaiti Gave Consistent Account of Atrocities; Retracted Testimony
To the Editor:
In his effort to buttress the unsupported claim by Nayirah al-Sabah that Iraqi soldiers removed babies from Kuwait City incubators, Thomas E. Eidson, president of Hill and Knowlton, in response to my Jan. 6 Op-Ed article, makes a curious choice for a corroborating witness (letter, Jan. 17).
Mr.
Eidson cites the assertion at a United Nations Security Council hearing by Dr.
Ibraheem Behbehani, head of the Kuwaiti Red Crescent, that he supervised the burial of 120 newborn babies after the Iraqi invasion, and personally buried 40 newborn babies "that had been taken from their incubators by  [ Iraqi ]  soldiers."


Coherent Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Bias Crimes Hold Steady, but Leave Many Scars
Their encounters with hatred came as a mellow May day dissolved into evening.
A young black man and his Hispanic girlfriend were talking amicably in a restaurant in the Baychester section of the Bronx.
According to a police synopsis, two white men began staring malevolently at them.
After a while, one snidely challenged the black man, "What did you say, nigger?" The white man then punched him in the head and shoved his pregnant girlfriend.
Before fleeing, the white men warned the black man that the next time they saw him they would kill him.


FCS Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reviews/Television; 3 Pioneers of the Wilderness Ethic
This week brings offerings from three popular PBS series.
None are at the top of their class, but all have their inviting aspects.
"Wild by Law," tonight's contribution from "The American Experience," at 9 on Channels 13 and 49, tells how the Wilderness Act of 1964, which made Washington the official protector of America's vast yet shrinking wilderness areas, came to be.


U.N.'S FUND CRISIS WORSENS AS ROLE IN SECURITY RISES
At a meeting here on Friday, President Bush and the leaders of the 14 other members of the Security Council are expected to call on the United Nations to play a growing role in preserving peace in trouble spots around the globe.
But the organization finds itself facing a deepening financial crisis because many of these same member nations are not paying their share for the operations.
The United Nations has been called upon to mount 8 new peacekeeping operations since 1988.
In its previous 43 years of existence, since its founding in 1945, there were 13 such operations.
This year it is planning ambitious new operations in Cambodia and Yugoslavia involving a total of some 15,000 troops and police personnel.
Those operations could double the organization's peacekeeping budget to more than $1 billion.


Grilli Property reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Books of The Times; V. I. Warshawski, in Detection and Reflection
Guardian Angel  By Sara Paretsky 370 pages. Delacorte Press. $20.
"Hot kisses covered my face, dragging me from deep sleep to the rim of consciousness. I groaned and slid deeper under the covers, hoping to sink back into the well of dreams."


Deposit Guaranty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Token Thoughts
Now that the price of a New York City subway token has risen to $1.25, a further adjustment is in order.
For the rider who buys more than one at a time, how about replacing the 10-pack with something that multiplies to a convenient whole-dollar total?
The Transit Authority introduced the 10-pack in 1983, with good reason.
A 10-pack covered a week's rides back and forth to work.
But as the fare rose to $1.15, people who paid with a $20 bill were often stuck with an unwanted bundle of ones in their $8.50 change.


I.S.G. Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Another Brief Glimpse of Winter


Dance in Review
Amka Oshrat YemeniteDance Troupe
Brooklyn Academy of Music
The old and the new came together on Thursday night when a Yemenite folk-dance troupe and a Yemenite pop star, Ofra Haza, shared a program in Israel: the Next Generation, a festival that continues through Feb. 2.


Affiliated Bankshares (Colo.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Quotation of the Day
"People say, 'I don't remember it this bad.' How could they remember? We didn't count these crimes years ago. Why were there all those civil rights marches if things were so hunky-dory in the good old days? In all probability, there were more bias crimes 30 or 40 years ago." -- INSPECTOR WILLIAM T. WALLACE of the New York Police Department's bias crime unit.  [ B2:1. ]


American Bank of Connecticut reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Can Trial Of Tyson Be Fair?
The question of whether the former heavyweight champion Mike Tyson can get a fair hearing in the trial that starts here Monday has become a hot speculative issue.
Already, T-shirts, at $12.50 apiece, are being sold that show a blindfolded Tyson holding a scale of justice in both hands with the words "Can Mike Tyson Get a Fair Trial?" underscoring an apparently growing belief among locals that maybe he can't.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Kerrey Moves to Reinvigorate Campaign
Senator Bob Kerrey has not been having as much fun running for President as he thought he would.
Asked why not, as he sat the other night drinking a draft beer and eating popcorn in an airport bar in Houston, the Democrat from Nebraska offered his whimsical smile and replied, "Cosmic forces."


Jukebox Economics; Are Lyrics and the Economy in Tune?
Harold Zullow can flash the kind of I-told-you-so grin that Alan Greenspan of the Federal Reserve Board or Louis Rukeyser of "Wall Street Week" can only dream of.
Mr.
Zullow forecast the recession in May 1990, months before the Government says it began.
All he did was to listen to the songs on Billboard magazine's Hot 100 chart.
"I was sorry to see that in fact we had a recession," said Mr.
Zullow, a research fellow in social psychiatry at Columbia University's School of Public Health.
"I don't really think of myself as a prophet of doom."


Rival Factions in Cambodia Pledge to Uphold Peace Plan
Cambodia's four rival political factions pledged today to uphold a fragile peace agreement despite recent cease-fire violations, diplomats said.
The factions, meeting in the country's reconciliation body, the Supreme National Council, also expressed sorrow for loss of life and the uprooting of 10,000 rural residents who were forced to flee during recent violence.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices fell in Tokyo today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues lost 65.04 points, or three-tenths of 1 percent, to end at 21,007.11.
Concerns about the health of President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia helped push the dollar higher early in the day but had little effect on the stocks.
On Friday, the Nikkei lost 508.57 points.


Assault of Officer Called a Bias Crime
An off-duty Amtrak police officer was injured in a Manhattan nightclub late Saturday during an assault and robbery that the police are calling a bias incident.
The officer, Sean Noonan, 23 years old, was in the Ritz at 254 West 54th Street about 11:25 P.M. on Saturday.
A police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch, said an unidentified black man approached Officer Noonan and said: "What are you? A white supremacist?"


Airlifted Hindu Nationalists Fly India's Flag in Kashmir
India's most prominent Hindu nationalist politician carried the nation's flag into the central square of Kashmir's capital today in a defiant gesture of Indian domination of the rebellious, predominantly Muslim region.
Explosions and gunfire echoed through Srinagar's streets, which were barren except for tens of thousands of police and soldiers sent to protect the Hindu leader, Murli Manohar Joshi.


Airtran reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Why Favor Less Sturdy Japanese Cars?
To the Editor:
It would seem to be very easy bashing American-made products, particularly the automobile ("Don't Brake for Detroit," Op-Ed, Jan. 7).
There is, in certain segments of the motoring press, a bias toward Japanese-made cars perhaps directly related to the amount of advertising space taken by specific auto makers.


Reviews/Television; Cybill Shepherd in a Tale Of a Crime Turned Sour
With few exceptions, the quality of made-for-cable movies ranges from modestly successful to disastrous.
Skimpy budgets and tight shooting schedules are not generally conducive to churning out masterpieces.
Gradually, though, the good cable movies are getting better.
Tonight's example on TNT at 8 P.M., 10 P.M. and midnight is "Memphis," in which Cybill Shepherd serves as star, co-executive producer and, with Larry McMurtry and Susan Rhinehart, co-writer.
But also, alas, the clinkers are becoming almost unbearable.
Just peek for a few minutes at tomorrow night's Lifetimepremiere, at 9, of "Notorious," a pointless updating of the 1946 Alfred Hitchcock film.
"Memphis," which is based on the novel "September, September," by Shelby Foote, takes place in September 1957, when the headlines and television news reports were dominated by civil rights protests in the South.
Driving up from the Mississippi Delta, three drifters arrive in Tennessee with what they think is a fail-safe ploy to make some money.
Reeny (Ms. Shepherd), Podjo (J. E. Freeman) and Rufus (John Laughlin) will kidnap the grandson of the wealthiest black businessman in Memphis, a banker named Tio Wiggins (Moses Gunn), who is not likely to get much help from the all-white local police.


Dynatech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hands Off the Economy
The stock market has lurched into overdrive, betting that the Federal Reserve's shift to low interest rates means that an economic rebound is just months away.
But unlike the speculators who face perhaps 50-50 odds, President Bush in his State of the Union Address tomorrow is expected to make a wager that arguably has a 100 percent chance of being wrong.
Recession year "borrow and stimulate" packages have a habit of missing the present and haunting the future.
And in the present circumstances, the case against the grab bag of stimulants for housing, investment and the middle-class consumer that the President is expected to announce is especially compelling.


Dynatronics Laser reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First TV Spots For Microsoft
The Microsoft Corporation will become a television advertiser for the first time, spending $8 million to run commercials from mid-March through May for its Windows computer software.
"I call it 'printcast,' " said Gary Gigot, Microsoft's vice president of marketing, "taking the principles that have been successful in selling our product in print and using them in the television medium." The seven commercials, like Microsoft's print advertisements, are being created by Ogilvy &amp; Mather Los Angeles.


Results Plus
SKIING Tomba Clinches Title  Alberto Tomba of Italy clinched the World Cup slalom title for the season yesterday by winning the last slalom before the Winter Olympics in France, where he will be defending the two gold medals he won at the 1988 Olympic Games.
Tomba nailed his seventh victory of the season in Wengen, Switzerland, with a two-heat total of 1 minute 34.34 seconds, which was 62-hundredths of a second ahead of the overall World Cup leader, Paul Accola of Switzerland.
Armin Bittner of Germany was third, 85-hundredths of a second behind.
Tomba, who also leads the season giant slalom standing, showed that almost nothing can stop him.
A gate pole he uprooted fell in front of his skis in the first run.
But he still was second-fastest behind Ole Christian Furuseth of Norway, who fell in his second run.
On Tomba's second run, he nearly fell over backward at the top of a slope and then, near the finish, someone threw a snowball in his right eye.
Tomba won the slalom and the giant slalom at the Calgary Olympics and is the favorite in the events at the Games in the French Alps.
Accola now has 1,270 points in the overall standing, and Tomba 1,060. (AP) Compagnoni Takes Slalom Event: Deborah Compagnoni switched to longer skis and tamed a lightning-fast course in Morzine, France, yesterday to win a supergiant slalom, ending a six-year World Cup drought by Italian women.
A two-time world champion, Ulrike Maier, was second, followed by Norway's Merete Fjeldavli and American Diann Roffe, whose fourth place (1:11.64) was the best supergiant finish by a United States skier this season.
Compagnoni, 21, a giant-slalom specialist who usually prefers technical races to those in which speed is predominant, completed the 1.1-mile course in 1:11.02.
Maier, an Austrian who won supergiant world titles in 1989 and 1991, finished in 1:11.46.
Fjeldavli, whose best previous finish was a tie for ninth earlier this season, was third in 1:11.61.
The women will complete their three-day World Cup series today in Morzine with a giant slalom. (AP) HORSE RACING Thunder Rumble Wins  Thunder Rumble shook off an early challenge from Speaker Phone and ran off to a two-length victory yesterday in Aqueduct's $70,700 Count Fleet Stakes for 3-year-olds.
The winner, owned by Konrad O. Widmer, carried 123 pounds and Herb McCauley to his second start in two races this year, covering 1 mile and 70 yards on the fast track in 1:43. (AP)


Lift Taxes? Economists Vote Yes
As President Bush and Congressional Democrats seek to outdo each other in proposing tax cuts to stimulate the economy, many economists say that what the nation needs in the long run is exactly the opposite.
Higher taxes, these economists say, are needed to prevent America's competitiveness from slipping further by providing money for improving schools, beefing up research and development and modernizing highways, railroads and airports.


CHRONICLE
GRO HARLEM BRUNTLAND, the Prime Minister of Norway; JACQUES DELORS, president of the European Community's executive commission in Brussels; the Cable News Network, and the National Museum of Anthropology and History in Mexico City are the winners of the 1992 Onassis International Prizes, which will be presented in Athens in May.
The awards, carrying a stipend of $100,000 each, are given by the Alexander S. Onassis Public Benefit Foundation, which was established by Aristotle Onassis in 1975 to honor his son, who died two years earlier in a plane crash.


SUPER BOWL XXVI: Sports of The Times; The Buffalo Heads Vs. the Headdresses
THE man with the stuffed buffalo head and horns affixed to his red cap said he had flown into town from Buffalo because he had promised his hat he would.
"I told him at the beginning of the season," said the man about his hat, "that if he brings the Bills good luck all season then I'd bring him to the Super Bowl. And here he is."


Market Place; Healthy Growth From Fresh Fruit
THE DOLE FOOD COMPANY was cruising along comfortably last year, with strong demand for its fresh fruits and vegetables helping to push its earnings and stock price sharply higher.
Then came the great banana debacle.
With demand for bananas growing rapidly, Dole entered into costly contracts with independent producers to insure that it would have an adequate supply.
When banana prices declined in the summer after an unexpected price war, however, those contracts suddenly became very bad deals, and the company's profit margins got squashed.
Dole's third-quarter earnings, released in October, were down 41 percent, blindsiding investors who only months earlier had been assured by Dole's chairman, David H. Murdock, that profits for the full year would be substantially higher than in 1990.


Selling Shoes And Recognition
In the blizzard of commercials throughout yesterday's television coverage of the Super Bowl, we were more or less introduced to two fellows named simply Dan and Dave by Reebok, the athletic-shoe company.
In case you failed to count, there were four 15-seconds commericals and one of 30 seconds, all surrounding the third quarter of the game.


Bancorp of Mississippi reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


With Injuries Behind Him, Bowie Gets Nets Healthy
The road back.
Sam Bowie, the Nets' 7-foot-1-inch center, has traveled that craggy and potholed toll road so many times that sometimes he looks back in wonder at how he got over it.
"I've got 12 screws in my right leg and 35 screws in my left leg," said the 30-year-old Bowie, who has seven years' experience in the National Basketball Associaton but came into this season with more games missed from injury as a pro than played, 305 to 269.
Through it all he's learned not to worry about getting injured anymore.


Doyle Northrup, 84, Head of Drive To Detect First Soviet Atom Blast
Doyle Northrup, a physicist who ran the secret United States system that detected the Soviet Union's first atomic bomb explosion and later advised the Geneva talks on controlling nuclear tests and weapons, died Dec. 15 at the Holmes Regional Nursing Center in Melbourne, Fla.
He was 84 years old and lived in nearby Satellite Beach.
Mr. Northrup died of natural causes, his wife said.


Celtrix Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Democrats See Support for Capital Gains Tax Cut
The Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine, said today that Democrats in Congress could support a cut in the capital gains tax if it was part of a generally "fair and progressive tax package."
Mr.
Mitchell's comment, on the CBS News program "Face the Nation," was the second signal this weekend that Democrats might not go all-out in attacking such a proposal as proof of Republican commitment to helping the rich, the traditional Democratic accusation.


Salvadoran Landowners and Peasants Also Learn to Live With One Another
A dozen years ago, Raul Salaverria sat on his veranda and declared that he would never cede to Government orders to give up his vast coffee estate.
His determination turned Hacienda La Labor into a battleground of the agrarian reform decreed by the military-led Government on March 7, 1980, in a vain effort to halt the budding guerrilla insurgency.


Mason Etching His Mark On Knicks
It was merely a question of opportunity.
If someone gave it to him, Anthony Mason believed he could take it and prove, finally, that he belonged.
The dark days in pro basketball's minor leagues are behind him, perhaps forever.
Mason, a reserve forward for the Knicks, is playing a pivotal role at a pivotal time and taking minutes from starter Xavier McDaniel.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
None Tuesday
None Wednesday
G.D.P. 4th Qtr. Thursday
Durable Goods Dec.
Personal Income Dec.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday
Leading Indicators Dec.
New-Home Sales Dec.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Networks Try to Intercept Football's Mounting Losses
FOR the three broadcast networks, the National Football League is the spigot that provides the most consistent, reliable flow of viewers in television.
And yet, some network executives now say they are thinking about shutting off the tap.
The reason, they say: they can't go on getting soaked.


One Dead, 3 Hurt in Restaurant Shooting
At least one man was killed and three others were injured early this morning in a shooting at a Chinese restaurant in Queens, the police said.
The shooting occurred at 12:20 A.M. in the High Pearl Restaurant at 82-22 45th Avenue, near Broadway, in Elmhurst, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Edelle James.


Can 4 Magazines Stay in Fashion?
Like the shiver of expectation that sweeps through the fashion world at the hint of a new look, Hearst's snapping up of the editor in chief of British Vogue to head Harper's Bazaar has sent a frisson through the fiercely competitive world of fashion magazines.
Not that any of the players have spent much time recently worrying about Harper's Bazaar, once the undisputed leader in the field and now but a pale contestant.
But with advertising pages still plunging for Vogue, Elle, Harper's Bazaar and Mirabella, and newsstand sales not doing much better, the unspoken question in this winter of discontent is whether enough advertising exists to support four fashion magazines.


Russia May Limit West's Oil Profits
Reflecting the caution with which Russia is approaching foreign investment in its oil industry, Viktor Lopukhin, the Fuel and Energy Minister, said today that his Government would push for practices that prevent Western oil companies from earning too big a return on their investments.
One such practice will be the greater use of competitive bidding to win the right to explore for oil or to develop existing fields, Mr.
Lopukhin said in an interview in Tyumen, the capital of Tyumen Province and the center of Russia's huge western Siberian oilfields.
The Russians will also try to avoid exclusive exploration or development rights.
And joint ventures, popular now, might be de-emphasized because they can overvalue the contribution of the foreign partners and undervalue that of the Russian partners.


Andover Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Clinton Defends His Privacy And Says the Press Intruded
In an unusual national televison interview, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas appealed tonight to voters to preserve his family's private life.
He criticized the press, saying it had engaged "in a game of gotcha" by reporting allegations that he had been unfaithful to his wife.
The Democratic Presidential candidate denied that he had had an affair with Gennifer Flowers, the Arkansas state employee and nightclub singer who told the tabloid Star in a paid interview that they had had a 12-year relationship.


Who (and What) Decides How City Budget Rates
WHEN Mayor David N. Dinkins delivered his State of the City address earlier this month, one sentence in the 18th paragraph finally inspired his audience to spontaneous applause: "Bond ratings are important," Mr.
Dinkins declared, "but we are judged against a higher standard."
Surprisingly, perhaps, some bond raters agree.


Can Trial Of Tyson Be Fair?
The question of whether the former heavyweight champion Mike Tyson can get a fair hearing in the trial that starts here Monday has become a hot speculative issue.
Already, T-shirts, at $12.50 apiece, are being sold that show a blindfolded Tyson holding a scale of justice in both hands with the words "Can Mike Tyson Get a Fair Trial?" underscoring an apparently growing belief among locals that maybe he can't.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Drama at Macy's
R.
H.
Macy's lawyers and investment bankers worked to assemble the financing package that the retailer needs if it files for bankruptcy protection, as expected.
The arrangements were expected to be completed by today, and several participants reiterated their belief that a filing was imminent.
If a filing is made, a judge will settle the fate of lenders, bondholders, suppliers and the company itself, but the stores will operate as usual.  [ Page D1. ]
What went wrong at Macy's?
The problems of the retailer, like those of many companies in bankruptcy, stem from the billions of dollars borrowed to enable its managers to buy the company from stockholders.
News Analysis.  [ A1. ]
Tremors emanating from the shaky foundation of Macy's parent company are being felt by shoppers on 34th Street.  [ D1. ] Companies


Letters Capture Spirit of the Neediest
"I am sorry." Dozens of letters to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund begin with that three-word refrain of sympathy that seems better than any other to capture the spirit of giving in these tough times.
Contributors say they are sorry the needs of New York's poor, sick and disabled are so great.
They are sorry that they do not see a permanent solution in sight.
And they are sorry that their own financial troubles have prevented them from giving more.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Almanac; Other Issues On Voters' Minds
"Besides issues like war and peace, the national economy and jobs, what other issues would you like to see the candidates for President emphasize in their campaigns this year?" % Issues mentioned 19 Health/care insurance 14 Education 10 The homeless 5 Taxes 5 Other domestic issues 4 Drugs 4 The elderly 4 Abortion 4 The environment Respondents were permitted to mention up to two issues.
Based on a New York Times/CBS News Poll with 1,376 adults nationwide interviewed by telephone Jan. 6-8.
Those with no opinion and responses that received less than 4 percent are not shown.


Interface Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Citizens Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dance In Review
Fiona Marcotty and Keely Garfield
Dia Center for the Arts  SoHo
Fiona Marcotty has the body of an athlete and the mind, it seems, of a dreamer.
Keely Garfield's gaze and small-boned flouncing have a wicked glint to them, as do the profoundly human creatures she finds under the rocks pulled up by her dances.
And so the two choreographers made an odd but interesting pair in a shared program on Friday night.


George Lucas on Issues, Ideas and Indiana Jones
In the lush valley enclave of his Skywalker Ranch, the film maker George Lucas is in the grip of perhaps the riskiest odyssey of his career: a major television series about the young Indiana Jones.
Mr.
Lucas, 47 years old, was the creator of the "Star Wars" sagas and an architect of the three Indiana Jones films.
Now he has completed the two-hour premiere of "The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles," which was made by Paramount and Lucasfilm and scheduled to be broadcast on ABC in early March.
It is to be followed by about 15 hourlong episodes, possibly more, covering the years 1908 to 1918.


Washington Makes Its Presence Felt
From the day they began preparing for this game, the Washington Redskins wanted to punish the Buffalo Bills: make the runners not want to run, the receivers not want to receive and the quarterback not want to throw.
Tonight, with linebacker Wilber Marshall leading the way, Washington implemented its game plan so thoroughly that the National Football League's most potent offense was not merely shut down but, at a key part of the game, stripped of its desire to score.


Fight Over Florio Budget Plan Heating Up in Hostile Trenton
Facing his biggest fiscal and political challenges since he assumed office two years ago, Gov.
Jim Florio will present a 1992-93 budget plan on Tuesday to the Republican-controlled Legislature that he says will include no new taxes.
But Mr.
Florio's decision to base his reported $15.5 billion budget plan on a 7 percent sales tax has set the stage for the first major clash between the Governor, a Democrat, and the Legislature, where Republicans took control about two weeks ago vowing to reduce the tax to 6 percent.


World Economies


Dance in Review
Hernando Cortez and Dancers  Merce Cunningham Studio
Hernando Cortez, who has danced with the companies of Paul Taylor and Eliot Feld, presented his first full evening of choreography on Saturday night.
The promising debut revealed that he can be both frivolous and serious.


A Crisis Built on Debt; Despite Its Strong Reputation in Retailing, Macy's Choices in the 80's Left It Crippled
The formidable Herald Square flagship of R. H. Macy &amp; Company is a New York landmark and one of the world's best-known stores.
Yet for all its name recognition and loyal following the 134-year-old retailer has come to the brink of filing for bankruptcy protection.
What went wrong?
The answer has little to do with Macy's stores or merchandise.
Macy's problems -- like those of so many companies now in bankruptcy -- stem from the billions of dollars it borrowed in the 1980's to enable its management to buy the company from its stockholders.
That $3.5 billion leveraged buyout in 1986, led by its chairman and chief executive, Edward S. Finkelstein, erected some high hurdles that the company was never able to clear.


'Buy American': Remedy or Tunnel Vision?
Intended or not, President Bush's trade mission to Japan has now stirred an emotional wave of "buy American" fervor across the recession-pocked land.
But economists and trade experts say the movement is a dubious remedy for the underlying ills of the American economy.
Sentiments reached a peak last Wednesday, when the Los Angeles County Transportation Commission, after withering public attack, rescinded the $122 million contract it had issued to a Japanese company for new rail cars for a mass transit system.


Rypien Is Most Thankful About One That Got Away
Mark Rypien, the Redskins' quarterback, who was chosen as the most valuable player of the Super Bowl tonight, figured that maybe the single finest moment in the most important game of his career came not on any of the 18 passes he threw for 292 yards in Washington's victory over the Bills.
Not even on either of the two scoring passes he threw.
It came, he said, on an incomplete pass.
"The big play was when a pass I threw to Gary Clark was batted down," he said.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Advacare Inc., 4.4 million shares. Robertson, Stephens.
Advanced Magnetics Inc., 1.75 million shares. Paine Webber Inc.


Woman Is Accused of Trying to Set Fire to Club
A 33-year-old Brooklyn woman who had been ejected from a Manhattan nightclub for fighting with another woman was arrested early yesterday after she returned with a can of gasoline and threatened to burn the club down, the police said.
The suspect, Yvonne Pertha of 309 Patchen Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant, was angry because the money she paid to get into the club, Octagon, at 555 West 33d Street, was not returned when she was ejected around midnight Saturday, the police said.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY A PICTURE OF BIAS
When racial and ethnic confrontations occur, who gets hurt and how, and how do the police classify them as bias incidents?
Despite a high number of bias crimes and the public outcry they tend to provoke -- 540 were reported by the police last year -- the number has remained fairly constant for the last four years.
Records were not kept before 1981, but "in all probability, there were more bias crimes 30 or 40 years ago," said Inspector William T. Wallace, commander of the Police Department's Bias Incident Investigating Unit.
A1.
Why the classification of bias crimes is so important. B2.
The latest crime to be classified as a bias attack.
B2.
AN OVERHAUL FOR THE TAXI INDUSTRY?
The Dinkins administration will propose a fundamental reorganization of New York City's taxi industry with an eye toward improving service outside central Manhattan.
Its proposals include the elimination of the free market in tax medallions, the creation of a new medallion for car services in the outer boroughs and a six-fold increase in enforcement against unlicensed cabs.
B1.
THE HIGH COST OF A JAIL BARGE
New York City's most expensive jail, a $161 million 800-bed barge, will open next month in the Bronx, far behind schedule and over budget.
The city's Correction Department attributed the cost overruns to unexpected design and construction delays and charges linked to the preparation of a dock site.
But the chairman of the Board of Correction, an independent body that monitors city prisons, said the shipbuilder should have foreseen the problems.
B3.
DO BOND RATINGS MATTER?
When Mayor David N. Dinkins delivered his State of the City address earlier this month, he said the city was being held to a "higher standard" than its bond ratings would imply.
Surprisingly, some bond raters agree, saying bond ratings are put in perspective by issues like public safety, adequate sanitation and education.
Metro Matters, B3.
A THREAT TO BURN CLUB
A 33-year-old Brooklyn woman who had been ejected from a Manhattan night club was arrested after she returned with a can of gasoline and threatened to burn the club down.
She was charged with second-degree attempted arson after witnesses told the police that she had poured some gasoline on the sidewalk and down the steel grating in the sidewalk.
B3.
REGION BUDGET PLAN FOR NEW JERSEY
Gov.
Jim Florio will present a 1992-93 budget plan on Tuesday to the Republican-controlled Legislature that he says will include no new taxes.
But his decision to base his budget plan on a 7 percent sales tax sets the stage for the first major clash between the Governor, a Democrat, and the Legislature, which the Republicans dominate.
B5.
COPING WITH CUTBACKS IN SCHOOL AID
The news that Governor Cuomo has proposed yet another cut in state aid to education has provoked outbursts of rage and fear among parents and teachers at the Bayview Avenue Elementary School in Freeport, L.I., and another suburban schools hit hardest by the cuts.
The budget cuts, the parents and teachers worry, are beginning to erode the promise of quality schools, a fundamental attraction and unifying principal of life in the suburbs.
B5.
ETHNIC TENSION IN A NEWARK CHURCH
In the Ironbound section of Newark, a Catholic Church whose members were once mainly Polish has a large new Portuguese contingent and is getting a Portuguese parish, angering the Poles.
To many Polish parishioners, some of whom picketed the church during Portuguese services yesterday, the action amounts to giving away a birthright.
Ironbound Journal, B5.
A 9-year-old Long Island girl died of what the authorities are calling heart failure in a foot race at the Colgate Games.
B5.
The Traffic Map B4 Neediest Cases B3 Chronicle B6


Washington Times Moves to Reinvent Itself
When Wesley Pruden, the combative managing editor of The Washington Times, moved into the top editor's spot in May, he soon found himself discussing country music at an intimate lunch with President Bush.
That kind of political access has given The Times, after nearly a decade of publication, its own genuine, if limited, place in the capital's rich media mix.


Macy Prepares for Bankruptcy
R.
H Macy &amp; Company's retinue of lawyers and investment bankers worked yesterday to assemble a financing package that the retailer will need if it files for bankruptcy protection, as is expected.
Several participants in the negotiations said they expected the financing arrangements to be finished by today.
They reiterated their belief that a bankruptcy filing is imminent.
Macy's board is expected to meet today to decide whether to proceed with the filing.


Why Favor Less Sturdy Japanese Cars?; A Model American
To the Editor:
Russell Baker acknowledges his error in calling the Duesenberg a car of German make ("That Stands for Car," column, Jan. 11).
The Duesenberg is indeed American.
It was named and built by the Duesenberg brothers, Frederich Samuel and August Samuel.
They were raised on a farm in Iowa, but were born in Lippe, Germany.
They arrived in Rockford, Iowa, in 1885 when only 8 or 9 years old.
They first repaired and sold bicycles, and later designed and built engines and ultimately cars.
Their first car was completed on Feb. 19, 1906, with the financial backing of Edward R. Mason, a Des Moines lawyer.
The factory was called the Mason Motor Company and the car was called a Mason.
Later models carried the Duesenberg name.
STANLEY H. STOLAR Fort Worth, Jan. 13, 1992


Bettina L. Chow, 41, Acclaimed As a Model and Jewelry Designer
Bettina Louise Chow, an internationally acclaimed model, restaurateur, jewelry designer, sculptor and fashion collector, died on Friday at her home in Pacific Palisades, Calif.
She was 41 years old.
Her death resulted from complications of AIDS, her family said.
She had talked openly of her illness, which she attributed to heterosexual transmission, and even before she knew she would be stricken, she was active in AIDS organizations because of the epidemic's toll on colleagues and friends.


Ameribanc Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Portuguese Flavor Irks Church's Old Guard
The street sign in front of St.
Casimir's says Pulaski, but the shop windows across from the church say Teixeira's Bakery, Brazil Restaurant and Favo de Mel food store.
It is that contrast -- between the fading Polish-American presence here in the Ironbound area of Newark and the large and growing Portuguese and Brazilian community that is replacing it -- that accounted for the presence of about 50 Polish-speaking parishioners picketing their own church here this morning.


In the Aisles, Shoppers Voice Dismay
Evie Wollman, 76 years old, was in the furniture department on the ninth floor of Macy's Herald Square store yesterday.
"I would like to buy a couple of chairs," she said, adding, in a note of potential impulse that is sweet music to retailers everywhere, "and maybe some sheets."
As newspapers and radio and television stations reported that bankruptcy proceedings to protect R. H. Macy &amp; Company from its creditors were imminent, Mrs.
Wollman -- "nee Bender," she said -- had come from the Bronx to go shopping with her friend, Ida Rubinstein.
And though their trip to 34th Street could not be described as a pilgrimage exactly, both women had memories of the store that recalled better days.


Medstat Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


If Frogs Had Wings
President Bush went to New Hampshire the other day to tell voters that he cares about their economic distress.
But when asked whether he would agree to further extend last year's extension of unemployment insurance benefits, he dismissed the question curtly: "If a frog had wings, he wouldn't hit his tail on the ground -- too hypothetical."
There's nothing hypothetical about the determination of Congressional Democrats to add still more weeks to the 13 to 20 extra weeks of insurance payments that were added last fall.
The House Ways and Means Committee is scheduled to vote on a 13-week extension Tuesday, just hours before Mr.
Bush's State of the Union Address.
The Senate Finance Committee plans hearings for Wednesday.


First Federal S&amp;L-Lenawee reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Rock; Fans Urged to 'Go Crazy' and They Do
Waterproof eyeliner must have been invented for performers like Ozzy Osbourne, who regularly punctuated his concert on Friday night at the Paramount by dipping his head in a bucket of water, then flinging the contents into the front rows.
Mr.
Osbourne is rock's most cheerful ghoul, singing about strange compulsions, unholy desires, mass destruction and Judgment Day.
His concerts, however, are like pep rallies, where Mr.
Osbourne urges his fans to sing along and "go crazy." At the Paramount the audience, overwhelmingly male and mostly wearing black T-shirts, stayed on its feet throughout the set; "I love you all!" Mr.
Osbourne kept shouting.
As the singer for Black Sabbath in the 1970's and on his own during the 1980's, Mr.
Osbourne laid the foundation for speed-metal with songs that bash and pummel heavy-metal riffs while lyrics ponder the pervasiveness of evil, sometimes from the perspective of a killer or a lost soul.
He has a gift for writing ambiguous lyrics; in "No More Tears," the title song of his current album (Epic), it's hard to tell whether the woman he's singing about is alive or dead.


The Devils Adopt Stylish Black Look
The red, green and white colors of their uniforms have been the one consistent aspect of the Devils' 10 years in New Jersey, but the colors, too, are in the process of being changed.
Starting with next season, the Devils will dress in red, black and white, which, in the eyes of some of the team's executives, are more attractive and more marketable colors.


China's Floods of July: Misery Lingers
Half a year after a flood devastated parts of central China, at least two million people are still shivering in crude temporary shelters and may not be able to rebuild their lives for years to come.
The flood victims are now enduring the coldest winter in many years, without heat or enough blankets, and they are likely to depend on Government handouts of rice for many months more.


Palestinians, After Debate, Decide to Go to Peace Talks
With the next round of Middle East peace talks scheduled to start in Moscow on Tuesday, Palestinian leaders ended their debate with a decision to take part in the negotiations.
Despite the wishes of Israel and the United States, the Palestinian delegation might include people from Arab East Jerusalem and from outside the Israeli-occupied territories, a delegate, Ghassan al-Khatib, told Reuters today.


First Tennessee National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Pittsburgh, Laid-Off Workers to Cook Up Civic Pride Along With Bread
Here in Steel Town, which lost 100,000 manufacturing jobs over the last decade, the start of a new bakery is being heralded with as much hoopla as a new sports team.
Workers are preparing to brand the city's north side with the bakery's neon sign, 14 feet high, 136 feet long and visible from the moon.
It will say, "City Pride Bakery: The Bakery With a Heart."
Experts say City Pride is the nation's first start-up of a major manufacturing company intended to be owned in full eventually by its employees, almost all of whom are being hired from welfare rolls and long-term unemployment lines.
Many of its workers hadlost their old jobs when the city's last commercial bakery closed in 1989 and organized to obtain government loans and private investments to establish the $9 million company.


Jose Ferrer Dies at 80


Gloomy Moment For Levy
Not every coach can talk about "the most bitter defeat I can remember in 40 years of coaching," because most coaches don't last that long in the business.
But the Buffalo Bills' Marv Levy is somewhat of a late bloomer as a head coach, and he waited until he was 63 to suffer his most bitter loss, the 37-24 defeat to Washington in the Super Bowl today.


Review/Theater; Doors Slam and the Pratfalls Fall In Ill-Fated Trysts at 'A Little Hotel'
For a farce to succeed onstage, it need not offer the audience redeeming social value, literary merit, great acting, esthetic perfection or brilliant wit.
A farce need be only one thing: funny.
By that simple criterion, the National Actors Theater staging of "A Little Hotel on the Side" can be called a complete flop, and it doesn't fare better by any other criteria, either.


Southwest Airlines Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Coming Back; New York's Finest, Underground
William Bratton's brief but effective career as chief of the New York City Transit Police vividly demonstrates how one person's energetic leadership makes a difference, even in a city struggling with fiscal and spiritual depression.
At the same time, his departure for a top management post with Boston's Metropolitan Police leaves New Yorkers with an urgent piece of unfinished business: bringing the separate forces that patrol subways and housing projects under the unified command of the Police Commissioner.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  U.N. NEEDS PEACE MONEY
The United Nations is facing a deepening financial crisis as member nations fail to pay their share for peace operations.
The United States remains the biggest delinquent on the payments, even though President Bush will call on the U.N. to expand its peacekeeping role this week.
A1  AGRARIAN PEACE FOR SALVADORANS
A coffee estate that became a battleground of Salvadoran land reform a dozen years ago is peaceful today.
Like the Salvadoran Government and the guerrilla movement, landowners and peasants have gradually found ways to live together.
A3  PALESTINIANS DEBATE TALKS
With the next round of Middle East peace talks set to start Tuesday in Moscow, Palestinians are still debating whether they will take part.
A2  DEFIANT FLAG IN KASHMIR
A Hindu nationalist politician carried India's flag into the central square of Kashmir's capital in a defiant gesture of domination over the Muslim region.
A6  CHINA'S FLOOD VICTIMS
Months after a flood devastated parts of central China, at least two million people are still shivering in crude temporary shelters and may not be able to rebuild their lives for years to come.
Flood victims have received relatively little attention in the West because China has restricted access to the hard-hit areas.
A6  OVERLOOKED KAZAKH GIANT
Having avoided nationalist unrest, the former Soviet republic of Kazakhstan has more time to study the new arts of making money.
An An American economist has already made notable progress in helping the new nation privatize housing.
A9  CAMPAIGN CIRCUS IN MANILA
The first presidential campaign in the Philippines since the nation rose up to topple the Marcos dictatorship in 1986 is developing into a free-for-all.
It looks like victory will depend more on political deal-making than on debate over ways to ease the plight of tens of millions of poor.
A6  JAPAN CONFRONTS AN ATROCITY
Wako Journal: Outraged that Japanese leaders were rewriting history, a professor singlehandedly debunked the Government's assertion that it played no role in forcing Korean women to work in battlefront brothels during World War II.
It took research and a willingness to break a taboo.
A4  National A10-17  ACCESS FOR THE DISABLED
The first phase of a sweeping anti-discrimination law took effect, requiring businesses to give equal access to millions of disabled Americans.
The law may give rise to menus in Braille, wheelchair space in theaters and other changes in businesses of every size.
A1  DOES BUY-AMERICAN HELP U.S.?
President Bush's trade mission to Japan has stirred a "buy American" fervor, but economists doubt the movement can heal the ailing economy, and some Americans say the campaign may have racist overtones.
A1  ON THE ROAD AGAIN
After two years of less travel, Americans are again seeking bookings for cruise ships, hotels and airlines.
A1  BUSH TO EMPHASIZE THE DOMESTIC
President Bush is expected to use his State of the Union Message to challenge Congress on the economy, as well as to define a "new domestic order" to go with his "new world order." A16  DEMOCRAT BACKS A TAX CUT
Senator George Mitchell said he would back a cut in the capital gains tax if part of a generally "fair and progressive tax package." A17  ANOTHER VIEW OF TAX CUTS
As President Bush and Congressional Democrats seek to outdo each other in proposing tax reductions, many economists say that higher taxes are what the nation needs in the long run.
D1  CRISIS BUILT OF DEBT
Despite Macy's name and loyal following, the retailer is tottering close to bankruptcy, unable to leap hurdles created when it borrowed millions of dollars in a management buyout.
News Analysis.
A1  AN OPENING FOR KERREY
Senator Kerrey's Presidential campaign has been an absurdist adventure marked by angst and black humor.
Now "Cosmic Bob" has a chance to catch up with Governor Clinton, who is struggling with questions about his personal life.
A14  CLINTON DEFENDS PRIVACY
Governor Clinton appealed to voters to allow his family to preserve its privacy and criticized the press for reporting accusations that he had been unfaithful to his wife.
A14  SERVING UP BREAD AND CIVIC PRIDE
With open arms and mouths, Pittsburgh is welcoming the startup of a $9 million baking factory that eventually is to be owned by its employees -- almost all of whom are being hired off welfare rolls and long-term unemployment lines.
A10  The trial of Jeffrey Dahmer begins.
A11  Metropolitan Digest, B1 PORTRAIT OF BIAS
A young black man and his Hispanic girlfriend are assaulted in the Bronx.
Two gay men are heckled in Queens.
These are 2 of the 540 bias crimes recorded by the New York City police last year.
A1  Neediest Cases B3  Business Digest, D1  Sports C1-13  REDSKINS WIN SUPER BOWL  The Washington Redskins romped in Super Bowl XXVI, scoring a 37-24 victory over the Buffalo Bills in Minneapolis.
Washington brought the National Football Conference its eighth consecutive victory.
C1  Washington punishes Buffalo.
C1  Bills' stars are stymied C3  Reeves analyzes the game C4  Basketball: Mason paces Knicks.
C6  Bowie overcomes adversity.
C6  Big victory for U.N.L.V.
C10  Columns: Vecsey on a Super Bowl for winners.
C3  Berkow on the Bowl and the bonnets.
C5  Golf: Calcavecchia wins Phoenix Open.
C6  Obituaries B7  JOSE FERRER IS DEAD  Jose Ferrer has died at 80 after an award-winning career as an actor and a writer, producer and director.
Arts/Entertainment C17-22  George Lucas on "Young Indiana Jones." C17  Winners at the Sundance Film Festival.
C17  Theater: "A Little Hotel on the Side." C17  Music: Ozzy Osbourne at Paramount.
C17  Word and Image: "Memphis," on TNT.
C20  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  New York's transit police.
The rise and fall of MIRV.
Topics: If frogs had wings.
Letters A20  Leslie H. Gelb: Journalistic cannibals.
A21  William Safire: Macho feminism, R.I.P.
A21  David A. Stockman: Hands off the economy.
A21  Ralph Schoenstein: Nothin' but a hound dog idea.
A21


The Redskins, and the Roof, Fall on the Bills
This Super Bowl was supposed to be a high-scoring affair. It was.
This Super Bowl was supposed to match the creative wits of teams with strikingly different but, in the end, equal schemes.
It did not.


Essay; Macho Feminism, R.I.P.
A petty annoyance that contributed to Gov.
Bill Clinton's defeat in 1980 was his wife's refusal to adopt his name: it rankled many voters that Hillary Rodham, who met her future husband at Yale Law School, was too ardently feminist to permit herself to be called "Mrs. Clinton."
The Clintons, man and wife, learned plenty from that early slapping-down by the Arkansas electorate.
"You can't lead without listening," the chastened former hotshot told voters the next time out.
Ms.
Rodham joined in this by taking on the traditional style of "Mrs. Clinton"; they've been winners ever since.


Ivy League Furor, On and Off the Football Field
The Yardlings and the Bullpups are in danger of becoming extinct and that is the heart of a tiff among the Ivies.
Those are the nicknames of the freshman football teams at Harvard and Yale, and they have been around for decades; Yardlings coming from Harvard Yard, the heart of the campus, and Bullpups from Bulldogs, Yale's nickname.


French Boat Measures Up To New Zealand's Zip
Marc Pajot, skipper for the French team in the America's Cup trial competition, tends to be a soft-spoken, seldom-boastful yachtsman.
But he could hardly contain his happiness Saturday, despite his team's loss to New Zealand.
Losing wasn't the point.
More important, the French sailboat, Ville de Paris, appeared able to keep up with the New Zealand yacht in speed during their 20.3-mile match.
The French said a tactical mistake cost them the race, which New Zealand won by 56 seconds.


Mayor Seeks Solution To N.Y. Garbage Crisis
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 18 news article on my tenure as New York City's Sanitation Commissioner represents an unfair and misleading account of my views.
The article, without directly quoting me, said I had faulted Mayor David N. Dinkins for failing to acknowledge the city's waste-disposal crisis and for not supporting recycling.
I did say that most elected officials are not willing to confront the difficult issues of building new waste facilities because the consequences of inaction would not be apparent within their terms of office.
However, I specifically exempted the Mayor from this characterization because he has -- to the city's long-term benefit -- been willing to recognize this need.


Travel Industry Is Experiencing A Sudden Surge
After two years of reduced travel, Americans are on the move again, producing an unexpected spurt in bookings for cruise ships, hotels and airlines in recent weeks.
Trans-Atlantic flights are on the rise, travel industry executives say, and tour operators, who just a month ago were bemoaning a slowdown in bookings for Hawaii, now report an upsurge of fresh business.
Airlines that until recently were unsure whether to add flights to Florida and other warm-weather destinations now say they will, and so far this month almost 1,400 flight attendants have been recalled -- the largest number since May 1990.


Washington Leaves Buffalo With the Deficit
The game was played in the perpetually controlled environment of a domed stadium in Minneapolis.
But Super Bowl XXVI might just as well have been staged yesterday in the kind of weather the Washington Redskins traditionally wallow in: cold and tough.
From the opening moments, when they swatted Jim Kelly and his Buffalo receivers, the Redskins demonstrated their superiority to the Bills, the 63,130 spectators in the Metrodome and the usual television audience of more than 100 million viewers.


Don't Tear Down the Naumburg Bandshell; Strike Up the Band
To the Editor:
"Central Park Bandshell Has Become Irrelevant" (letter, Jan. 14), calling for removal of the "unwieldy" Naumburg Bandshell, was dismaying.
It is one of my, and perhaps millions of others, cherished memories.
Let it be refurbished and used by school bands or by small theater groups.
Renew rather than destroy what was good about our past.
Besides, band music is not dead.
A tour of community parks in the summer would attest to this.
A plaque with the Naumburg family name in brass would be a dead monument to a living tradition.
MARIAN MARCHESANI Scarsdale, N.Y., Jan. 14, 1992


CHRONICLE
The director MARTIN SCORSESE will make Troy, N.Y., the primary location for filming "The Age of Innocence," city officials said.
The movie, a love story set in Manhattan in the 1870's, is based on the novel by Edith Wharton and stars Daniel Day-Lewis and Michelle Pfeiffer.
Location managers told The Associated Press that they picked Troy, just north of Albany, for its architectural wealth.
The City Manager, STEVEN DWORSKY, said the city's streets will be buried in dirt and street lights, signs, storefronts and fire hydrants will be removed or disguised for the movie.
Weather permitting, filming in Troy will start in mid-March.
Mr.
Scorcese also plans to shoot scenes in Philadelphia and New York City.


Integra Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Reversal on Touchdown
The first touchdown reversal caused by instant replay in Super Bowl history -- when a replay caught Redskins receiver Art Monk's foot out of bounds in the first quarter -- "will make it awfully hard to say you're not going to use it anymore," said Sandy Grossman, who directed the game's broadcast for CBS.
"You don't necessarily want to be a part of the process, but if you are, you are," Grossman said.
He added that "the process won't go away" if the National Football League eliminates review by replay.
"We'll keep showing what we have to 110 million viewers," he said.


Ralph Pritchard, 72, Leader in Real Estate
Ralph W. Pritchard, a retired national leader in the real estate business, died Jan. 16 at his home in La Grange, Ill.
He was 72 years old and died of a heart attack, his family said.


Foothill Independent Bancorp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


A Big Lead Shrinks, But the Game Is Saved
Maybe this was what Seton Hall needed to finally find itself in this oddest of college basketball seasons.
Maybe it takes a victory over a powerful nonconference team on national television on the day when pro football is king to swing the Pirates in a new direction.
And when Coach P. J. Carlesimo and his team point back to this date, they will credit Brian Caver for giving them the final push in their dramatic 68-64 victory over sixth-ranked Ohio State at Byrne Meadowlands Arena this afternoon.


Calcavecchia Finally Finds Touch
Mark Calcavecchia won his first tournament in two and a half years when he pulled away to a five-stroke victory in the Phoenix Open today.
Calcavecchia, once one of golf's brightest young stars but a struggling also-ran since his 1989 British Open victory, returned to form with a near-flawless, eight-under-par 63 in the final round on the Tournament Players Course at Scottsdale.


CCB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Little Help Goes Long Way for Klecker
Janis Klecker, aided by a gesture of camaraderiefrom Cathy O'Brien 15 miles into the race, rallied today to overtake the favorite and win the 1992 United States Olympic marathon trial for women.
Klecker, a 31-year-old dentist from Minnetonka, Minn., made up a 100-yard deficit in the last mile to capture the 26-mile-385-yard event in 2 hours 30 minutes 12 seconds, her fastest time.
O'Brien, 24, of Durham, N.H., placed second in 2:30:26 to repeat as a member of the Olympic team.


Police Find Bias Crimes Are Often Wrapped in Ambiguity
When a 15-year-old Brooklyn girl was raped earlier this month, her furious father made a point of telling the public what the assailants had told his child: that she was "white and perfect."
The girl described her attackers as two black men, and her father said later that he had wanted desperately to draw public attention to the case.


Sheila Ginsberg, Broker, Is Wed
Sheila Kelly Ginsberg, an associate broker at Sotheby's International Realty, and Stephen Lewis Wald, president of the First Czechoslovakian Investment Company, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Bernard Mehlman performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's mother, Ellen G. Wald, in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Mrs.
Wald graduated from Drexel University and has a master of professional studies degree in travel, tourism and transportation from the New School for Social Research.
She is a daughter of Ethel K. Richwine of Aston, Pa., and the late Edward J. Kelly Jr.
She was the widow of Robert L. Ginsberg.


Battle in Lebanon Kills Israeli and 3 Shiites
Fighting broke out today in southern Lebanon between Israeli forces and Lebanese Shiite Muslim fundamentalist guerrillas.
An Israeli soldier and three guerrillas were killed, both sides said.
After the incident, which occurred in the border area that Israel calls its security zone inside Lebanon, Israeli artillery fire on guerrilla stongholds east of Sidon.


CGI Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
A galaxy of stars assembled in London last week to contest the International Bridge Pairs Championship, sponsored by The Sunday Times and Macallan malt whisky.
Twenty of the players were world champions, past or present, and the rest were of comparable strength.
The winners, by a wide margin, were Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco of Brazil, who were playing completely without conventions.
The runners-up were Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff of Dallas, who will be opposing the Brazilians today in a match between Naturalists, playing without conventions, against Scientists.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Advanced Medical Inc.'s $60 million of convertible subordinated debentures were offered on Friday, priced at par, with a 7 1/4 percent coupon, through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
The San Francisco-based company makes infusion systems for the health-care industry.
Common Stock  *
UCC Investors Holding Inc., parent of Uniroyal Chemical Co., Middlebury, Conn., plans to file for $400 million of common stock, plus $300 million of senior notes. *
Chicago and North Western Holdings has filed for 8.75 million common shares.
The Chicago-based company is the parent of the Chicago &amp; North Western Railroad.
Underwriters will be Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette; Goldman, Sachs, and Morgan Stanley.
Ratings  *
Port Authority of New York and New Jersey's $100 million consolidated bonds have been rated AA- by Fitch, which said that rating also applied to $4 billion of similar bonds of the agency. *
Pfizer Inc.'s triple-A rating on its senior debt has been affirmed by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp., based on a proposed settlement of claims arising from difficulties with a mechanical artificial heart valve.
Pfizer is based in New York.


General Datacomm reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Best Performer? It's Madden in a Rout
At 6:31 P.M.
Central Standard Time yesterday evening, after a Gerald Riggs touchdown put the Washington Redskins up by 17-0 in the Super Bowl, John Madden gave up on the hapless Buffalo Bills.
He used his TeleStrator to show a blimp equipped with a remote-controlled camera tethered to the Metrodome roof.
"This means nothing," he said, circling the blimp.


The Rise and Fall of MIRV
MIRV.
Probably no word better encapsulates the technology and the terror of the Nuclear Age.
The acronym comes from
multiple, independently targetable, re-entry vehicle,
opaque Latinate language referring to multiple warheads on missiles developed in the late 1960's.
As they near their destination, they fragment into a burst of separate nuclear bombs, each headed for a different target.
Now, suddenly, the end of that destabilizing peril has come into view.
President Bush is now reportedly on the verge of sharply reducing multiple-warhead missiles in the U.S. arsenal, an act that would encourage the Soviet Union's successor states to contain their loose nukes.
There are few steps that could more effectively reduce the nuclear threat.


SWEEPING U.S. LAW TO HELP DISABLED GOES INTO EFFECT
The first major phase of what has been called the most sweeping anti-discrimination law since the Civil Rights Act of 1964 began yesterday, requiring businesses to give equal access to millions of disabled Americans.
The public accommodations provisions of the law, the Americans with Disabilities Act, mean more than merely providing adequate parking spaces or ramps for the handicapped.


First of American Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fast Data-Storage Systems Are EMC's Big Opportunity  BYL&gt;By JOHN MARKOFF
For more than a year the computer industry has been eagerly anticipating a ground-breaking new product code-named Iceberg from Storage Technology Inc., the disk-drive maker.
The new system will chain together dozens of small disk drives like a team of huskies pulling a sled, to give them greater speed and more reliability in storing data.
But it is not due out until the second half of this year.
Storage Technology will formally announce the system on Jan. 28.


In New York, State Prisoners Work or Else
New York State's prison system has quietly imposed one of the nation's toughest mandatory work policies, locking inmates who refuse work in their cells for 23 hours a day and then blackballing them when they come up for parole.
The new work policy was put in place over the last year when 1,071 inmates were locked in their cells until they agreed to work and another 267 had their privileges restricted, state correction officials said.


Franco-Nevada Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Commercial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Rock; Slow to Fast and Back
The Meat Puppets basically have two kinds of songs: ones that start out slow, then turn really fast, then slow again, and ones that start out fast, turn slow, and then fast again.
At the Knitting Factory on Friday night, this Arizona trio played both kinds, rotating them one after another in a set that had the pacing of an amusement park ride.
After a while, you wanted to be let off.
At first, the Meat Puppets were pleasurable enough.
Its guitarist and singer Curt Kirkwood has a sweet voice rife with twangy innocence, and his lyrics are often daffy little nonsense rhymes that offer grains of truth.
"In those days there was zero waste, now the waste of time is life," he sings in "This Day," from the band's eighth and most recent album "Forbidden Places" (London).
His accomplished guitar style flickers back and forth between heavy metal riffing and high-velocity country picking.
When the Puppets hit top speed, Mr.
Kirkwood's playing was almost surreal, like an entire hoedown chorus shoved into a single measure.


Show Will Miss A Top Shepherd
When the 2,500 showiest of this country's leading show dogs converge on Madison Square Garden two weeks from today for the Super Bowl of the canine world, the prestigious Westminster Kennel Club show, one of the odds-on favorites to capture the coveted best-in-show honors will be missing.
Ch.
Bramblewood's Custom Made, a 6-year-old German Shepherd owned by JANE FIRESTONE, died unexpectedly last Tuesday following emergency surgery to repair a stomach blockage.
The dog, whose off-duty name was Conan, accumulated 76 all-breed best-in-show victories and six specialty bests.
Conan not only was the nation's top German Shepherd, but one of the top 10 dogs over all.


FREE-FOR-ALL SEEN IN PHILIPPINE VOTE
The first presidential campaign in the Philippines since this nation rose up to topple the Marcos dictatorship in 1986 is developing into a free-for-all in which victory will depend more on traditional political deal-making than on debate over proposals to ease the plight of the country's tens of millions of poor.
The two candidates who top voter opinion surveys -- Senator Joseph Estrada, a grade B movie star who is sometimes described as the Ronald Reagan of the Philippines, and Miriam Defensor Santiago, a former immigration commissioner who is portraying herself as a dogged corruption fighter -- are being written off because they lack the backing of a large political machine.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a new natural gas pipeline serving the Northeast included erroneous data from the American Gas Association about the percentages of homes heated by gas.
The correct figures are 56 percent nationally, 36.3 percent in New York, 51 percent in New Jersey and 24.6 percent in Connecticut.


President's Message Expected to Lay Out Plans for a 'New Domestic Order'
In his State of the Union Message, President Bush is expected to challenge Congress to action on the economy without criticizing or directly confronting the Democrats, as well as to seek to define a "new domestic order" to go with his "new world order," Administration officials said today.
As Mr.
Bush worked today on a draft of the address, which he will deliver on Tuesday, the officials and Republican strategists said the White House was still debating philosophy and tactics.


Once Again, Redskins' Victory No Fluke for N.F.C.
Coach Dan Reeves, whose Denver Broncos were trounced by the Redskins in the Super Bowl four years ago, was able to appreciate what Washington did yesterday.
"I've been in this league since I joined Dallas in 1965," Reeves said, "and it'll never change: The team that can run the ball, and plays defense, wins."


Grapefruit Month in Congress
Forget the economy, health care and other weighty issues.
Representatives Andy Ireland and Tom Lewis of Florida are busily buttonholing colleagues to have February declared "National Grapefruit Month." That might please the state's citrus growers, but why does Congress waste its time on empty commemorations?
A new compilation in the Congressional Record shows that nearly one-third of the new laws passed by Congress last year named a day, week, month or decade to celebrate.
Whether the cause is National Mushroom Month or National Country Music Month, each bill requires lining up the co-sponsorship and signatures of a majority of members of both chambers.
That eats up a hefty portion of staff time.
And for what?
A clutter of forgettable occasions, many pandering to special interests.


Sikhs Kill Punjab Candidate
Sikh militants demanding a boycott of elections next month in Punjab State shot a candidate to death today, the police said.
Investigators said Harpal Singh, who would have been the nominee of the Communist Party of India, was killed by two gunmen near the town of Bhatinda in the southern Punjab.


Kazakhs Seek a Level Capitalist Road
Quietly, while the other republics of the fallen Soviet empire are raging with the politics of recrimination, this critical new nation linking Russia and the newly independent Asian states is employing a different drummer in its attempted march to the free market.
He is Dr.
Chan Young Bang, a 55-year-old American economist from the University of San Francisco, who has already achieved notable progress in the privatization of 40 percent of this capital's housing stock while the parliaments of other republics are still mostly agonizing over the alien notion of private ownership.


Communities, Rich and Poor, Scramble to Cope With Albany's School Aid Cuts
At the Bayview Avenue Elementary School, where the red welcome mat says "All Children Can Read," students in the second grade did not get a language arts workbook this year -- at more than $9 a copy they were simply too expensive in this age of budget cutting -- and there were not enough social studies textbooks to go around either.
So the news that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has proposed yet another cut in state aid to education has provoked outbursts of rage and fear among parents and teachers at the yellow-brick Bayview Avenue school and at other suburban schools hit hardest by the cuts.


When Charge Is Murder, Men Fare Worse
To the Editor:
The title "A Double Standard for Murder?" (Op-Ed, Jan. 8) is appropriate for the very opposite of what Phyllis Chesler describes.
Serial killers are rare and cannot serve as a basis for generalizations about differential treatment given men and women by the criminal justice system.
Killings between intimates, however, are common.
As a forensic psychiatrist, I have evaluated hundreds of such tragedies over the last 30 years.
Scientific literature, including my own research, has established that women are represented in that category of homicide as often as men.
In these cases it is common for men to be convicted of murder; women usually are charged with manslaughter.
Many women who have killed a husband or lover who was asleep were acquitted on grounds of self-defense.


Clients Demand Flexibility For Their Media Purchases
NOT too many years ago, anyone who suggested that an advertiser would be able to buy a commercial during a Super Bowl as late as two days before the game would have been dismissed as someone who played too much football without a helmet.
Yet for Super Bowl XXVI, which CBS broadcast yesterday, no one was surprised that it took the network until Friday to sell the last of the 56 available 30-second spots.
The difference between then and now is a fundamental change in the ability of advertisers to plan ahead.
As a result of two years of economic uncertainties, no company wants to make commitments as extravagant as a Super Bowl buy -- at $800,000 to $850,000 for each commercial -- as far as several months in advance.
Across a broad range of product categories, like beer, cars, soft drinks, air travel and credit cards, rapidly changing market conditions make flexibility far more highly prized than having an annual media plan locked in by Jan. 1.


Wako Journal; History Scholar in Japan Exposes a Brutal Chapter
When Japan's television networks recently began broadcasting the accounts of Korean women and girls who were kidnapped and forced to serve in battlefront brothels for the Imperial Army, even Japanese who prefer never to think about World War II said they felt shamed by the years of agony the women endured.
But the Japanese Government had the same ready answer it has had for decades: A few words of sympathy for the tens of thousands of victims whose lives were shattered, and a curt dismissal of their demands for Government compensation.
The brothels, Japan's Foreign Ministry said, were run by private entrepreneurs, not the Government.
No one in the Foreign Ministry, though, was ready for Yoshiaki Yoshimi.


Armatron International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Compaq Set To Introduce 2 Computers
The Compaq Computer Corporation on Monday will introduce the first computers of its Eckhard Pfeiffer era -- two notebook models with several new features and retail prices ranging from $2,900 to $4,600.
After Mr.
Pfeiffer took over as chief executive on Oct. 24, he vowed that Compaq would price its machines closer to the thriving clone makers like the Dell Computer Corporation of Austin, Tex.
And the two notebook models appear to blend Compaq's emphasis on new technology with a lower price.
Dell and other rivals gained ground on Compaq last year and forced the company into abrupt and sweeping changes.


Man Stabbed in Subway Robbery Attempt


Bairnco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


1992 CAMPAIGN: Players; Onetime Insider Adapts To Low-Key Campaign
Peggy Connolly, once a consummate Washington insider as spokeswoman for the Democratic National Campaign Committee, left the capital in 1988 right after George Bush's election.
She said she believed that a Democrat would not be elected President until the year 2000.
But today, Ms.
Connolly, 36 years old, is press secretary to Paul E. Tsongas, former Senator from Massachusetts, who is seeking the Democratic nomination.
Mr.
Tsongas was the first Democrat to challenge President Bush.


Kazakhs Seek a Level Capitalist Road
Quietly, while the other republics of the fallen Soviet empire are raging with the politics of recrimination, this critical new nation linking Russia and the newly independent Asian states is employing a different drummer in its attempted march to the free market.
He is Dr.
Chan Young Bang, a 55-year-old American economist from the University of San Francisco, who has already achieved notable progress in the privatization of 40 percent of this capital's housing stock while the parliaments of other republics are still mostly agonizing over the alien notion of private ownership.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 26: MONDAY
ARCO
Coachmen Inds
Fort Dearborn Income Secs
Howell Corp
Kennametal Inc
Philadelphia Elec Co
Stone Container Corp
UGI Corp
Zurn Inds  TUESDAY
Ahmanson H F &amp; Co
Allergan Inc
American Brands
Amoco Corp
Ball Corp
Birmingham Steel
Borden Inc
Cilcorp
Duke Power
McDonald &amp; Co Invts
Northeast Utils
TCF Finl Corp
Warner
-
Lambert Co
Wicor Inc  WEDNESDAY
Alexander &amp; Alehander Svc
Alltel Corp
Asarco Inc
Bethlehem Steel
Equifax Inc
Exxon Corp
Georgia Pacific
Grainger W W Inc
Houghton Mifflin Co
Newmont Minig
Panhandle Eastern
Quaker State
US Surgical Corp
Weis Mkts Inc
Westinghouse Elec Corp
Zero Corp
THURSDAY
Andarko Pete Corp
Black Hills Corp
Donnelley R R &amp; Sons
Duke Rlty Invts Inc
Oregon Stl Mls Inc
Parker Hannifin Corp
PSI Res Inc
Sara Lee Corp
FRIDAY
Broad Inc
Hea
l
th Care Ppty Invs Inc
Kysor Indl Corp Del


Czarina Had Rasputin, Devils Have Zelepukin
Valery Zelepukin is the Devils' answer to Buffalo's Aleksandr Mogilny, Detroit's Sergei Fedorov, the Rangers' Sergei Nemchinov and Vancouver's Igor Larionov, to name a few of the speediest and improvisational Russian forwards in the National Hockey League.
The 23-year-old Zelepukin has attracted raves over his immense talent and the dynamic and exciting manner he puts his attributes to use with or without the puck.
His crafty stick-handling, sudden twists and turns, remarkable balance and quick acceleration have brought gasps from fans and teammates alike.


Bankers Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ms. Reps Wed To B. J. Smith
Cathy Ellen Reps, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Cantor of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Bryan Jeffrey Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Smith of New York.
Judge Gerard H. Rosenberg of the Civil Court of the City of New York officiated at the Zinno Restaurant in New York.
Mrs.
Smith, 36 years old, is the director of custom publishing for the women's publishing division of The New York Times Company Magazine Group in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Syracuse University.
Her father is a lawyer in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Barbara Cantor, is an artist.


Can Trial Of Tyson Be Fair?
The question of whether the former heavyweight champion Mike Tyson can get a fair hearing in the trial that starts here Monday has become a hot speculative issue.
Already, T-shirts, at $12.50 apiece, are being sold that show a blindfolded Tyson holding a scale of justice in both hands with the words "Can Mike Tyson Get a Fair Trial?" underscoring an apparently growing belief among locals that maybe he can't.


Dinkins Plan Would Alter Taxi Industry
The Dinkins administration will propose a fundamental reorganization of New York City's taxi industry, including the elimination of the free market in taxi medallions, the creation of two new medallions for livery cabs and a sixfold increase in enforcement against unlicensed cabs.
The plan, to be released publicly this week, is intended to improve the quality of cab service, particularly in parts of the city outside the central Manhattan business districts.
Details of the proposal were disclosed this weekend by several people involved in drafting it.


New Jewish Magazine Seeks Charity's Help
A new Jewish magazine hopes to get off to a running -- and inexpensive -- start by turning some of the nation's top charitable donors into instant subscribers.
But the plan has drawn complaints of favoritism from competitors and raised concerns about the magazine's editorial independence.


Firstier Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Courier Defeats Edberg To Close In on No. 1
It was Australia Day, a celebration of the nation's birth, but it was an all-American celebration at the Australian Open after Jim Courier won the year's first Grand Slam tournament and stood poised to become the first United States man since John McEnroe in 1985 to be ranked No. 1 in the world.
Courier, currently ranked second, scored a decisive 6-3, 3-6, 6-4, 6-2 victory over Stefan Edberg to leave him trailing the world's No. 1 player by only 20 points on the Association of Tennis Professionals computer.


INSIDE
Overhauling Taxi Industry
To improve the quality of cab service, the Dinkins administration will propose a fundamental reorganization of how the taxi business works.
Page B1.
Good Words for Taxes
While politicians rush to embrace tax cuts, many economists assert that in the long run, higher taxes would be far more beneficial.
Page D1.
Candidate Makes Appeal
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas appeared on national television to ask voters to preserve his family's private life.
Page A14.
Kazakhs' Different Drummer
Kazakhstan is marching more boldly than other former Soviet republics toward the free market.
Page A9.


CHRONICLE
They may constitute a rarefied sample, but users of the Encyclopaedia Britannica's Instant Research Service were more interested in Edgar Allan Poe last year than they were in Jesus, Picasso or Al Capone.
One of the more surprising findings in a ranking of the people who generated the most requests for information from the research service was that Poe ranked fifth in the top 20 individuals.
The service provides information on any 100 topics requested over a 10-year period to purchasers of the Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Last year it received more than 162,000 inquiries.
One-fifth of those were sampled for the ranking, said MARGARET MOTTIER, director of the service.


Firms Relatively Quiet on Treasury Proposals
After decades of doing business pretty much on their own, executives and traders at firms that buy and sell Treasury securities seem to have relatively few quarrels with the sweeping market changes proposed last week by the Government.
In part, the subdued reaction stems from a realization that further changes, beyond those announced in the immediate aftermath of the Salomon Brothers bidding scandal, were bound to come.
But many traders say there is also widespread recognition that many of the proposed changes are sound ones.


Vacu-Dry Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Don't Tear Down the Naumburg Bandshell
To the Editor:
The proposed demolition of the beautiful neo-classic Naumburg Bandshell in New York's Central Park is an affront not only to the Naumburg family but to the concept of preservation itself (news article, Jan. 19).
In arguing it is a maintenance nightmare, attracting the homeless and drug abusers, Commissioner of Parks and Recreation Betsy F. Gotbaum makes as much sense as if proposing to tear down Grand Central Terminal or the New York Public Library, where derelicts abound.


Adac Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Jose Ferrer, Actor, Writer And Director, 80, Is Dead
Jose Ferrer, renowned as the cool, cerebral and idiosyncratic actor who won an Academy Award playing Cyrano de Bergerac, died yesterday at Doctors' Hospital in Coral Gables, Fla.
A family spokesman gave his age as 80, although some reference works said he was 83.
He was a resident of Miami.
His family said he died after a brief illness but did not disclose its nature.


Cray Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Foreign Affairs; Journalistic Cannibals
Journalistic cannibalism is just grand.
Nothing like opening up the garbage pails of politicians' private lives to get the democratic juices running.
The people want a full whiff.
They need to know all.
Perhaps the public's right and need to know should even include investigations of journalists at play to see who among them is chaste and virtuous.
Bill and Hillary Clinton decided they had to expose themselves to such a trial last night.
On the distinguished CBS News program "60 Minutes," they repeated that their marriage had been troubled and reaffirmed that they have worked things out.
That tells us everything we need to know.
More than we need to know.


Powell to Receive Jesse Owens Award at Waldorf
MIKE POWELL, the American long jumper who broke BOB BEAMON's 23-year-old world record at the track and field world championships in Tokyo last August, will receive this year's Jesse Owens International Trophy Award at a dinner Feb. 4 at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in Manhattan.
When Powell steps to the podium, a trio of special peers of the past will best comprehend what is behind the award.
Beamon, RALPH BOSTON and IGOR TER-OVANESYAN are expected to be present.
They, and Powell, are the only ones to have held the world long-jump mark since the late JESSE OWENS set a world record in 1935.


Going Up the Downhill Slope
It was his first World Cup victory of the season, the first after the worst start of his career, a start that prompted many experts to conclude that Marc Girardelli had used up the last of his 99 lives and was on his way to being a former champion.
But there he was, just two hours after winning the supergiant slalom in Val d'Isere, France, on Dec. 8, running slalom gates beneath the watchful eye of Helmut, his ever-present father.


Pedestrian Killed by Train
A man was struck and killed by a shore-bound New Jersey Transit train tonight, a transit official said.
The accident delayed rush-hour trains up to one hour.
The man was killed instantly when the train hit him at 5:50 P.M. on the North Jersey Coast Line tracks near Fulton Street, just west of the Woodbridge station, said Rosemary Sheridan, a spokeswoman for New Jersey Transit.
The name of the victim was not immediately available, and it was unclear whether he was crossing or walking along the tracks when he was hit.


Hartford Steam Boiler reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hammer-and-Sickle Falls Out of Fashion in Brazil
Drawing back from a 70-year effort to bring Marx to Brazil's masses, the Brazilian Communist Party has voted to drop the hammer and sickle as its symbol and to change its name to the Popular Socialist Party.
The party, which is stressing democracy and socialism, abandoned its name Sunday night in a raucous congress marked by egg-throwing and name-calling.
Last fall, as a struggle over the party's future deepened, reform leaders took out a 10-year patent on the party's old name to prevent others from using it, and orthodox members retaliated by breaking into party offices and carrying to safety portraits of Marx, Engels and Lenin.


Afraid and Hurt, Young Turn to Clinics
The girl had just turned 13 and complained of acne when she came to the adolescent medicine clinic at Oakland Children's Hospital last week.
But blemishes were the least of her problems.


Supreme Court Roundup; Limits Placed on Union Organizers on Employers' Property
The Supreme Court today sharply limited the ability of labor union organizers to go onto an employer's property to distribute literature or urge workers to join the union.
In a 6-to-3 opinion written by Justice Clarence Thomas, the Court said that the National Labor Relations Board had failed to give adequate protection to employers' property rights when it adopted a rule four years ago that gave union organizers greater access to areas like the parking lots of shopping centers or factories.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 20 about the political crisis in Haiti referred incorrectly in some editions to the size of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide's election victory 13 months ago.
He won with more than two-thirds of the vote.


Intergraph Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Beckman Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Q&amp;A
Giraffe Hypertension
Q.
Is the blood pressure of a giraffe extremely high to get blood to the head?
Do giraffes get hardening of the arteries and strokes?
A.
In an adult giraffe, the systolic blood pressure, the pressure when the heart contracts to pump blood through the body, is about 200 millimeters of mercury at the level of the heart, about twice that of an adult human being, said Dr.
Paul E. Calle, a veterinarian at the Animal Health Center of the New York Zoological Society.
The center cares for the animals of the Bronx Zoo, the Central Park Zoo and the New York Aquarium at Coney Island.
During exercise, the blood pressure at the level of the giraffe's feet might be double what it is at heart level because of gravity, Dr.
Calle said.
At the head, it is comparable to the blood pressure of a human being.
"Stroke and hardening of the arteries can occur in most mammal species," Dr.
Calle said, "but is not a notable problem with giraffes."
The giraffe's circulatory system has evolved with special adaptations for both high and low pressure, he said.
For example, because the blood pressure in the lower part of the body is so high, the artery walls in the legs are very thick, much thicker than in the neck, to prevent edema, or leakage of fluid out of the vessels, Dr.
Calle said.
The skin and tissue under the skin on the limbs are also very tight to prevent leaks.
In the large veins of the neck, there are valves to restrict the flow of blood so that it does not flow backward and pool in the head when the giraffe puts its head down to drink or eat, Dr.
Calle said.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.93
9.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.84
3.80
6.22
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.93
3.91
6.28
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.88
6.88
7.89
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.72
7.70
8.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.85
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.68
6.68
7.42
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Apple Is Said To Set Price Cuts
Apple Computer Inc. will slash prices on some desktop Macintosh computers by 17 to 36 percent next week, the industry newspaper Macweek reported today.
Macweek, which attributed its information to anonymous sources, said the cuts would come on various Macintosh II models as well as on the Macintosh LC and the Macintosh Classic II.
An Apple spokeswoman said the company had no comment.


Drug-Resistant TB Makes U.S. Rethink Elimination Program
LESS than three years after Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, set 2010 as the target for eliminating tuberculosis in the United States, the resurgent disease is out of control in this country.
As Dr.
Sullivan and his lieutenants confront the problem, far more is at stake than upsetting an arbitrary deadline.
The goal itself is in jeopardy because the disease has to be controlled before it can be eliminated.


Lyondell Petrochem reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tyson Stays Silent; His Supporters Don't
The television lights abruptly fired up and, at 8:54 o'clock here this morning, Mike Tyson came striding through the revolving door of the City-County Building.
Behind the police restraints, the crowd was waiting for him.
There were photographers, cameramen, reporters with note pads and onlookers who either stood silent or shouted encouragement to the former heavyweight champion.


Rollins Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Australian Novelist With a Full-Tilt Pace And Ferocious Humor
Peter Carey is proof that a bad party can make a good novel.
A few years ago, the Australian writer found himself at a tony social gathering in Sydney, when the subject turned to Sir Johannes Bjelke-Petersen, the archconservative premier of Queensland, who had decided to run for Prime Minister on a tax-cutting policy.
"Everyone agreed how wonderful it would be to have this moron running the country," recalled Mr.
Carey, interviewed recently at his home in lower Manhattan.
"There was no sympathy, no understanding that the wealthy might have an obligation. I left that party angrier than I thought myself capable of being. And I decided it would be a good idea to write a novel with a tax inspector as the hero."


A 'Lab Mouse' of Coral May Be Several Species
A COMMONLY studied species of coral, the "lab mouse" of marine biology, has been found to be three species rather than one, according to a new study.
The finding, reported in the Jan. 17 issue of the journal Science, may compel scientists to review their previous research involving star coral.
The lead investigator, Dr.
Nancy Knowlton, a staff scientist of the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in Panama, said past research commonly attributed differences in the coral to environmental factors.
But the discrepancies might have actually been based on genetics if the researchers were unknowingly comparing different species, she said.


Making Painful Choices on Deformed Fetuses; For Honest Debate
To the Editor:
I found "If Unborn Have Rights, Those Must Be Equal" (letters, Jan. 9), three responses to "The Looming Abortion Showdown" (editorial, Dec. 18), indicative of why the abortion question remains divisive: each side is more interested in advancing its position than in pursuing the truth.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
AGS Computers Inc., White Plains, a unit of Nynex Corp., appointed Paul J. Cosgrave president, succeeding A. T. Engkvist, who retired. *
ARCO Chemical Co., Newtown Square, Pa., named Ronald R. Remick vice president and treasurer.


Accounts
*
Domecq Importers, Old Greenwich, Conn., to Berenter Greenhouse &amp; Webster Advertising, New York, from Deutsch Inc., New York, for its Sauza Tequila and Presidente Brandy lines.
A Berenter spokeswoman said that the account has billings of $3 million. *
Andrew Jergens Co., Cincinnati, to Lewis &amp; Gace, Fort Lee, N.J., for a new skin-care product.
Billings were not disclosed.
The assignment includes professional advertising to dermatologists as well as direct marketing to consumers in doctors' offices.


Crompton &amp; Knowles reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Making Painful Choices on Deformed Fetuses
To the Editor:
Re "In Late Abortions, Decisions Are Painful and Options Few" (front page, Jan. 5), your article on the increasing ability of sonograms to detect severely deformed fetuses, and the consequent decision many women make to abort the fetus in the last three months of pregnancy:


Husband in Triangle Tells Of His Pursuit by Ex-Lover
The man who was at the center of an ill-fated love triangle involving Carolyn Warmus today described how Ms.
Warmus continued to pursue him after his wife's death despite his refusal to see her.
Paul Solomon, Ms.
Warmus's former lover and the husband of Betty Jeanne Solomon, whom Ms.
Warmus is accused of killing, said in direct testimony today that Ms.
Warmus wrote him many notes and letters in the months after the killing.


Setback for Walker
KENNY WALKER, a former Knick, injured his Achilles' tendon in a Spanish league game Sunday and is expected to miss the rest of the season.


Safeco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Five Jurors Chosen as Tyson Trial Begins
In the left corner of Courtroom 4 today, Mike Tyson, former heavyweight champion of the world, watched as two teams of lawyers began the tedious process of choosing the 12 Marion County citizens who will determine his fate.
By the end of the day, the first of what is expected to be at least a two-week trial on rape and related charges, five jurors had been selected.
Potential jurors were questioned about whether they would hold a celebrity to a higher standard of conduct than someone else and whether they believed a woman had the right to say no, and even about their feelings on the recent William Kennedy Smith trial.


Making Painful Choices on Deformed Fetuses; What Declaration Says
To the Editor:
In attempting to use the Declaration of Independence to justify his anti-abortion views, George Bush unwittingly underscores the disregard for women's rights that is central to the anti-abortion movement ("President and G.O.P. Take Aim at Abortion on Roe Anniversary," front page, Jan. 23).


Reality Spoiled Merchant's Dream
Edward S. Finkelstein tried everything to avoid bankruptcy -- catchy advertising, sales, cajoling suppliers, tapping his circle of wealthy friends to stump up more cash.
But in the end, there was nothing the 66-year-old chairman of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, who was once hailed as a marketing miracle worker, could do to keep his debt-laden empire afloat.
A man known as brilliant, thin-skinned and at home with hyperbole, Mr.
Finkelstein (the last syllable is pronounced STEEN) repeatedly made optimistic predictions for Macy -- and repeatedly fell short of those goals.
"Finkelstein really believed his own rhetoric," said one investment banker familiar with the company.


Music in Review
Benita Valente and Tatiana Troyanos  Alice Tully Hall


Potlatch Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


These Tax Cuts Stunt Growth
To judge by advance leaks to reporters, the "growth" tax cuts that President Bush will announce in his State of the Union address tonight and his budget tomorrow will promote precious little growth.
Taken individually, they range from inconsequential to destructive.
Taken together, they would put billions into undeserving pockets -- and wreck the tax code.
Economic recovery cannot be bought with a mishmash of political handouts.
What the economy does need is a swift kick, most easily delivered by a temporary tax cut that doesn't drain away revenues once the economy recovers.
For the long term, the economy needs a tax code that favors saving over consumption.
Perhaps there's more to the Bush plan than has been leaked, but otherwise, it won't do much to hasten recovery or reform.


Profits Fall For ARCO And Phillips
ARCO and the Phillips Petroleum Company reported sharply lower earnings today for the fourth quarter, steeper declines than oil companies with broader international operations like Exxon, Mobil and Texaco have reported.
The Unocal Corporation, which like ARCO and Phillips Petroleum operates primarily in the United States, reported a small loss for the quarter.


In the Retail Desert, Fortunoff Is Planting a Mall on L.I.
Macy's, 47th Street Photo and other big-name retailers are in various stages of bankruptcy, but Alan Fortunoff is undaunted.
He is putting his family's housewares and jewelry business on the line with plans to build a $194 million shopping center here.
Standing in the middle of 69 acres of barren blacktop in the heart of Nassau County, Mr.
Fortunoff envisioned a mall that will employ more than 3,000 people and, by his estimate, pump $352 million annually into the depressed local economy.


On My Mind; The Clinton Couple
The Clinton couple of Arkansas have presented to the American public a gift and a testing opportunity.
The gift is that they treated us as adults. The opportunity is for us to act that way.


Skinner Chavez-Melo, Church Musician, 47
Skinner Chavez-Melo, an organist, conductor and composer who was music director at the St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan, died on Saturday at New York Downtown Hospital.
He was 47 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of spinal cancer, said his brother, Juan Francisco.


Quotation of the Day
"We worked day and night to find a suitable solution and ultimately came to the conclusion that filing for Chapter 11 was best for Macy's future. I am convinced that beginning this rehabilitative process is the best way to protect our valuable franchise." -- EDWARD S. FINKELSTEIN, chairman of Macy's.  [ A1:6. ]


Killing Casts a Rare Light On Gay Life in Suburbia
Nobody at Pal Joey's wanted to talk much about Henry Marquez, the dark-haired Texas dreamer who loved old cars, country music and Hamptons beaches.
At the gay bar, where one would expect outrage at a gay-bashing episode that the police said led to Mr.
Marquez's death, the silence instead ran cold, immutable and deep.
The attack on Mr.
Marquez at a parking lot near Pal Joey's last month has thrown an unwelcome spotlight on gay life in the suburbs, a shadowy world between the pride, bravado and activism of Christopher Street in Manhattan and the exuberant summer retreats on Fire Island and the Hamptons.


How to Use Debt to Save Russian Forests
To the Editor:
The United States has agreed to support Russia's inclusion in the International Monetary Fund and World Bank (front page, Jan. 4), to suspend Russia's debt payments until 1993 and to provide millions of dollars in direct aid.
For little or no additional cost, the United States and the international community can use debt restructuring and foreign aid to help protect Russian forests, vital to offset the greenhouse effect and maintain the world's air quality.


Review/Fashion; In Paris, Diverse Dreams
Three Italian designers kicked off the French haute couture openings for spring and summer over the weekend, enhancing the cosmopolitan quality of this city.
A fourth, Gianfranco Ferre, led the house of Christian Dior into the fashion fray this afternoon.
Nearly half of the accredited couture designers scheduled to show their collections this week have already done so.
So far, even with the help of the Italians, none seem to have had any significant impact on fashion.
The raison d'etre of the couture is to be the laboratory of new ideas.
Until now, each couturier has been pursuing his own dream.


Review/City Ballet; Balanchine Meets Mozart in 'Divertimento No. 15'
George Balanchine meets Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart in "Divertimento No. 15," and the audience comes away knowing each a good deal better.
The ballet, presented by the New York City Ballet in a richly satisfying performance on Saturday afternoon, is essentially about the good manners and vital graciousness of the world of Mozart's music.
It is also a prime example of the sensitivity to music that shaped much of Balanchine's choreography.
And almost everyone in the cast gets a chance to shine.
Some of the best dancing came from Robert Lyon and Erlends Zieminch, each seen here in a role debut as the male demi-soloists.
One pleasure of the City Ballet season has been watching finished classical dancing travel through Mr.
Lyon's long body down through his tapering hands and feet.
Mr.
Zieminch proved himself here to be the kind of partner who looks, deceptively, as if all his passion and exaltation flows from his proximity to his ballerina.
He danced with an impressive buoyancy and a quality of attention to style that softened occasional distracting moments of loose light-weightedness.


Montreal Journal; Have the Quebecers Gone Soft? (Just Ask Miami)
From the earliest days of French settlement in the 17th century, Quebec has taken a stubborn pride in its winters.
Even Voltaire, dismissing Quebec as "a few acres of snow" after France lost the territory to British conquest in 1759, inadvertently contributed to the legend Quebecers have built of themselves as a people who have thrived in the face of bitter chills and blizzards.
But if the Quebecer of yore was a climate-hardened backwoodsman, his descendants have changed.


Tyson Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


CHRONICLE
Two years ago, a team of Olympic and collegiate women basketball players beat a team of Congressmen by 28 points; last year, the women beat the legislators by seven points.
So it is with a certain degree of optimism that 10 Congressmen face the game they are to play next Wednesday in Washington to kick off the 1992 National Girls and Women in Sports Day sponsored by the Women's Sports Foundation.
This year the celebration, which will also include a Congressional reception on Feb. 6, will mark the 20th anniversary of Title IX of the 1972 amendments to the Education Law.
Title IX, considered a milestone in the fight for women's equality, mandated that schools and colleges receiving Federal funds provide resources for women's sports equal to those available to men.


Union Carbide Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Grumman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Of Geniuses, Snowshoes And Football
THE question came up in a news conference earlier in the football week about winning The Big One.
In sporting terms, that means, as Humpty Dumpty said, exactly what the speaker chooses it to mean -- neither more nor less.
In sports, though, The Big One has come to symbolize the championship, like, in recent days in Minnesota, the Ice Fishing Tournament at Forest Lake, or the Snowshoe Marathon in Duluth, or the Super Bowl in Minneapolis.


Commercials Offer a Fairly Ho-hum Bowl
Super Bowl XXVI may have turned out super for the Washington Redskins, but as for the commercials, it was a Satisfactory Bowl, maybe merely an Adequate Bowl, at best.
Compared with some Super Sundays of yore, the audacious, attention-at-any-cost creativity seemed noticeably absent from the 27 or so minutes of extravagantly expensive spots that cost a record $850,000 for each 30 seconds.


Commonwealth Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Advocates of Disabled File Complaint About the Empire State Building
Using a wheelchair because of multiple sclerosis, Daniel Robert has never been able to visit the top of the Empire State Building since it meant climbing two flights of steps from the 86th floor.
Yesterday, Mr.
Robert and other advocates of disability rights took the owners of the famous skyscraper to court.
Invoking a powerful new Federal law called the Americans With Disabilities Act, which went into effect on Sunday, the group filed a complaint with the Department of Justice and urged the Government to demand that the owners remove barriers to people in wheelchairs.


Florida Progress reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Water-Meter Service Files for Bankruptcy
The Vanguard Meter Service Inc., which dominated New York City's water-meter installation program until it was charged with fraud, filed for bankruptcy reorganization last week, citing $21 million in liabilities against $17 million in assets.
Vanguard, once the nation's biggest water-meter installer, is still in business and will try to come up with a plan to repay its 150 creditors, said a lawyer for the company, Abraham Backenroth.


Land and Health Also Erode in Haiti
The fields are still green here, but they do not mask the ominous signs that the international economic embargo intended to force a return to democratic rule in Haiti is accelerating land and environmental damage, and threatening already precarious food supplies for the hemisphere's poorest people.
Trade sanctions imposed by the Organization of American States have blocked fuel, fertilizer and pesticides to the rice farmers of the Artibonite Valley.
The sanctions were voted early in October in an effort to reverse the Sept. 30 coup in which the elected civilian President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, was overthrown.


Haitians Fleeing Again to U.S. Asylum
After a lull of several weeks, hundreds of Haitians have begun fleeing over the last seven days, the Coast Guard said today.
More than 1,100 were pulled from the sea today, a record daily number.
When the sun set tonight, "an unknown number of boats were still on the horizon," a Coast Guard spokesman, Petty Officer Roger Wetherell, said in Miami.
He said that 10 cutters working around-the-clock were overloaded, and that there were fears there will not be enough places at the United States Naval Station in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to house the refugees.


State of Union On TV Tonight
The State of the Union Message and the Democratic response will be broadcast live on the three major networks and on PBS, CNN and C-Span tonight at 9 o'clock.
CBS News will broadcast a special program immediately after the Democratic response in which as many as 300,000 viewers can call an "800" telephone number and voice their opinions about the state of the country.


Brazil Loan Is Expected
The International Monetary Fund is expected to approve a $2 billion loan for Brazil on Wednesaday and to support President Fernando Collor de Mello's economic program, Government officials and diplomats said.
The loan, which Brazil requested in December, is a vital step toward restoring the country's international financial credibility.


Record Year For Merrill As Net Jumps
As if anyone needed yet another sign of how well Wall Street has been doing, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company yesterday reported quarterly earnings of $170.1 million, raising its yearly profits to a record $696.1 million.
Merrill, Wall Street's biggest brokerage firm, credited its success to controlling costs even as the stock market surged and underwritings of new stock and bond issues multiplied.


Critic's Notebook; The Super Bowl on TV: Too Much Pumping Up?
Over the years, the phenomenon has become unsettlingly familiar: Super Bowl turns out to be Super Bloat.
That certainly was the case on Sunday.
After weeks of publicity hype, the game fizzled to the point where television cameras in the second half were panning to fans in the stands who were either yawning or nodding off.
In hindsight, an omen was offered early on by Harry Connick Jr., whose version of the national anthem was laconically determined to prove that anything you can do he can do slower.
Viewers needing a quicker picker-upper could have turned at half-time to Fox Broadcasting, which, in a characteristically frisky counter-programming ploy, was offering a special live-from-Hollywood edition of "In Living Color," all of the skits and routines with weekly regulars taking pokes at the wide, wide world of football.
Serving as host, Tommy Davidson assured the audience for the "Half-Time Countdown Party" that a special countdown clock would let them know when the second half of the game was starting so they could get right back to CBS and not miss any of the crunching brutality.


Five Jurors Chosen as Tyson Trial Begins
In the left corner of Courtroom 4 today, Mike Tyson, former heavyweight champion of the world, watched as two teams of lawyers began the tedious process of choosing the 12 Marion County citizens who will determine his fate.
By the end of the day, the first of what is expected to be at least a two-week trial on rape and related charges, five jurors had been selected.
Potential jurors were questioned about whether they would hold a celebrity to a higher standard of conduct than someone else and whether they believed a woman had the right to say no, and even about their feelings on the recent William Kennedy Smith trial.


People
*
John B. Adams has been promoted to president, from executive vice president, at the Martin Agency, Richmond.
He succeeds Donald R. Just, who resigned.


Thomas J. Mackell Is Dead at 77; Former Queens District Attorney
Thomas J. Mackell, who resigned as the Queens District Attorney in 1973 after he was indicted on charges of hindering prosecution in a $4.4 million get-rich-quick scheme, died yesterday at his son's home in Douglaston Manor, Queens.
He was 77 years old and lived in Douglaston Manor.
He died of stomach cancer, his son Terrence said.


Store Manager Was Shot
The New York City medical examiner has determined that the assistant manager of The Gap Kids store in midtown Manhattan died of a gunshot wound to the head as well as multiple stab wounds to the neck.
The 22-year-old victim, Lisa Steinberg, was found bound and gagged Saturday morning in the store at 250 West 57th Street where it was apparent she had been stabbed numerous times with a screwdriver.
But an autopsy on Sunday revealed that she had also been shot once in the head, Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the medical examiner, said yesterday.


Review/Music; Image of Death Opens Schubertiade Festival
In Hermann Prey's haunting performance of the most famous of Schubert's lieder, "Erlkonig," at the 92d Street Y on Saturday night, accompanied by the pianist Leonard Hokanson, there seemed no separation of the singer from the song.
By carefully shaping his now considerably darkened baritone, Mr.
Prey seemed to change vocal masks from verse to verse.
One moment his singing was a sort of heightened speech in the lowest register, the father assuring the feverish child that his visions of the devilish Erlking are just streaks of mist in the night.
The next moment Mr.
Prey was singing in mock innocence, insinuating, coaxing, seeming to be the voice of the Erlking himself, tempting the child with visions of dance and song and flowers.
Finally, Mr.
Prey was the sick child borne on horseback, crying out in urgency that his father attend to what he sees, that these are not visions of willows gleaming in the night, that the Erlking was about to seize him.
When the Erlking's seductive lines turn demonic, Mr.
Prey's face twisted with the threat.
And when the father, after shuddering at the child's cries, looked down at the child in his arms, the pause before the last words was chilling: Mr.
Prey seemed to be staring into the face of death.
It was an extraordinary enactment.


Two Promotions At Leo Burnett
In a move to consolidate the chain of command at its American and international units, the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago has named two executives to oversee all client-service and business operations.
William T. Lynch, 49 years old, who had been chairman and chief executive of Leo Burnett U.S.A., has been promoted to president and chief client service officer of Burnett and of its international unit, Leo Burnett Worldwide.


Analog Devices In Hewlett Tie
The Hewlett-Packard Company and Analog Devices Inc. said today that they had formed an alliance to jointly develop mixed-signal semiconductors.
Such chips combine digital and analog processing on a single chip, and are increasingly used in automobiles, telecommunications and consumer electronic equipment.
"An alliance with a technology leader like H.P. affords us a unique opportunity to accelerate the development of advanced mixed-signal processes beyond what we could afford to do on our own," Ray Stata, Analog's chairman and chief executive, said in a statement.


Security Chief At City College Is Reassigned
The security director of the City College of New York was relieved of his duties yesterday for his role at a celebrity basketball game last month at which nine people were killed in a deadly crush, City University officials said.
The action against the director, Charles Delaney, was made known last night at a session of the university's board of trustees, where the college's president, Dr.
Bernard W. Harleston, also unveiled new procedures for the use of college buildings for student events, CUNY officials said.


Disabled People Protest Lack of Accessibility at Empire State Building


Books of The Times; A Telephone Novel Based on an Adult Party Line
Vox By Nicholson Baker 165 pages. Random House. $15.


Around the World With Balloon And Gizmos
FOR more than two centuries aeronauts have dreamed of circumnavigating the world in a balloon, the last great aeronautical challenge remaining to be conquered.
All the adventurers who previously attempted the daunting 22,000-mile voyage have failed, but this week an American balloon ace, a seasoned aeronautical mechanic and a senior Russian astronaut are completing preparations for the launching of Earthwinds, the most complex and advanced balloon ever built.
If all goes well in the next few days here, the huge craft, carrying American and Russian scientific experiments as well as the three crew members, will ascend on Thursday or Friday from its berth at the Loral Defense Systems Air Dock, a gigantic hangar built in 1929 to accommodate the largest dirigibles ever built in America, the ill-fated Akron and Macon.
The Earthwinds balloon is supposed to rise slowly to an altitude of about 35,000 feet, slip into the eastward-flowing jet stream, and complete its trip around the world in something under two weeks.


Successor Nominated For Top Unilever Posts
Unilever, the British-Dutch food and consumer goods giant, has nominated Michael S. Perry, who oversaw an expansion in cosmetics, to be chairman of its British corporate entity and a vice chairman of its Dutch entity.
If shareholders give their approval at May meetings, Mr.
Perry, who is 57 years old, will succeed Sir Michael Angus, who has held the two posts since 1986.
In May, Sir Michael reaches the company's mandatory retirement age of 62.


Cheap Insurance for Hard Disks
A HARD disk drive is never more than one second away from disaster.
A power fluctuation, a computer virus, a faulty circuit, a corrupted file, a hard knock on the desk, a burglar, an infestation of gremlins; any one of them can render your hard disk as useless as a stone, sending data into oblivion.
Luckily, you have a current backup. You DO have a backup, don't you?


Business Scene; Moonlighting In Moscow
A CARDIOLOGIST sees private patients to supplement his salary from a full-time hospital job, which pays him only 2,000 rubles a month, or $10.
An office worker, who could afford to buy a small car two years ago, now cruises the streets in it, picking up taxi fares -- a growing freelance activity.
And a woman sells plastic bags for 3 rubles apiece to shoppers leaving a high-priced farmer's market with fresh food in their arms.
She had purchased the bags for less than half that price by standing in line at a state store.
Everywhere in the commonwealth, people are hustling for extra income to survive.
"Poverty is the normal state of living in our country today," said Lev Timoteyev, an economist and writer.
But "poverty" has a different, broader meaning here than in the United States.
The word in America suggests slum-living, joblessness, school dropouts and a high crime rate.
Here, poverty is a result of prices that have tripled or more for everyone, while wages have only doubled at best.
It is as if an American family earning $40,000 suddenly had that reduced to $30,000 -- or maybe $25,000.


Loctite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Instanter Journal; What Water Hid, Drought Reveals
Frank J. Nitsche sat on the stump of an apple tree, which 66 years ago had shaded his family's home here in what is now a ghost town 100 miles southeast of Erie.
Mr.
Nitsche, a retired state highway worker who now lives in nearby Wilcox, recalled living with 500 other residents of Instanter, which became an outpost for hunters when its main employer, a tannery, closed in 1926.


Corrections
A brief article on Thursday about protests surrounding the French abortion pill RU-486, and a correction in this space on Friday, referred incorrectly to the target of the protests, the Hoechst Celanese Corporation.
Horace S. Webb, vice president for communications and public affairs, says Hoechst Celanese in 1985 gave up all rights to market the pill.


G.M. Plans Issue Of Class C Stock
The General Motors Corporation said yesterday that it had filed for $750 million of a new class C preference stock to be sold here and abroad to help strengthen its balance sheet.
The portion to be sold in the United States will be handled by a group headed by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company and involves 12 million depository shares to be offered at $50 a share.
The international part of the offering will be three million shares offered through a group headed by Merrill Lynch International Ltd., at a similar price.


U.N. Team in Baghdad Jostled as Police Watch
Three members of a United Nations Inspection team in Iraq were confronted by 40 demonstrators in the lobby of the Sheraton Hotel Baghdad today as Iraqi policemen stood by and did not intervene, United Nations officials said.
Francois Giuliani, a spokesman for Secretary General Boutros Ghali, said the team's American deputy chief inspector, Maj.
Karen Jansen of the United States Army, and two colleagues had been "jostled, shouted at and pinned against the wall of the lobby, while Iraqi police looked on."


ARCO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Carter Hawley To Merge Units
Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc. said it was consolidating two groups within its Broadway division, resulting in the elimination of 240 jobs.
The merchandising, sales promotion and administrative functions of the Broadway Southwest unit will be consolidated into the Broadway Southern California division.


Betz Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Retreat, Supreme Court Limits Scope of '65 Voting Rights Act
In an important ruling on the Federal Voting Rights Act, the Supreme Court today adopted a narrow view of the 1965 law and rejected arguments the Bush Administration had put forward on behalf of black elected officials in two Alabama counties.
The blacks won election to previously all-white county boards, only to find that some budgetary authority over roads that individual commissioners had historically exercised had been stripped from the offices.
The reorganizations were supported by the white incumbents.


George Sweazey, 86, Presbyterian Official
The Rev.
Dr.
George E. Sweazey, a senior official of the Presbyterian Church and professor emeritus of homiletics at Princeton Theological Seminary, died on Thursday at the Monroe Village Health Care Center in Jamesburg, N.J., where he lived.
He was 86 years old.
He died of a stroke, a spokeswoman for the theological seminary, Barbara A. Chaapel, said.


Consolidated Freightways reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ambac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; CLINTON ATTEMPTS TO IGNORE RUMORS
Gov.
Bill Clinton started off his day on a sober note, with a prayer delivered by a Mississippi preacher who sought divine intervention for the health of the Arkansas Governor's Presidential campaign.
"May we concentrate on winning races, not ruining lives," said the Rev.
Jerry Young at a breakfast of Clinton supporters in Jackson, Miss.


Future Ads Expected to Project 'Business as Usual' Image
The decision yesterday by R. H. Macy &amp; Company to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy court protection is not expected to alter its marketing efforts significantly, advertising executives said.
But they said they anticipated a tightrope-walking act, in which executives at Macy and its agency must balance the retail chain's short- and long-term needs.
It is not clear whether the bankruptcy filing will affect how much advertising Macy buys.


Worst-Case Scenario: Bills Lose 3 in a Row
All the Buffalo Bills' worst fears turned into reality in Super Bowl XXVI.
The Washington Redskins' 37-24 thumping on Sunday was so complete and so embarrassing for the Bills that they left here with what was for them the worst possible scenario: being compared to the Denver Broncos and the Minnesota Vikings as teams that can be counted on to turn Super Bowls into Super Flops.
That's two straight losses now for Buffalo in the big show, matching Denver and Minnesota as the only teams to suffer such misery.


Chess
The apprentices of the sorcerer, Gary Kasparov, have treated him with less respect in the last 12 months than in the previous nine years, when he won every competition he participated in.
In Linares, Spain, in February, the world champion had to take second place behind the Ukrainian grandmaster Vasily Ivanchuk.
In Amsterdam in May, he tied for third place behind the winners, the grandmasters Valery Salov of Russia and Nigel Short of Britain.
And now, in the Reggio Emilia International Tournament, which ended Jan. 6 in northern Italy, he shared second place with the Russian grandmaster Boris Gelfand behind the 23-year-old Indian grandmaster Viswanathan Anand.
This was a special plum for Anand because the tournament had been billed by its sponsors, Banco San Geminiano e San Prospero, CartaSi and Ferrarini S.p.A., as the strongest in history, reaching Category 18, the highest on the scale of the International Chess Federation.


A.N.C. Leader Sees a Threat From Rightists
The secretary general of the African National Congress, Cyril Ramaphosa, said today that he took seriously the threat to South Africa from white racial militants who have warned of civil war if a black government comes to power.
"The right wing is a threat that we should all consider seriously," Mr.
Ramaphosa said at a breakfast with journalists.


2 Elections Today For Assembly Seats
Special elections for two State Assembly seats are being held today in districts in Brooklyn and Queens.
In the 44th Assembly District in Brooklyn, which covers Flatbush, Midwood, Windsor Terrace and Park Slope, voters will pick a successor to former Assembly Speaker Mel Miller, who resigned his seat after conspiracy and mail-fraud convictions.
Running are Joni Yoswein, a Democrat-Liberal, a former aide to Mr.
Miller, and Albert Millus, a Republican-Conservative lawyer.


Victorious Knicks Get to Travel Home in First
The Knicks have had their troubles on the road this season, but not this trip.
They have soared and slumped at various times, but suddenly appear unstoppable.
New York earned a significant road victory tonight, routing the Jazz, 97-80, and ending Utah's 17-game winning streak at the Delta Center.
The Knicks also moved back into sole possession of first place in the Atlantic Division, one-half game ahead of idle Boston.


Yankees Are Looking At Alan Anderson
The Yankees have apparently decided that the quickest way to solve their pitching woes is by adding free agents because they expressed interest in Alan Anderson last week after having already made an initial contract offer to Eric King.
Craig Fenech, Anderson's agent, said he spoke with General Manager Gene Michael late last week and would likely call him again today or tomorrow.
The agent said five clubs are talking to him about Anderson, a left-hander who was 5-11 for Minnesota last season but who led the American League in earned run average in 1988.


Treasuries Steady in a Light Day
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed in slow trading yesterday, as credit market participants marked time before a number of important events are played out over the next week to 10 days.
Specifically, traders pointed to this evening's State of the Union Message, the confirmation hearings for the Federal Reserve chairnan, Alan Greenspan, on Wednesday -- a day when preliminary estimates of fourth-quarter economic growth are also expected -- and next week's announcement from the Treasury about the size and confirguation of its quarterly refunding auctions.


Newell Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ServiceMaster L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Haute Cuisine vs. the Vegetarian Menace
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 15 article on a new "Lost Generation" in the kitchen describes the inability of many members of my generation to prepare complicated meals from scratch.
But you miss one of the chief causes of this calamity: rampant vegetarianism, particularly among young women.


This Time, Connecticut's Defense Is Much Too Tough for Villanova
Chris Smith, Connecticut's leading scorer and all-round main man this season, failed to score a field goal tonight, going 0 for 8 from the floor.
It made little difference.
Maybe the lights were too bright at the glitzy Gampel Pavilion because there were plenty of other misses, too.
Or, as the coaches said, the defensive play was too good.


Observer; Before Much Longer
"Welcome, election fans, to 'Meet the Adulterer,' the Emmy-Award-winning news show that lets Presidential candidates tell their own revolting stories of squalid and sordid conduct with models, actresses, bimbos and --"
"Hold it right there, fella. I categorically deny ever having had a relationship with a bimbo. What's more, even if I had, under no circumstances would I ever refer to any woman by a viciously sexist word like 'bimbo.' I am here to tell America candidly and entertainingly about adultery and me, not to be smeared as a sexist."


By Design; Hayride in Paris
Paris is off on a hayride.
Left behind at the spring couture shows are the usual luxurious trimmings of satin ribbons and lace.
Instead, the braids, edgings, fringes and accessories are mostly of straw or raffia.
In the sensitive fingers of couture artisans, these materials have been transformed into gilded objects.
The prevailing whim is to dip the straw into gold paint.
Every designer seems to have at least one pair of gauntlets with straw cuffs.
And at Christian Lacroix's presentation, the big-brimmed farmer-style hats glistened with their lacquer finish.
Even the metal fastenings on his handbags were shaped like wrapped strands of straw.


CHRONICLE
SUE ELLIOT does not seem to be fazed by the fact that she is engaged to marry BARRY TUCKWELL, whom many consider the world's pre-eminent player of the French horn.
"In the overall scheme of things, he's a regular person," she said during a recent interview with her fiance for a newspaper in Hagerstown, Md.
Mr.
Tuckwell urged her to be a bit more effusive.
"Well, O.K., a great regular person," she added.


St. John's Judge Allows Evidence
A New York State judge yesterday denied a defense motion to limit testimony in the trial of a 22-year-old former St.
John's University student accused of sodomy and other charges in a sexual attack on a former female student.
The judge, Justice Kenneth N. Browne of State Supreme Court in Queens, said yesterday that the prosecution could present evidence detailing what happened in a house near the university's campus in Jamaica, Queens, when the defendant, Michael Calandrillo, was not there.


Colombian Blood, U.S. Guns
On Dec. 16, 20 indigenous peasants, including five women and four children, were murdered as they met to discuss a struggle over land rights in the village of El Nilo in southern Colombia.
News reports indicated that the gunmen were drug traffickers who had been seizing land in the region to grow opium poppies to produce heroin.
The truth is much more complex.
In Colombia, drug-related violence continues because it is generally tolerated and often supported by the security forces.
For the most part, the U.S. news media have portrayed the drug terrorists as the only perpetrators of violent crime, ignoring the role of Colombian state agents, whose human rights abuses have been denounced by Amnesty International, Americas Watch and the Washington Office on Latin America.


Atlantic Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Donations to Neediest Made in Memory of Others
"Please accept this contribution in memory of my niece, Heather Renee Orthmann, who was killed at the age of 25 in an automobile accident last summer," wrote Nan Orthmann Sharp of Bergenfield, N.J., in a note accompanying a $100 donation to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"Heather loved to help people! She had spent some summers teaching handicapped children to swim and was studying to be an interpreter for the deaf."
Each year people make contributions to the Neediest Cases as memorials to departed loved ones.
Most are tributes to the lessons of generosity and caring handed down by parents who have since died.
But many are remembrances of young people who were also able to leave powerful legacies during their short lives.


Armstrong World Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Du Pont Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gaseous Envelope
A British astronomer has found that the scattering of radio waves caused by turbulent interstellar electrically charged gases, or plasma, is present in areas of the galaxy where it had not been previously proven to exist.
The findings are considered evidence that the solar system is encapsulated in an envelope of these gases, probably the relic of the explosion of a nearby, massive star tens of millions of years ago.


Review/Theater; 'Crazy He Calls Me': Well Yes, He Does
At first "Crazy He Calls Me," a new two-character play by Abraham Tetenbaum at the Walter Kerr Theater, seems like just another boy-meets-girl, girl-helps-boy-masturbate romantic comedy.
The time is 1948, the place Brooklyn.
Benny (Barry Miller), a young lawyer who still lives with his mother and sister, has fallen for Yvette (Polly Draper), a Polish emigre, nee Yetta, who has a burning mission to raise money for a Hebrew home for the aged.
But no sooner has Benny stopped off for the first time at Yvette's apartment for a nightcap than the audience begins to suspect darker doings.
Not only does Yvette insist on helping her date achieve orgasm while he remains fully dressed in his pin-striped suit but she proudly displays an impressive collection of lipstick-stained napkins kept in a bureau drawer and yells at a possibly imaginary uncle through her parlor floor.


Slim Pickings and Hope at Lafayette High
Insurrection was brewing one recent afternoon in a first-floor corridor at Lafayette High on Benson Avenue on the edge of Bensonhurst in Brooklyn.
Three starting players from Coach Ira Levine's basketball team cornered Kevin Meyers, the assistant coach and academic tutor.
Present were Hardin Desire, Lafayette's best all-round player; Tony Rexha, a streaky long-range shooter, and Kareem Sims, a bruising forward.
On behalf of their teammates, for the sake of team pride, for the good of the school, it was time, once and for all, to take a stand.


Philadelphia Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bills Pack Up and Grumble Off to Buffalo
The Bills, having lost their second consecutive Super Bowl on Sunday, headed back to Buffalo today, trying to come to grips with their dismal performance and wondering whether they have what it takes to make it back for a third attempt.
One Buffalo player described the mood as "bitter" among veteran players after the Bills' 37-24 loss to the Washington Redskins at the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome.


Commodore International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


G.M. to Close High-Tech Parts Factory
General Motors' "factory of the future" will become part of the auto maker's past in August, when it plans to close the Saginaw, Mich., plant.
The General Motors Corporation said the factory, called Saginaw Vanguard, had fulfilled its goals of developing high-tech solutions to productivity problems.
The project was started in 1982, as part of the campaign by G.M.'s former chairman, Roger B. Smith, to increase productivity through automation.


Practicing Acupuncture Made Easy
Dr.
Doreen Chen first studied acupuncture 40 years ago in rural Chinese villages.
She did not press her first silver needle into a patient's skin until her teachers were satisfied that she understood the philosophies of harmony and equilibrium that guided the needle.
And she did not receive her license in to practice acupuncture on her own until she had completed a long and rigorous apprenticeship.
Now, she says with quiet but obvious outrage that New York State "wants to call someone an acupuncturist after some classes and a test."


Cordis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
It is well-known, in theory, that if a partnership has a fit in two suits the one that is divided evenly may be more productive.
A 4-4 fit, for example, may be more desirable than 5-3, or 5-4, or 6-3, or 6-4, because the long suit can provide discards.
But there are many exceptions, and the right time for the 4-4 is hard to spot in practice.
The diagramed example occurred recently in a trial for the selection of the British team in this year's World Team Olympiad, due to take place in Salsomaggiore, Italy, in August.
All but one of the pairs holding the North-South cards landed in six spades, and West had no trouble in leading the diamond king and defeating the slam.
One suspects that a great majority of expert American pairs would suffer the same bidding failure.


Market Place; Win or Lose, Buyouts Do It Big
The bankruptcy filing of R. H. Macy &amp; Company represents yet another leveraged buyout gone bad.
But while the list of leveraged failures is long, the list of leveraged successes is also substantial.
Safeway, the supermarket chain; Duracell, the battery maker; American Medical International, which owns hospitals, and RJR Nabisco, the largest leveraged buyout ever, have succeeded despite the huge debts they took on.
Among the companies that went from buyout to bankruptcy are Federated Department Stores, the parent of Bloomingdale's and Abraham &amp; Straus; Jim Walter, a leading home builder; Southland, the owner of the 7-Eleven stores, and Interco, a shoe and furniture company.
Mitigating Factors
Luck played a part in which group a company ended up in.
It is not Macy's fault that the economy entered a prolonged period of weakness just as the company needed to improve cash flow.
But there is also the matter of timing, and of the rising optimism through much of the 1980's.
In general, leveraged purchases in the last years of the decade were made at much higher prices than those earlier in the decade.
It was not impossible to make a good deal in 1987, but it was highly unlikely.


Late Changes Are Ordered on Health Budget
Top officials at the White House today ordered Richard G. Darman, the director of the Office of Management and Budget, to pull back and rewrite crucial provisions of the national health-care plan that was to have been sent to Congress this week as part of President Bush's budget package.
The action came at the insistence of Republicans in Congress, who vehemently objected to some of the detailed health-care proposals that Mr.
Darman had drafted for inclusion in Mr.
Bush's budget.


2d Sayville Fire in 8 Days Kills 2 in Business District
A fire in a row of 19th-century buildings killed two men in the genteel business district of this South Shore hamlet today and is terrifying shopkeepers and residents who fear the unseen hand of an arsonist.
The fire, labeled suspicious by the police, occurred eight days after three arson fires destroyed nine stores in the wood-frame Victorian buildings of the old Sayville business district, where some structures date to the 1840's.


Applied Biosystems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Court Shifts California's Political Lines
In a move that alters the political landscape of California, the State Supreme Court today imposed a new redistricting plan that is widely expected to accelerate Republican gains in the largest state.
Political experts say Republicans could take control of the state's huge Congressional delegation this year and possibly both houses of the State Legislature within two to four years.
The plan ignored existing district lines, thereby putting many powerful incumbents in both Congress and the Legislature in the difficult position of either running against other incumbents or moving to less reliable districts.


German Film Makers Express Support for 'Europa'
Many of Germany's leading film makers, citing "the special responsibility the past imposes upon us," have joined a protest against the German Export Film Union's decision not to submit "Europa, Europa" for Academy Award consideration as best foreign film.
The film, about a Jewish youth's surviving the Holocaust, was written and directed by Agnieszka Holland, who was born in Poland and lives in Paris.
It was named best foreign film of 1991 by the New York and Boston film critics and by the National Board of Review, and on Jan. 18 it received the Golden Globe award in that category.
But the decision by a panel of German producers not to nominate the film, which is now playing in New York and about 40 other American cities, has touched off an outcry by its creators, producers and other film makers who say it was not nominated because its subject matter is an embarrassment to contemporary Germany.


Schering-Plough reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Dance; Soloist Bounds From Film With Boundless Ambiguity
A sketch can be as vivid as a mural.
Yancey Dance Theater demonstrated that Sunday afternoon at the Ohio Theater in SoHo when it presented two mixed-media works by Leslie Yancey.
A brief piece for a solo dancer was more persuasive than a long work for a cast of 13.
"Window of Time" began with a film sequence that showed a neatly dressed man waiting for someone.
Often he opened an umbrella, even though it was not raining.
Although he danced with a woman at various times, he was always left alone again, waiting.


Unocal Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Phillips Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Never mind that JODIE FOSTER went to Yale: yesterday she was named 1992 Woman of the Year by the Hasty Pudding Theatricals at Harvard, and she is to be honored with a parade through Harvard Square on Feb. 11.
MICHAEL DOUGLAS has been named Man of the Year by the same organization.
He will get the prize, a "pudding pot," without a parade, before the opening-night performance of the Hasty Pudding's traditional drag show on Feb. 18.
This year the production is called "Up Your Ante" and is described as a musical spoof of "all things Vegas."


INSIDE
Late Changes on Health Plan
White House officials told Richard G. Darman, the budget chief, to rewrite key parts of the health-care plan in President Bush's budget.
Page A10.
Dinkins Seeks Capital Cuts
Mayor David N. Dinkins will propose new taxes and big cuts in long-term construction projects as part of a four-year fiscal plan.
Page B1.
Refund on Mortgage Funds
G.M.'s mortgage unit will refund tens of millions of dollars to homeowners who paid excessive amounts into escrow accounts.
Page D1.
Palestinians Shun New Talks
In a dispute over the ground rules, Palestinians decided not to attend a round of Middle East peace talks in Moscow.
Page A8.


Catching Up With Nate, Aces and a Penny Fund
AS we pass this columnist's first anniversary in Our Towns, Nate is enjoying retirement.
Lisa Hedley's cinema is doing nicely; so is the baby.
The Little League dads couldn't finish the new ball field.
But the Greenwich school refurbishing is beautiful.
The Philosophy Soirees are on hiatus, which is New Jersey for suspended.
Frank Sharkey and Dwayne Franks returned to work after the shootings.
The Piermont Library's Penny Fund has crept into four figures.
And Edna W. Newman is back at work, no thanks to the Federal Communications Commission.
Edna W. Newman, you should recall, is the outspoken 75-ish disk jockey on WMRF, the weak-watted, incredibly informal, in-house radio station of the Daughters of Israel Geriatric Center in West Orange, N.J.
The other 287 residents know Edna W. Newman ("Stress the 'W,' will you!") for her music and comments, which were heard throughout the building.


Pope &amp; Talbot reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Boy Accuses Schoolmate In Sex Case
New York City police and school officials are investigating an incident in which a 9-year-old boy said an 8-year-old boy sexually molested him last week as the two stood in line inside a Bronx school waiting for a bus.
Among the questions in the case is whether an adult was supervising the students as they stood inside a stairwell at the school at dismissal time last Tuesday, and if not, why not.


New York City To Korey, Kay
Korey, Kay &amp; Partners in New York has been awarded a widely followed pro-bono assignment to create a marketing theme and an image campaign for New York City.
The campaign is scheduled to coincide with the Democratic National Convention and the quincentennial celebration of Columbus's voyage to America.
The city, which began its search for an agency six months ago, considered 50 shops before selecting Korey, Kay.
Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, New York, was one of the two runners-up, a city spokeswoman said, adding that the other runner-up declined to be identified.


Music in Review
New Orchestra of Westchester  State University College at Purchase


To Stop the Cable Gouging
Transmission consent.
Exclusive contracts.
"12-12-12" broadcast rules.
The fierce debate over whether to reregulate the cable TV industry employs an arcane terminology that few cable customers understand.
What many customers do understand, all too well, is that they've been socked with unconscionable price hikes and wretched service ever since 1984, when Congress freed cable operators from local regulation.
The Senate is scheduled to vote today on a bill that would end these egregious practices.
It deserves enthusiastic support.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GOTTI TRIAL: PLEA TO THE JUDGE
Prosecutors in John Gotti's racketeering trial urged the judge to limit the defense's ability to cross-examine three former high-ranking mob figures about murders they had committed, saying that grisly details about the murders would inflame the jury.
Mr.
Gotti's chief lawyer had declared that he planned to delve deeply into the motives of the three men, who are key witnesses for the Government.
B3.
DINKINS TAXI PLAN: CAN IT WORK?
As he seeks to bring order to the city's fragmented taxi industry, Mayor Dinkins's motive is clear.
He would like all New Yorkers to have the same quality of cab service -- particularly the right to hail a taxi on the street -- that people enjoy in central Manhattan.
But it remains unclear whether he can obtain approval for his plan, and whether it will actually bring better service.
News Analysis, B3.
TAKING ON A TOWER
In what is believed to be the first test of a new Federal law protecting the rights of the disabled, a group of advocates filed suit against the Empire State Building, demanding that its owners make the observation deck accessible to people in wheelchairs.
B3.
DECLINING CONFIDENCE
On the two issues that most affect business decisions to move -- cost and safety -- New York is significantly worse off than five years ago, a survey of business leaders has found.
B3.
City College security chief reassigned.
B2.
Second trial opens in St.
John's case.
B2.
Sex-abuse inquiry at elementary school.
B3.
REGION  WARMUS'S LOVER TAKES THE STAND
Paul Solomon, the man at the center of an ill-fated love triangle involving Carolyn Warmus, described how the former Westchester teacher continued to pursue him after his wife's slaying, despite his refusal to see her.
Ms.
Warmus's lawyer, who suggested in his opening statement that Mr.
Solomon could have killed his wife, is expected to begin cross-examining him today.
B5.
A PRECARIOUSLY BALANCED BUDGET
The Florio administration unveiled a precariously balanced budget that relies on a turnaround in the economy, a substantial reduction in state payments to pension funds and as-yet-unapproved Federal Medicaid payments.
It also counts on sales tax revenue that the Republicans who control both houses of the Legislature have vowed to cut.
A1.
FIRE AND FEAR ON L.I.
A fire in a row of 19th-century buildings killed two men in the genteel business district of Sayville, L.I., and is terrifying shopkeepers and residents who fear the unseen hand of an arsonist.
B5.
AGAINST THE TIDE
Macy's, 47th Street Photo and other big-name retailers are in various stages of bankruptcy, but Alan Fortunoff is undaunted.
He is putting his family's housewares and jewelry business on the line with plans to build a $194 million shopping center in Westbury, L.I.
B5.
Victim had hands up, key witness testifies in trial of Teaneck officer.
B4.
Neediest Cases B2  Our Towns B5


J.P. Morgan Is BT Customer
BT, formerly British Telecommunications, announced yesterday that J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, the huge financial services company, had become a customer for telecommunications services worth $20 million over the next five years.
Like other multinational corporations, J. P. Morgan had in effect acted as its own telephone company, spending millions of dollars on equipment and special leased lines to provide private and secure voice and data links between headquarters and its branch offices.


Disney (Walt) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Miscellany
*
CBS and The New York Times Company Women's Magazines have agreed to co-sponsor a 25-market shopping-mall tour next year that will include personal appearances by Times magazine editors and stars of CBS programs.
As part of the promotional arrangement, the first between a big network and a leading magazine publisher, advertisers who commit to combined purchases with the two companies will be prominently featured in the tour.


Crawford &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Swift Gets 3-Year Pact
Pitcher BILL SWIFT agreed to a $7.95 million, three-year contract with San Francisco yesterday, pitcher TERRY MULHOLLAND agreed to a one-year contract with Philadelphia and outfielder GARY THURMAN agreed to a one-year deal with Kansas City.
Swift was 1-2 with 17 saves and a 1.99 e.r.a. for Seattle last season and came to the Giants as part of the trade for KEVIN MITCHELL.
He made $925,000 last season.
Mulholland, who made $525,000 last season, agreed with the Phillies on $1.25 million while Thurman settled for $287,000.


Indictment in Taxi Scheme
The manager of an organization of taxi owners that for decades provided Election Day services to New York City has been indicted on fraud charges alleging that he billed for work that he did not provide, City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman said yesterday.
The man, Herman Sherman, the manager of the Independent Taxi Owners Group, was indicted by a Queens grand jury last week.


Cyprus Minerals Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Invitation for Johnson
Basketball Australia said today that it had invited MAGIC JOHNSON to serve as captain of a United States all-star team in a pre-Olympic tournament in July against the country's national team.


Sally Mugabe, Zimbabwe President's Wife, 60
Sally Mugabe, an anti-colonialist and the wife of President Robert Mugabe, died Monday.
She was 60 years old and had suffered from a kidney disease, the Government announced.
Mrs.
Mugabe, who was born in Ghana, met Mr.
Mugabe when he was teaching there in the 1950's.
They married in 1961.


Detroit Edison reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Citibank, New York, a unit of Citicorp, selected an automation vendor, ISC-Bunker Ramo, a wholly owned unit of Olivetti, to install bank-branch automation systems nationwide. *
Edison Brothers Stores Inc., St.
Louis, a retail concern, reached an agreement to purchase the 39-store chain of Harry's clothing stores for big and tall men.


RMI Titanium reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Five Jurors Chosen as Tyson Trial Begins
In the left corner of Courtroom 4 today, Mike Tyson, former heavyweight champion of the world, watched as two teams of lawyers began the tedious process of choosing the 12 Marion County citizens who will determine his fate.
By the end of the day, the first of what is expected to be at least a two-week trial on rape and related charges, five jurors had been selected.
Potential jurors were questioned about whether they would hold a celebrity to a higher standard of conduct than someone else and whether they believed a woman had the right to say no, and even about their feelings on the recent William Kennedy Smith trial.
Statements Wednesday?
Jury selection in the Tyson trial is to continue Tuesday morning and, if all goes according to the schedule set by Judge Patricia J. Gifford, lawyers will present their opening statements Wednesday afternoon.


Once Again, the Taxi Industry Is Up for Review
Like his immediate predecessor, Mayor David N. Dinkins has decided to take on one of New York City's more intractable problems: making order out of the fragmented, even chaotic taxicab industry.
Mr.
Dinkins's motive is clear.
He would like New Yorkers outside central Manhattan, particularly his core political constituency in poor neighborhoods, to have the same quality of cab service and the same ability to hail a taxi on the street that people enjoy in places like Wall Street, midtown and the Upper East Side.


Fox Stole Ratings but Not the Show From CBS
A few final notes on Super Bowl XXVI:
"IN LIVING COLOR" MAY HAVE BEEN AN EMBARRASSMENT BUT IT DID ITS JOB: The Fox Network show fell down on its promise to review the first half of Super Bowl, instead relying on canned sketches.
The "Men on Football" segment, coming on late in the show, fell flat and showed the staff had barely watched the game.
Although the effort was a long tumble into an abyss of limp, humorless taste, the live show still pulled viewers Fox's way.


Mattel Doll Deal
The toy maker Mattel Inc. announced a licensing agreement with Rollerblade Inc. of Minneapolis to market two skating doll lines in 1992, including a Barbie that uses in-line roller skates.
"This sport is becoming increasingly popular among children," said Rita Rao, Mattel's executive vice president for marketing.
In addition to Rollerblade Barbie and friends, Mattel will create Baby Rollerblade, a 15-inch doll that is supposed to look as if it is skating.


Erhardt Joins Steelers
RON ERHARDT, the New York Giants' assistant head coach in charge of the offense last season, was named offensive coordinator of the Steelers yesterday. (AP)


Cabot Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tyson Stays Silent; His Supporters Don't
The television lights abruptly fired up and, at 8:54 o'clock here this morning, Mike Tyson came striding through the revolving door of the City-County Building.
Behind the police restraints, the crowd was waiting for him.
There were photographers, cameramen, reporters with note pads and onlookers who either stood silent or shouted encouragement to the former heavyweight champion.


Careers; Schooling Engineers in Environment
TOMORROW'S engineers -- and today's as well -- must be grounded in environmental science, says Dr.
George S. Ansell, president of the Colorado School of Mines, in Golden, Colo.
Two reasons he cited were the growing contamination of the environment and the need for a broader education to assure jobs.
"Our graduates have been getting jobs and with little trouble," he said in an interview last week.
He contrasted that to the situation at many universities whose engineering graduates have difficulty finding jobs in the current market.
He thinks that a requirement since 1984 that every student at the School of Mines take at least one course in environmental science is a helpful start.


Palestinians Refuse to Attend Moscow Peace Talks
Middle East peace talks opened in Moscow today without a Palestinian delegation.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d read a prepared opening speech and made no mention of the Palestinians' refusal to attend.


Corrections
An article on the Health page on Wednesday about sexually transmitted warts referred incompletely to the treatment of infected men.
Although the viruses that cause the warts can be impossible to detect, the warts themselves can be detected and treated.


Butler Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kia, of Korea, Plans to Sell Vehicles in U.S
The Kia Motors Corporation of South Korea said today that it would develop a dealer network in the United States to start selling subcompact cars and small sport-utility vehicles in 1993.
Kia, which is South Korea's No. 2 auto maker, after Hyundai, makes the Festiva subcompact distributed by Ford in the United States.
Kia also announced that W. Gregory Warner, a former Hyundai Motor America executive, would oversee the North American project as chief operating officer.
Mr.
Warner, who is 48 years old, has been a consultant to Kia since November.
Quality Called Imperative
Kia faces many challenges in the American market as it takes aim at sedan buyers whose choices include the acclaimed Honda Civic and Toyota Corolla models.
Hyundai entered the American market in the late 1980's with a very strong start, but sales suffered after quality problems arose.
In contrast, the Festiva made by Kia received a high reliability rating in the Consumer Reports 1991 car guide.


News Summary
International A3-9  YELTSIN DIAGNOSIS: BUSINESS
President Yeltsin is retreating from Moscow and public life for a few days, but the prescription is not rest, but rather a dose of domestic efforts and preparation for another trip to the United States later this week, his office said.
A1
Dozens are reported killed in ethnic strife in Nagorno-Karabakh.
A6 PALESTINIANS ARRIVE IN MOSCOW
After a weekend of wrangling, Palestinians sent a delegation to the Moscow round of Mideast peace talks, but some of the members are likely to raise Israeli and American objections.
A8
Shamir's Government weathered a series of no-confidence votes.  A8
Curfews circumscribe the lives of Palestinians in Ramallah.
A8  EMBARGO'S CHOKEHOLD ON HAITI
Fuel is scarce, famine is on the horizon and the environment is suffering as Haitians labor under the strictures of an economic embargo.
A3  A record number of Haitians arrived in the U.S. seeking asylum.
A3  GOODBYE, HAMMER AND SICKLE
Eggs and epithets were hurled at a meeting of Brazil Communist Party as members decided to drop the hammer and sickle as their symbol and change the group's name to the Popular Socialist Party.
A6  "L'HIVERNISTE" IN HIBERNATION
Montreal Journal: Quebec's residents have gone underground, gone south and gone soft, some say.
Unlike their hardier forebears, when bitter winter strikes, they burrow in warm subterranean shopping malls or pack their bikinis and head for Florida beaches.
A4  RIGHTISTS TRIUMPH IN FRANCE
Support for the right surged in France as the ruling Socialist Party took a drubbing in parliamentary and municipal by-elections.
The loss was seen as a sign of a leadership crisis.
A9
China reportedly freed nine democracy movement prisoners.
A9  National A10-17  MACY'S IN BANKRUPTCY
Finally admitting defeat in its bruising battle with creditors and the deteriorating economy, R. H. Macy &amp; Company filed for bankruptcy protection.
The proud retail business succumbed to the billions in debt it had taken on in the late 80's when it went private and then added two big retail chains.
A1 NARROW VIEW OF VOTING ACT
The Supreme Court adopted a restrictive view of the Federal Voting Rights Act, rejecting arguments the Bush Administration had put forward on behalf of black elected officials in two Alabama counties.
A1
A roundup of other High Court rulings. A13  A TOUGH AUDIENCE FOR BUSH
President Bush is giving his State of the Union Message to a nation that is gloomy about the economy and more disapproving of his Presidency than ever, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.A1  LATE CHANGES ON BUDGET
The White House ordered Richard Darman rewrite crucial provisions of the national health-care plan that was to have been sent to Congress this week as part of the President's budget package.
A10
The President called for voluntary prayer in schools.  A17  CRITICAL WEEK FOR LEADERS
The presumed front-runners in the New Hampshire primary face a crucial week.
President Bush must convince the voters he can cure the recession.
Governor Clinton must regain his balance after being hit with accusations of infidelity.
A16
Governor Clinton started the day with a public prayer.
A16  G.O.P.
OPENING IN CALIFORNIA
The Supreme Court of California imposed a redistricting plan that political experts say could enable Republicans to take control of the state's huge Congressional delegation this year and both houses of the Legislature within four years.
A10  TRYING TO HEAL BODY AND SOUL
Thousands of teen-agers a year go to a clinic in Oakland, Calif., to get help for sore throats or acne.
Usually they need help for greater problems: assault, sexual abuse, depression and hunger.
A1  WHEN THE FLOODWATERS CLEARED
Instanter Journal: Pennsylvania's worst drought in 50 years has turned a lake into a moonscape of cracked earth, revealing the remains of what was Instanter.
A10
A female drifter was convicted of murder in Florida.
A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 FLORIO UNVEILS BUDGET
Gov.
Jim Florio's budget, the largest in New Jersey history, counts on a turnaround in the economy as well as on sales-tax revenues that the Republicans, who control the Legislature, have vowed to cut.
A1  Neediest Cases B2  Business Digest, D1 Science Times C1-10  A newfangled balloon is ready for a round-the-world trip.
C1  Many scientific diciplines enlisted to find drugs in rain forest.
C1  The plastic brain: a new theory of fetal development.
C1  The Doctor's World: drug-resistant TB and elimination goal.
C3  Fashion Page A19  In Paris, Diverse Dreams  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  German film makers support "Europa, Europa." C11  Music: Schubert's settings of Goethe text.
C11  Classical Music in Reviews.
C16  Dance: Yancey Dance Theater.
C12  City Ballet in "Divertimento No. 15." C15  Word and Image: An Australian novelist with a full-tilt pace and ferocious humor.
C11  "Vox," a telephone novel.
C15  Obituaries A18  Thomas J. Mackell, former Queens District Attorney  Sports B7-13  Baseball: Yankees looking at Alan Anderson.
B11  Basketball: Slim pickings at Lafayette High.
B9  When Ewing is hot, the Knicks win.
B10  Boxing: Tyson trial starts.
B7  Columns: Berkow on the Super Bowl.
B7  On Pro Football B8  Football: Redskins are one big happy family.
B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  These tax cuts stunt growth.
Leers, smears and Clinton.
To stop the cable gouging.
Letters A20  Russell Baker: Before much longer.
A21  A. M. Rosenthal: The Clinton couple.
A21  Jorge Gomez Lizarazo: Colombian blood, U.S. guns.
A21  Eric L. Chase: To end terrorism, punish its sponsors.
A21


Rites of Grief, Signs of Strength
The mourners filed silently out of Sacred Heart Basilica, next to the golden dome on the Notre Dame campus.
They set out on foot, three and four abreast on paths cleared of last week's snow, across campus and down Notre Dame Avenue to the cemetery that became Meghan Beeler's resting place.
At the end of the long procession, just in front of the hearse, the young people wore blue-and-gold parkas that said Notre Dame Swimming on the back.
There were others on the team who had gone to St.
Louis for the funeral today of Colleen Hipp, who like Beeler had died in the crash of the swimming team's bus just past midnight early last Friday morning.


Results Plus
N.H.L.
Bruins Nip North Stars, 3-2  Vladimir Ruzicka's sixth goal in seven games, a slap shot from the top of the right circle with 3 minutes 6 seconds left in the game, gave the Boston Bruins a 3-2 home victory over the Minnesota North Stars last night.
Minnesota had rallied from a 2-0 deficit to tie the game with 11:14 left on goals by Mike Craig and Basil McRae in a span of 1:50. (AP) TENNIS  This Time, She Wins  Jennifer Capriati saved two match points to defeat Gabriela Sabatini, 6-3, 6-7 (2-7), 7-6 (7-4), yesterday in an exhibition in Hong Kong.
Last week when it counted, Capriati lost to Sabatini in the quarterfinals of the Australian Open.
In another match, Yayuk Basuki beat Lori McNeil, 6-1, 1-6, 6-3. (AP) Seeded Players Win: The only two seeded players in action, No. 4 Veronika Martinek of Czechoslovakia and No. 7 Susan Sloane-Lundy of Lexington, Ky., won their first-round matches at the Nutri-Metrics Classic in Auckland, New Zealand.
Martinek outlasted Kathy Rinaldi of Amelia Island, Fla., 7-6 (7-2), 4-6, 6-4, and Sloane-Lundy breezed to a 6-2, 6-2 victory over Clare Wood of Britain.(AP) HORSE RACING  A 'Rowdy' Victory  Rowdy Regal took a 1 1/2-length victory yesterday in Aqueduct's $47,000 Time for a Change purse for horses 4 years old and up.
Patricia H. Thompson's horse carried 115 pounds and was ridden by Herb McCauley.
Island Edition ran second, 8 1/2 lengths ahead of Watamotel.
Rowdy Regal covered the mile and a sixteenth in 1:45 2/5 and paid $7.40 for $2 to win. (AP)


Jury Selection Begins in Dahmer Trial


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the growth of capitalism in Kazakhstan misattributed the final quotation.
It was Dr.
Chan Young Bang, an American adviser to the Government, who said: "We do not have a lot of time. Within two years there'll be fresh stagnation, and then big social unrest, unless positive and very radical change can happen."


Baker, Fentress &amp; Co.  reports earnings for As of Dec 31


Profit Up 47% At Grumman
The Grumman Corporation said today that its fourth-quarter income rose 47 percent, reflecting stringent cost controls and improved cash management.
Grumman, based here, is the nation's ninth-largest military contractor.
It said earnings jumped to $24.5 million, or 71 cents a share, in the quarter, from $16.7 million, or 48 cents a share, in the 1990 period.


Leers, Smears and Governor Clinton
At times, voters can legitimately ask about a political candidate's financial, sexual or other personal conduct; it can bear on one's capacity for public service.
At other times any such inquiry amounts to no more than leers, smears or smug moralizing.
So far at least, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and his wife have found a reasonable place to draw a line between the two, responding to the first curiosity while resisting the second.
In a televised interview Sunday night, Mr.
Clinton, an early front-runner for the Democratic Presidential nomination, responded to stories, some of which have burdened his long years in office, alleging extramarital affairs.


Stocks Gain in Tokyo
Stock prices rose in Tokyo today.
At the end of the afternoon trading session, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 383.41 points, or 1.83 percent, to 21,390.52.
On Monday, the index lost 65.04 points.


Dinkins Plans New Taxes And Job Cuts
Mayor David N. Dinkins will propose more big cuts in spending for long-term construction projects, new taxes on gasoline and automobiles, higher income taxes on commuters and a four-year freeze in property tax rates when he presents his preliminary budget for New York City on Thursday, city officials said yesterday.
The Mayor must present a plan for closing a $1.8 billion gap in the $29 billion budget for the fiscal year that starts July 1.
He must also show how he proposes to keep the budget balanced over the next four years, in hopes of winning support for a $1 billion bond deal with the Municipal Assistance Corporation to ease the pain of spending and service cuts.


Greenstone Roberts To Buy Ackerman
Greenstone Roberts Advertising, the largest advertising agency on Long Island, yesterday announced its fourth acquisition in the last 10 months.
The Melville-based shop has agreed to purchase Ackerman Advertising Communications, Glen Head, L.I., in a move that could add about $10 million in billings to Greenstone's $70 million.
Ackerman's clients include divisions of Avis Car Leasing and King Kullen supermarkets.


Health Costs Up 12.1% Last Year, a Study Says
Employers' health-care costs rose by 12.1 percent nationwide, to $3,605 per employee last year, or about four times as fast as overall living costs, according to a survey released yesterday.
What is more, analysts said the annual increase in 1992 would be higher.
Health costs in 1991 were the highest in the Middle Atlantic States, averaging $4,066 an employee, and were the second highest in New England, at $3,918, followed by $3,659 on the West Coast, $3,546 in the Midwest, $3,412 in the South Atlantic States, and $3,262 in the Mountain States.


New York City Slips in Survey on Why Businesses Leave
On the two issues that most affect business decisions to relocate, New York City's performance is significantly worse than it was five years ago, a survey of city business leaders has found.
When asked to rate 15 considerations that might affect a company's location, 74.9 percent of those interviewed cited the overall cost of conducting business and 60.6 percent cited citywide security as extremely important.
Of those choosing these two issues, more than 80 percent said they thought New York was worse off now than it was five years ago.


Music in Review
New York Festival of Song  Renee Weiler Concert Hall Greenwich House Music School


New York City Schools Can't Afford Any More Budget Cuts
To the Editor:
I was appointed to the New York City Board of Education on July 1, 1990 -- a little more than 19 months ago.
It was an exciting time for me.
After all, it was a predominantly new board -- five new members out of seven, mostly women, significant Latino representation for the first time in the history of the board, an outspoken Republican member, a Parent-Teacher Association activist and generally a good mix of committed people who wanted to change the school system so that all of our students could succeed


Federal Signal Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Redskins Are Just One Big Happy Family
Solid.
Whenever Joe Gibbs was asked to characterize this year's Washington Redskins, he'd go back to the well for that one word: Solid.


Policy Management Systems Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Up, Up and Away


Oshkosh Truck reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Brain Cell Surprise: Genes Don't Set Function
YOUNG nerve cells can wander far greater distances across the growing brain than anyone previously imagined, two scientists have found.
And once the neurons have settled into a particular neighborhood, they learn what they are meant to do from signals that surround them, rather than from an innate genetic program, the researchers said.
The new research strongly supports the idea that the cerebral cortex, the most advanced component of the mammalian brain, is extremely supple and responsive to its environment, instead of being fixed early on by a blueprint in the genes, as some scientists had believed.


Crane Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


61 Acts of Bias: One Fuse Lights Many Different Explosions
Since Jan. 6, when a gang of white youths yelling racial epithets squirted white sneaker polish on two black children in the Bronx, bias incidents have rained down hard and heavy in New York City.
Sixty-one cases have been reported so far, ranging from racial slurs hurled from a passing car to subway riders slapped in the face to a 15-year-old honor student raped, her attackers told her, because she was "white and perfect."


The 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; For the Front-Runners, Crucial Days Are Here
Pace-setters often fade in the stretch.
It happens to horses, and it happens to politicians.
So this week, which should show something about the staying power of the presumed front-runners in the New Hampshire primary, could turn out to be highly significant.
Neither President Bush nor Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas is likely to find the going easy.
Mr.
Bush must somehow manage, in his State of the Union Message on Tuesday night, to convince the intensely provincial people here that he has a concrete program to pull their state out of recession.
Mr.
Clinton must somehow recover his balance after being staggered by allegations of marital infidelity last week.


Patterns
Badgley Mischka Acquired
The young design team of Badgley Mischka, known for its slinky women's evening clothes, was acquired yesterday by Escada, the large German fashion company.
Badgley Mischka, founded in 1988 by Mark Badgley and James Mischka, had held discussions with several possible investors before entering into the agreement with Escada.
"We've become partners with them," said Mr.
Mischka, who added that Escada would finance all existing production and future collections.
Mr.
Badgley and Mr.
Mischka said they would retain creative control and a financial stake in Badgley Mischka, as it will still be called.
"Their fabric resources and production capabilities open up a whole new world to us," Mr.
Badgley said. 'From T-Shirts to Tuxedos'
Even amid the shock waves of the R. H. Macy earthquake, there is considerable positive energy this week in fashion.
The Paris spring couture shows are up and running.
And it is also men's-wear market week in New York, with top designers exhibiting their wares on the runway.
Some of the heavyweights of women's fashion have lately jumped into the men's-wear arena, including Calvin Klein and Donna Karan.
Mr.
Klein, who dropped out of men's tailored clothing in the late 1980's, showed his comeback fall men's collection in his packed showroom yesterday afternoon.
Very big deal.
Madonna in the front row, along with Hollywood types like David Geffen, Barry Diller and Matthew Modine (whom does
he
write for?). Mr. Klein showed a complete wardrobe for men, from cashmere overcoats to tailored suits, which will cost $800 to $1,200, and lots and lots of underwear, modeled by chiseled men.
Ms.
Karan, whose father was a men's tailor, is into her second season of men's wear.
She said yesterday that her first collection, carried exclusively by Barneys New York, was a sellout.
She shows tomorrow.
Michael Kors, another designer who has made his mark with women's clothes, is showing his men's collection this evening on a balcony at Grand Central Terminal.
"Everything from T-shirts to tuxedos," Mr.
Kors said.
Mr.
Kors plans to show bodysuits for men, with dress shirts attached to underpants.
This will make tucking in the shirt unnecessary, but could incite untold amounts of yanking and hitching.
Star Power
The Council of Fashion Designers of America, which will give its annual awards Monday evening, has nailed down more presenters.
Uma Thurman, the actress, is to present the designer-of-the-year award to Isaac Mizrahi.
Peter Fonda, of "Easy Rider" fame, has been enlisted to present a special award to Harley-Davidson Inc., for popularizing the biker look.
Thierry Mugler is to present a fashion journalism award to Mary Lou Luther of the Los Angeles Times Syndicate, who will wear Mugler.
Tickets for the dinner and awards presentation are still available to the public.
The council's number is (212) 302-1821.
And Charge It
Everyone orders by mail these days, even royals.
Recently, Ann Taylor received an order for a double-breasted jacket in pink wool crepeand black pleated skirt, short.
The instructions were to "bill to Her Royal Highness the Duchess of York," said Geri Savidge, a spokeswoman for Ann Taylor, who added that the order was confirmed by her official dresser.
The Duchess must have seen the outfit in Vogue, Ms.
Savidge said, the only place it was advertised.


St. Paul Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Witness in Teaneck Case Disputes Police Account
A major state witness in the manslaughter trial of a Teaneck police officer, Gary Spath, finished two days of testimony today by stating that Phillip Pannell, a black teen-ager, had his hands raised when the officer fatally shot him in the back.
The expert, Lucien C. Haag, said he "rejected" Officer Spath's statement -- made to a Bergen county detective two days after the shooting in April 1990 -- that the teen-ager's arms were down and he was reaching toward a gun in the left pocket of his bulky parka.


U.S.-Japan Auto Parts Rift Grows
In tones reflecting the increasingly combative exchanges between Japan and the United States, the head of a Japanese auto group said today that it was "incomprehensible" that Detroit had not accepted Tokyo's offer to buy $19 billion more in American-made auto parts.
He said top Japanese executives "have no intention" of discussing the issue again with the Big Three.
The comments by Yutaka Kume, the president of Nissan Motor Company and the chairman of the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association, virtually erased any hopes of continuing discussions among the world's biggest auto makers about how to close the trade gap between the countries.


Elizabeth Walters, 86, An Author of Manuals
Elizabeth Ogg Walters, the author of many public affairs studies, died on Jan. 14 at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of pneumonia, after having been hit on Dec. 1 by a bus near her Fifth Avenue residence, said Arnold Allentuch, her executor and friend.
Mrs.
Walters, who used the pen name, Elizabeth Ogg, wrote nearly 50 pamphlets dealing mainly with mental health and social problems for the Public Affairs Committee, Inc. of New York City.
Her widely cited pamphlets include: "Your Nursing Services Today and Tomorrow," "A New Chapter in Family Planning," "When a Family Faces Stress" and "Good News for Stroke Victims."


President Puts Final Touches On State of Union Message
President Bush today began final preparations for his State of the Union Message to Congress on Tuesday night, reviewing final drafts of the speech and delivering the first of two dress-rehearsal readings to aides in a theater in the East Wing of the White House.
Mr.
Bush's recitation signaled the end of a gantlet through which speechwriters and advisers have alternately dashed and staggered, nights and weekends, for almost a month.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Brook Jacoby, third baseman, on a minor-league contract.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Gary Thurman, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Invited Brien Taylor, Mike Witt, Royal Clayton, Mark Hutton and Mike Draper, pitchers; Kiki Hernandez, Dave Sax and Mike Stanley, catchers; Robert Eenhoorn, Andy Stankiewicz and Torey Lovullo, infielders; and Dion James, outfielder, to training camp as non-roster players.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Lance McCullers, pitcher, on a minor league contract with Oklahoma City of the American Association.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Named Brett Fischer strength and conditioning coordinator and Garrett Giemont director of strength and conditioning.
Invited Jeff D. Robinson, Jamie Moyer, Steve Adkins, Jessie Hollins, Scott May and John Salles, pitchers; Jim Robinson and Matt Walbeck, catchers; and Earl Cunningham and Fernando Ramsey, outfielders, to training camp as non-roster players.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Agreed to terms with Rob Murphy and Joe Boever, pitchers, Denny Walling, outfielder, and Ernest Riles, infielder, on minor-league contracts.
NEW YORK METS -- Named Vada Pinson minor league hitting coordinator.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLES -- Agreed to terms with Terry Mulholland, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Agreed to Bill Swift, pitcher, on a three-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Signed Tracy Moore, guard, to a second 10-day contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NHL -- Suspended Jaromir Jagr, Pittsburgh Penguins forward, 10 games for skating into referee Ron Hoggarth.
CHICAGO BLACKHAWKS -- Traded Paul Gillis, center, to the Hartford Whalers for future considerations.


What Courier Must Do To Take the No. 1 Spot
JIM COURIER could overtake STEFAN EDBERG and claim the No. 1 spot in the Association of Tennis Professionals ranking if he gets to the final of the Volvo Tennis tournament in San Francisco next week, according to an A.T.P. spokesman.
Courier, currently No. 2, beat top-ranked Edberg in the final of the Australian Open on Sunday and trails the Swede by only 19 points in the A.T.P. computer.
Edberg currently is not scheduled to play in either the San Francisco or Milan tournaments next week.
If Edberg stays inactive, Courier could overtake him two ways in San Francisco: by either reaching the final or, if he plays highly ranked opponents early in the tournament, by accumulating 15 bonus points and just making it to the semifinals.


First the Fidgeting, Then the Fame
Backstage, the members of the cast are starting to fidget, and for good reason: Final reviews are about to be rendered and championships bestowed for last year's performances, and the curtain is about to rise on the new year's national racing drama.
The stage is being set in Las Vegas, Nev., where the Eclipse Awards will be announced Saturday, crowning winners in 10 divisions from juvenile prodigies to Horse of the Year.


Israeli Government Survives No-Confidence Vote
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's Government survived a string of no-confidence votes in Parliament today, overcoming its first such challenge since two small, right-wing parties defected from the governing coalition last week, stripping it of a majority.
Opposition movements brought a total of five motions of no-confidence to protest the Government's handling of social and economic matters.
But the motions were defeated in a single 55-49 vote after several hours of debate.


Goulds Pumps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chapter Starting at Macy's, Ending at Federated
The bankruptcy filing by R. H. Macy &amp; Company yesterday came just a week before Federated Department Stores Inc., which owns Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus, Rich's and other department stores, is expected to emerge from bankruptcy protection after two years.
Federated, the first large department store chain to emerge from bankruptcy, filed for protection on Jan. 15, 1990, after it was swamped by the debts incurred by its parent, the Campeau Corporation, in buying the Federated stores.
Campeau shareholders will vote today on the proposed plan to emerge from bankruptcy.


Experts Say Logging Of Vast Siberian Forest Could Foster Warming
THE forests of the Amazon and other tropical regions have been getting attention for some time, and understandably so.
They are home to a disproportionate share of the world's living species, they absorb huge amounts of atmospheric carbon dioxide that would otherwise exert a big heating effect on the earth's climate and they are rapidly being destroyed.
Less well known is the vast stretch of fir, larch, spruce and pine that girdles the continents at far northern latitudes and is known as the taiga.
The word is derived from the Russian, appropriately enough since the Siberian part of the taiga is the largest forest in the world, far larger than the Brazilian Amazon.
At more than two million square miles, it would cover the entire continental United States excepting Alaska.
Like the tropical forests, it is a major absorber of atmospheric carbon dioxide.


Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


In a Speech, President Returns to Religious Themes
Reviving social and religious themes that are seldom heard in his oratory except in election years, President Bush today called for voluntary prayer in schools, pledged to curtail "the decline of the American family" and cited the teachings of Jesus Christ as the moral force behind the Persian Gulf war.
"Obviously no country can claim a special place in God's heart," Mr.
Bush said in an address to the National Religious Broadcasters, a group of Christian radio and television station officials.
"Yet we are better as a people because He has a special place in ours."


Dow Edges Up 7.83 and Closes at 3,240.61
Stock prices were mixed yesterday, with blue chips posting small gains while the broader market was weak.
Many cautious investors moved to the sidelines in anticipation of the President's State of the Union Message tonight.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 7.83 points to finish at 3,240.61, but all the other leading indexes wound up with losses.


In West Bank Town, Curfew Deepens Resentment
Living every night under military curfew, Saleh Abdel-Jawad says, means that seemingly small decisions can sometimes loom large.
"A few nights ago my daughter was sick and needed to be looked at," said Professor Abdel-Jawad, who teaches political science at Bir Zeit University.
"Fortunately, it was not urgent. If it was urgent, I might have risked the indignities I probably would have faced if the Israeli soldiers stopped me. But I would rather not go through that. I waited until the next day to take her to the doctor."


Investor Takes Over As Head of L.A. Gear
No one expected Stanley P. Gold to be a passive investor when he bought 34 percent of L.A.
Gear Inc. last year for an investment fund he runs for Roy E. Disney.
So it came as no surprise last weekend when Mr.
Gold became the new chairman and chief executive of the financially troubled footwear company, replacing L.A.
Gear's co-founder and chairman, Robert S. Greenberg.
Mr.
Greenberg, whose resignation was announced with Mr.
Gold's appointment Sunday, had built L.A.
Gear into one of the nation's leading athletic shoe companies by concentrating on fashionable sneakers for women, a market largely ignored by Nike Inc. and Reebok International Ltd.
But the company faltered after it expanded into clothing and tried to compete with Nike and Reebok in men's athletic shoes.


Yeltsin, Out of Sight Again, Prompts Anxiety and Rumor
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia made another characteristically abrupt retreat from public life today, this time stirring a sense of mystery and diplomatic risk on the eve of the Middle East conference here of leading nations whose economic aid he has been courting.
Mr.
Yeltsin has canceled all meetings for two days and left Moscow to focus on domestic problems and a coming foreign mission, according to the office of the Russian President, who has previously disappeared on sudden restorative retreats that caused world anxiety about the stability of this troubled nation and its leader.


Florio's Budget Plan Charts Collision Course With G.O.P.
The Florio administration unveiled a budget today that counts on a turnaround in the economy, a substantial reduction in state payments for pensions, and as-yet-unapproved Federal Medicaid payments to bring it into balance.
It also counts on sales tax revenues that the Republicans, who control both houses of the Legislature, have vowed to cut.
The precariously balanced budget is the largest in state history at $15.7 billion -- actually more than $16 billion if an unappropriated buffer of about $300 million is included.
It relies heavily on a new formula that would cut state pension contributions and increase the amount to be paid from the investment income of the pension funds.
No Drop in Sales Tax


N.H.L. Suspends Jagr
JAROMIR JAGR, the Penguins' all-star forward, was suspended by the National Hockey League yesterday for 10 games for skating into Referee RON HOGGARTH in the final minute of Pittsburgh's 6-4 loss to Washington Capitals on Sunday.
Jagr, a left wing, can appeal the suspension to the league.
The ban would last until the Penguins' Feb. 20 game against Quebec.


Gotti Trial Judge Is Urged To Limit Cross-Examining
Prosecutors in John Gotti's racketeering trial urged the judge yesterday to limit the defense's ability to cross-examine three former high-ranking mob figures about murders they had committed.
The mob figures are considered key prosecution witnesses -- Philip Leonetti, a Philadelphia mobster who has admitted taking part in 10 murders; Peter Chiodo, a Genovese crime-family captain who has acknowledged 4 murders, and Salvatore Gravano, a Gambino leader who is expected to testify that he participated in additional slayings.


Briggs &amp; Stratton reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Macy's Bankruptcy
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Co. filed for bankruptcy protection, finally admitting defeat in its bruising battle with creditors and the economy.  [ Page A1. ]


Disney Earnings Up by 22%
The Walt Disney Company said today that its profits improved 22 percent in the most recent quarter, as several lucrative movies compensated for weak attendance at the company's theme parks.
Disney said earnings for the quarter that ended on Dec. 31 rose to $208.1 million, or $1.56 a share, from $170.4 million, or $1.28 a share, a year earlier.


G.M. Unit Settles Mortgage Escrow Suit
One of the country's largest mortgage lenders settled a Federal lawsuit yesterday by agreeing to refund tens of millions of dollars to hundreds of thousands of homeowners who officials said had been forced to pay excessive amounts into escrow accounts.
The Attorneys General of 12 states, including New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and California, said their settlement with the General Motors Corporation's mortgage unit represented a significant victory against widespread abuse in mortgage lending.
They expressed the hope that the settlement would result in reforms nationwide.


Ground Is Broken for a New Federal Courthouse in Lower Manhattan


Amended Charge for Howe
Federal prosecutors have decided to amend their misdemeanor charge against Steve Howe, the Yankee pitcher who was arrested near here last month for possession of cocaine.
The new charge has come three days before the 33-year-old athlete was to go on trial and will force the trial to be postponed.
Stephen Nardi, one of two local defense attorneys representing Howe, said the United States Attorney's office in Helena informed Howe today that he was being charged with an additional misdemeanor count -- that of "attempted possession" of a dangerous drug.
The original count against Howe, filed by the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration Dec. 19, charged Howe only with possession of cocaine.
The pitcher, who was arrested and charged with buying a gram of cocaine from an informant, must be arraigned a second time, said Nardi.


China Reports Freeing 9 Democracy Campaigners
China said today that it had recently released nine people who had been held in connection with the Tiananmen democracy movement of 1989.
The State Council Information Office declined to identify the nine, who apparently had been held for about two and a half years without charge.
But John T. Kamm, an American business executive and human rights advocate who has successfully negotiated the release of dissidents before, said Chinese officials gave him the nine names on Saturday.


Bad News for Bush as Poll Shows National Gloom
In his State of the Union Message tonight, President Bush will address a nation that is gloomier than it has been in 13 years, more disapproving of his Presidency than ever and increasingly willing to try a Democrat in the White House, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
The survey suggests that Mr.
Bush's speech at 9 o'clock tonight may be the most important of his Presidency.
He is facing a discontented and volatile electorate that on a variety of issues is willing to give the opposition party the benefit of the doubt.


Shamans and Scientists Seek Cures in Plants
FOR ages, traditional remedies derived from plants were the primary form of medical care for the world's people, and for three-quarters of the global population they still are.
But in the United States, medical researchers have generally been lukewarm at best about investigating the undeniable curative properties of plants.
This is not just a prejudice in favor of modern medicine; isolating specific plant compounds can be a difficult technical task.


Fined for Roughness
Separate referee-bumping incidents on Saturday night resulted in fines and one-game suspensions imposed yesterday by the National Basketball Association against Nets assistant coach TOM NEWELL and Houston Rockets guard VERNON MAXWELL.
Newell was assessed a $2,000 fine along with the suspension for bumping Referee STEVE JAVIE after being ejected with 7 minutes 48 seconds remaining in the third quarter of the Nets' game at Philadelphia.
Newell will miss tonight's game between the Nets and Kings in Sacramento.


SETBACK AT POLLS FOR MITTERRAND
The governing Socialist Party of President Francois Mitterrand, battered by a weak economy and mired in a leadership crisis, suffered a humiliating defeat in parliamentary and municipal by-elections on Sunday as support for the far-right National Front surged.
The results of the six by-elections, released today, suggest that the popularity of Socialists has fallen to its lowest point since Mr.
Mitterrand took office a decade ago.
They also disclosed an angry French electorate, tired of traditional parties, drawn to the xenophobic platform of the National Front, which proposes sending immigrants back to the countries they came from.


Anatomy of Integrated Program For Macs
PROGRAMS that can do more than one thing are tempting for many computer users, particularly novices, or even veterans whose demands are relatively light.
If you do not need all the features and complications of WordPerfect, dBase and Lotus 1-2-3, but do need to write, keep track of data and manipulate spreadsheets, a so-called integrated program may be just the ticket.
ClarisWorks, for Apple Macintosh computers, is about as integrated as an integrated program can get.
It combines word processing, graphics, database, spreadsheet and communications in one package, and you do not usually have to leave one module to use another.
For instance, while writing a report, you can call on the spreadsheet to make a calculation and later print the report and the spreadsheet as a single document.


Premark International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


A Judge Who Often Aids Debtors
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company will have its day in court in front of one of the favorite judges of lawyers representing bankrupt clients.
Judge Burton R. Lifland, the 62-year-old chief judge of the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan, has a reputation for giving debtors the benefit of most doubts.
Perhaps the most obvious indication of Judge Lifland's sympathies is his patience in allowing companies operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection to come up with debt-reorganization plans.
The bankruptcy law guarantees a company three months in which it has the exclusive right to propose a reorganization plan.
But a judge may extend that, and in November Judge Lifland -- for the 19th time in five and a half years -- agreed to give the LTV Corporation more time to submit its plan, although he also allowed creditors to file a competing plan.


Tyson Stays Silent; His Supporters Don't
The television lights abruptly fired up and, at 8:54 o'clock here this morning, Mike Tyson came striding through the revolving door of the City-County Building.
Behind the police restraints, the crowd was waiting for him.
There were photographers, cameramen, reporters with note pads and onlookers who either stood silent or shouted encouragement to the former heavyweight champion.


MACY'S ASKS COURT TO PROVIDE SHIELD AGAINST CREDITORS
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company, the proud retail business whose executives confidently took on billions in debt in the late 1980's, filed for bankruptcy protection yesterday, finally admitting defeat in its bruising battle with creditors and the deteriorating economy.
At a brief noontime meeting, the company's board voted unanimously to file for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
Several board members, including Laurence A. Tisch, whose Loews Corporation had tried to prop up Macy with a $1 billion buyout plan, participated by telephone.


Computers Are Distributed Containing Software Virus
A personal computer manufacturer has notified its dealers that in December the company accidentally shipped as many as 500 personal computers with a potent computer virus.
The company, Leading Edge Products Inc., based in Westboro, Mass., sent a letter to its dealers' service centers on Jan. 14 warning that computers shipped from the company's warehouse between Dec. 10 and Dec. 27 may have been infected with a virus known as Michelangelo.


Louisiana-Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


MDU Resources Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Friends of Victim Testify In Teaneck Officer Trial
The prosecution rested its case this morning in the manslaughter trial of a Teaneck police officer accused of killing a 16-year-old youth.
The defense then began calling teen-age friends of the slain youth, Phillip Pannell, and police officials in an effort to link Mr.
Pannell to a handgun and to undermine the credibility of a witness to the shooting.


Mutombo Is All-Star
DIKEMBE MUTOMBO, the Denver Nuggets' highly celebrated rookie, will be the only first-year player in the National Basketball Association's All-Star Game Feb. 9 in Orlando, Fla.
The 7-foot-2-inch Mutombo was one of 14 reserves named yesterday by the league's head coaches.


No More Hissing the Ham: Food Is Now a Star
THE Playbills should include menus this season.
In theaters around town, Italian food, Jewish food, French food, junk food and yuppie food are central to the settings and action.
It's not the first time food has been a supporting player on stage, but there is more of it now.
This is not some proper cup of tea in the drawing room or a musical glass of Champagne, but copious quantities of food.
Dinner for the cast and, sometimes during intermission, for the stage crew.
Hunger pangs for the audience.


Bridge
If there were a vote for the best-played hand of all time, there would be many candidates.
But if the field is restricted to deals played by top-ranked players on a major occasion, the choice is more limited and the one shown in the diagram would be one of the favorites.
It was played in 1970 in Winnipeg, Canada, and the hero was Giorgio Belladonna of Italy.
He was playing for the Omar Sharif Circus, which was competing daily in different cities against Ira Corn's Aces.
East-West for the Aces were Bob Goldman and Bill Eisenberg, and the North player, partnering Belladonna, was Claude Delmouly of France.


Ratings Mixed for Super Bowl
The CBS broadcast of Super Bowl XXVI recorded a Nielsen rating of 40.3, with a 61 share, down from the 41.9/63 for last year's Giants-Bills game.
Although the rating fell, CBS said the game drew a total audience of 120 million viewers, the second-highest total since 127 million watched in 1986.
The CBS total figure is the number of viewers who watched some portion of the game.
Nielsen computed that 80 million viewers watched during an average minute.


Dow Corning's Failure In Public Opinion Test
Regardless of whether Dow Corning Inc. ever convinces regulators that its silicone-gel breast implants are safe, the company seems likely to be branded as one of several that have bungled their handling of an accident or product defect, according to public relations and crisis management experts.
Dow Corning's handling of the growing controversy that led to the Food and Drug Administration on Jan. 6 to call for a moratorium on breast implants is increasingly being compared to the Exxon Corporation's response to the Exxon Valdez oil spill, the Johns Manville Corporation's treatment of its asbestos woes, and A. H. Robins's debacle with its Dalkon Shield birth control device.
Critics say that Dow Corning's mistakes include a lack of public action by Lawrence A. Reed, the company's chief executive; too little sympathy and support for women who say they were harmed, and the failure to get the worst news out quickly.


Prices Rise as Confidence Drops
A surprisingly big drop in consumer confidence and sales of big inventories of corporate bonds helped to lift prices of Treasury securities yesterday.
In addition, an important measure of inflation showed that cost pressures continued to weaken in the fourth quarter, a trend that analysts expect to continue.


American Express's Net Jumps 72.2%
Coming off a year of financial turmoil in its main lines of business, the American Express Company said yesterday that its earnings rose 72.2 percent last quarter, bolstered by record results in its consumer financial and information services business.
But analysts viewed the overall results as poor.
The financial services company said its quarterly profits rose to $237.4 million, or 47 cents a share, compared with $137.9 million, or 28 cents a share, in the comparable period of 1990.


Budget Pretense in New Jersey
Gov.
Jim Florio's new budget for New Jersey offers more spending, no new taxes and no more layoffs.
Nice trick if he could pull it off.
But there's a new reality in Trenton.
The Democratic Governor's budget will be filtered through a Republican Legislature this year, and the Republicans are determined to cut both taxes and spending.
At this stage, both he and they are just sparring.
Mr.
Florio's $15.7 billion proposal for the year starting July 1 -- $700 million more than the current year -- rests on uncertain assumptions of increased revenues.
He hopes that an economic recovery will yield higher state tax collections, that Washington will provide a windfall of Medicaid reimbursements and that the Legislature will approve revised accounting for state pension funds.
He also proposes small spending cuts, of less than 1 percent, for most state agencies.


The Other Crime Trial: A Gambino Heir
Thomas Gambino, the son of the late reputed Mafia boss Carlo Gambino, apparently never aspired to inherit the leadership of the organized-crime family that some law-enforcement officials expected his father to bequeath him at his death in 1976.
Instead, the officials said, Mr.
Gambino carved out an exclusive sideline for himself in New York City's garment industry, ultimately placing what they said was an extortionate stranglehold over the industry's trucking business and successfully mediating rival interests of two other Mafia families.


Colonial Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Trees That Yield a Drug For Cancer Are Wasted
Nearly a year after the Government recognized the Pacific yew as the most valuable tree in American forests because it yields a rare cancer-fighting drug, the precious bark is still being burned as scrap and discarded to rot on the forest floor in wasteful logging operations in the Northwest.
Here in the Umpqua National Forest one January day, a crew of Forest Service workers set fire to a huge pile of downed trees, the garbage of a typical logging operation on Government land.
But among the wood smoldering in the pile were several yew trees covered with sections of bark.


The Pop Life
Sounds of the 70's
The 1970's keep on intruding, declaring themselves as an important decade.
"Pimps, Players and Private Eyes" (Sire), a compilation of tunes from "blaxploitation" movies, attempts to resuscitate the funk and soul sounds of that decade.
Produced by Jorge Hinojosa and the rapper Ice-T, the album includes tunes by Bobby Womack, Marvin Gaye, Isaac Hayes and Curtis Mayfield.
The movies raided include "Superfly," "The Mack," "Cleopatra Jones," "Shaft," "Shaft in Africa" and "Across 110th Street."


Lam Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CF&amp;I Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Airborne Freight reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oryx Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Guardsman Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Is Islamic Fundamentalism a New Red Scare?
To the Editor:
What is Islamic fundamentalism?
I consider myself a student of Islamic history and have practiced Islam for 60-odd years, have read and understand the Koran and consider it just like the Bible and the Torah as the word of God.
What is this "march of Islamic fundamentalism" to which you refer (news article, Jan. 1)?
I know of Christian fundamentalist priests, but Islam does not allow any kind of priesthood, fundamental or otherwise.


Nicor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


St. Joseph Light &amp; Power Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bank Problems Lingering on Long Island
Some of the largest banks on Long Island are finding that their problems with bad real estate loans are lingering longer than at many other banks in the Northeast, whose loan problems have begun to subside.
The North Fork Bank in Mattituck, for example, said Friday that it expected its fourth-quarter results -- and those for all of 1991 -- to show a large loss.
"Much of the loss is attributed to the write-down of Long Island real estate values held as collateral for loans," the company said.


Profits Rise 19.8% at Merck; Warner-Lambert Has Loss
In a case of good and not-so-good news in the pharmaceutical industry yesterday, Merck &amp; Company added to its string of double-digit earnings gains in the final quarter of 1991, while the Warner-Lambert Company reported losses because of previously announced restructuring and accounting charges.
Following are details from the companies' reports: Merck
Surpassing the forecasts of some analysts, Merck, the world's largest prescription drug maker, announced a 19.8 percent gain in quarterly profits, to $529.8 million, or $1.37 a share, from $442.2 million, or $1.14 a share, a year earlier.


IBP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Who Has Implants? The Estimates Vary
The Food and Drug Administration, plastic surgeons, breast implant manufacturers and consumer groups all once estimated that nearly two million women in the United States had silicone breast implants.
The manufacturers and plastic surgeons still hold to the estimate, but recently, the F.D.A. reduced its estimate to one million, based on a survey of households by the National Center for Health Statistics.


American Claims Evaluation reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tyson Side Protests a Juror's Dismissal
The racial composition of the jury took center stage in the Mike Tyson rape trial today, as his lawyers accused the prosecution of excluding a man from the jury for the sole reason that the man is black.
The legal skirmish came on the second day of jury selection in the trial of the former heavyweight boxing champion.
Tyson is charged with raping an 18-year-old woman when she visited his hotel room during a beauty pageant here last summer.


Tale of a Chinese Deportee Is Haunting Japan
Five months after deporting a Chinese woman who had fled to Japan to claim political asylum, the Japanese Government reacted with embarrassment and concern today over a new report that she had been arrested and imprisoned in her home province.
At the time of her deportation last August, Japan dismissed the woman's request to be considered a political refugee and forced her onto a plane in the southern city of Fukuoka to Shanghai.
The move was deplored by Amnesty International, Asia Watch and other rights groups.


The Once and Future Intern's Lament
To the Editor:
"Graduates March Down the Aisle Into Job Nightmare" (news article, Jan. 9), on the growing number of well educated young professionals in volunteer work or internships, hits the nail right on the head.
I am a recent graduate of Catholic University of America, who like many of my fellow graduates, saw graduation as a step toward an exciting and challenging future.
I was under the impression that if I worked hard during college and received good grades, a career, or a job for that matter, would follow.
Well, that impression was surely a farce.


Dinkins Aides Fear Cuts In Construction Spending
Mayor David N. Dinkins's latest proposals for cutting New York City's capital budget for construction took his own city agency heads by surprise when City Hall announced them on Monday, and yesterday many commissioners were still scrambling to figure out what the cuts would mean.
The cuts in capital spending are part of the Mayor's plan for closing at least $8 billion in gaps between projected city revenues and spending over the next four years, and were decided by senior city officials over the weekend, after they reached the limits of their willingess to cut other spending for city services.


Applied Magnetics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I.B.M. to Invest $100 Million in Groupe Bull
I.B.M. will pay about $100 million for a stake in Groupe Bull, France's troubled state-owned computer maker, under a wide-ranging technical and commercial agreement announced today.
The accord, announced by Prime Minister Edith Cresson after a meeting with President Francois Mitterrand, suggests that pragmatism is winning out over political posturing among Europe's troubled computer makers.
As a symbol of French technological independence, Bull had long seen I.B.M., whose stake will be between 5 and 10 percent, as a threat rather than a potential ally.


Total Petroleum (North America) Ltd. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Miscellany
*
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, bought a majority interest in Cadilla Inc., an advertising agency in San Juan, P.R.
The company will be renamed Cadilla/D.M.B.&amp; B. *
Gavin Anderson &amp; Co., New York, has opened an office in Paris.
Luc Perinet-Marquet, who had been the joint manager of a small public relations consultancy, has been named president of the new unit.


Broker Loses $1.27 Million In Arbitration
In an unusually large arbitration settlement, a West Virginia investor has won a $1.27 million award against Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. and a former broker at the firm for what he charged was fraud, unsuitable trading and violation of exchange rules.
According to New York Stock Exchange documents, an arbitration panel ruled last month that Shearson had failed to properly supervise its broker, William Toothman, while he carried out excessive trading, or churning, for the customer, Dr.
Vijay Jain of Charleston, W.Va.


Arkansas Freightways Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Buyers of New Volkswagens Get Hedge Against Job Loss
To ease the worries of skittish consumers and woo them to its showrooms, Volkswagen of America said today that it would cover car insurance and loan payments for up to a year for new Volkswagen buyers who lose their jobs because of the soured economy.
Volkswagen's coverage is unusually generous, analysts said.
"This program seems to be a bit more extensive" than what other auto makers have done in the past, said L. Raymond Windecker, who runs American Autodatum, an industry research firm in Livonia, Mich.


Wicor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Weather Looking Good for Round-the-World Balloon Flight
As helium gas screamed from a tank truck into a huge plastic gas bag yesterday, final preparations began for the launching of Earthwinds, a balloon whose three-member crew hopes to be the first to circumnavigate the world in a single balloon flight.
Larry Newman of Scottsdale, Ariz., captain of the Earthwinds, said there was a good chance that weather conditions in Akron, Ohio, would permit the launching of the balloon this weekend to begin its voyage of some 22,000 miles at an altitude of about 35,000 feet.


Another Furor Over a Benetton Ad
In what has become a familiar series of events, the Italian clothing company Benetton has created a provocative print advertisement; many people are furious about it, and the ensuing furor is generating copious media coverage.
The latest ad shows a man with AIDS on his deathbed, accompanied by the Benetton logo in the right-hand corner.
The photograph, which appeared last year in Life magazine, is part of a new campaign that the company says addresses social issues; it to supposed to begin appearing in magazines in March.


Ground Round Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton, Cheered by New Polls, Again Assails Bush on Economy
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, restored to good humor and some short-term political stability by news of several polls showing that most New Hampshire voters care little about recent accusations of marital infidelity, today returned to criticizing President Bush about the nation's troubled economy.
Even Mr.
Clinton's opponents acknowledge that his organizers in Texas have assembled the most extensive network of endorsements so far this year.
They also say that the assertions of marital infidelity against the Governor do not appear to have cost him any of his early strength in Texas, one of the 11 states whose voters will participate in primaries on March 10.


Is Islamic Fundamentalism a New Red Scare?; Equal Time?
To the Editor:
Some institutions in the United States display Christmas trees and Hanukkah menorahs voluntarily.
Nobody, as far as I recall, has ever asked for this.
But Mohammad T. Mehdi, secretary general of the National Council on Islamic Affairs, has demanded that banks and post offices "honor and recognize Islam" by giving the crescent and five-pointed star equal time next March, the Ramadan month of the Islamic calendar (Religion Notes, Dec. 28).


Universal Security Instruments Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Geneva Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Theater in Review
We Should . . . (a Lie)  Living Theater 272 East Third Street Manhattan Through Feb. 16 By Kenneth Bernard; directed by Robert Press; lighting by Craig Kennedy; costumes by Daniel Cole; original music by Roberto Pace; assistant director and stage manager, Dena Kazmin; producer, Judith Malina; French text translation, Richard Wilbur; French dialect coach, Joan Templeton.
Presented by the Living Theater New Directors Series.
WITH: Joanie Fritz, Gene, Lois Kagan, Kevin D. Mayes, Victoria Murphy, Joe Pichette and Michael St.
Clair.
One has to suspect that Kenneth Bernard's "We Should . . . (a Lie)" is more comprehensible when it is read than when it is seen and heard.
Still, it is so intelligent, quick and ironic that it ignites a viewer's imagination.


Ferro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Trenton Adds $341 Million to Moderate-Income Schools
New Jersey education officials unveiled a revised school aid package today that would direct an extra $341 million mostly to middle-income districts that were angered by cuts announced just a month ago.
The new aid money derives from Gov.
Jim Florio's budget proposal, announced yesterday, to cut the government's contribution to state employee pension funds.


Chile to Seek Bush Testimony
The Chilean Supreme Court has approved a judge's request for President Bush to testify in an investigation into the killing in 1976 of Orlando Letelier, officials said here today.
Mr.
Letelier, a prominent exiled opponent of the Chilean military ruler of the time, Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, was killed along with his American aide, Ronni Moffitt, by a car bomb in Washington.
In 1976, Mr.
Bush was Director of Central Intelligence.


INSIDE
Arrests in South Africa
The South African police arrested almost the entire leadership of a far-right organization, in the most aggressive action taken against the militant group.
Page A3.
Florio Reaches Out
The New Jersey Governor went before the Legislature with a conciliatory message, saying he would not rule out a sales-tax cut.
Page B1.
Jeffries's Removal Planned
The City College president said he would remove Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., who has been accused of anti-Semitism, as head of Afro-American studies by June.
Page B1.
Casino Raises Hopes
In southeastern Connecticut, people are hoping that a casino run by the Pequot Indians can rescue the area from economic disaster.
Page B1.


Detroit Signs Fielder to a Record Contract
The Detroit Tigers reached a contract agreement with Cecil Fielder yesterday, avoiding a battle in salary arbitration that could have resulted in the first baseman walking away with more than 19 percent of the Tigers' projected 1992 payroll if he had won the record $5.4 million he was seeking.
Still, Fielder wound up with a landmark salary, agreeing to sign for $4.5 million, the largest one-year contract ever for a major leaguer.


Adaptec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Procter &amp; Gamble Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
On line for a movie on the Upper East Side, I heard a well-dressed woman ask the fellow in front of me, "Is this the line for "Fried Green Tom-AH-toes?" I waited for him to launch into "Let's Call the Whole Thing Off."
Unfortunately, he just said "Yes." -- ERIN EGAN
. . .
Antoinette A. Gallo asks a salesperson in F. A. O. Schwarz, "Where are the toy kitchens?"


THE 1992 CAMPAING: Media; Low-Key Tsongas Tries New, Louder Approach
At first, Paul E. Tsongas hoped his message alone would carry him through in his drive for the Democratic Presidential nomination.
Mr.
Tsongas, the diffident former Senator from Massachusetts, refused to be packaged by consultants like some other candidates.
But after 10 months of campaigning and little evidence that his candidacy was taking off, he has discovered that some media savvy and aggressive television advertisements might sweeten the appeal of his tough prescription for economic recovery.


BUSH VOWS ECONOMIC RELIEF AND PROPOSES MODEST STEPS IN STATE OF THE UNION TALK
Staking his political fortunes on advice that the economy will right itself by summer, President Bush delivered a State of the Union Message tonight that offered modest proposals to ease the immediate pain of middle-class taxpayers and erase any impression that he is insensitive to America's economic burdens.
Mr.
Bush used his own powers to give some quick relief to taxpayers and inject about $20 billion into the economy in the next six months.
He directed that tax-withholding rules be changed immediately, meaning that some money normally given back later in refunds will be left in paychecks so it can be spent quickly.
The change is expected to inject some $2 billion a month into the economy when fully effective.
Mr.
Bush also ordered Federal spending on some programs accelerated.
Rewarding the Taxpayer


This One Goes Manhattan's Way
History certainly was not on Manhattan College's side last night as the Jaspers tipped off against La Salle at Draddy Gymnasium.
Manhattan went into the game having lost 18 straight to La Salle, a streak dating back to 1975.
The Explorers had won 32 of the last 34 games in the series.


Sacred Heart Won't Seek Tie To Law School
A potential complication in the transfer of the University of Bridgeport's academic programs to Sacred Heart University was eliminated today when Sacred Heart said it would no longer pursue an affiliation with Bridgeport's rebellious law school.
The president of Sacred Heart, Anthony J. Cernera, said the law school faculty's opposition to affiliating with Sacred Heart had put the school's accreditation with the American Bar Association at risk.


Roadway Services Inc.  reports earnings for 16wks to Dec 31


Book Notes
'Satanic Verses' Paperback
Salman Rushdie's "Satanic Verses" is finally scheduled to be released in paperback, though not by Viking Penguin, the original publisher of the book that was called blasphemous to Islam and brought an Iranian order for the writer's execution.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday comparing the R. H. Macy &amp; Company bankruptcy filing with several others misstated the time elapsed since a filing by Revco D.S.
Inc., the drugstore chain.
It occurred in 1988.
The article also referred incorrectly to the bankruptcy plan of the Campeau Corporation.
That plan has no relationship to the bankruptcy proceedings of Federated Department Stores Inc., and when Federated emerges from bankruptcy it will have no ties to Campeau, its former parent.


Bank Yields Drop Slightly
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit dropped slightly for the week ended yesterday, according to figures released by The Bank Rate Monitor, which watches bank rates.
Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor, said interest rates over the next couple of weeks will be influenced by the reaction to President Bush's State of the Union address and the possibility that the Federal Reserve will again reduce its key rates."


CHRONICLE
A campaign of a different sort has been started to help save a rain forest in Tanzania.
On Thursday night, 200 guests at a party at the Yale Club will bid on chances to choose the common and scientific names for a butterfly, a beetle, a frog and a flower found in the Eastern Arc.
The arc encompasses seven mountain ranges that have the oldest rain forest in Africa.
The prime mover of the benefit, sponsored by the Tanzania Wildlife Fund, is CARTER COLEMAN, who became a witness to the decimation of the forest in an unusual way -- from the air.
Mr.
Coleman is writing a book for Random House about becoming a bird.


Sun Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Many Ideas Behind Gifts to Neediest
In December, it said "Happy Holidays." But now it can express almost anything: "Happy Birthday," "Happy Anniversary," or "Good Luck." People have found that a contribution to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund can be given to mark almost any occasion.
"This contribution is made on behalf of my son, Richard," George W. Cooper of Stamford, Conn., wrote with his $50 contribution.
"He works at the Harvard Co-op selling textbooks for a wage little above the minimum and can ill afford to make his own contribution. However, when his 35th birthday rolled around he insisted that the only present he desired was that I contribute to the Neediest Cases Fund. I am more than happy to do his bidding."


Borden Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Punishing the Victims in Unwed Births
To the Editor:
In "Stop Favoring Unwed Mothers" (Op-Ed, Jan. 16), Charles Murray of the American Enterprise Institute argues that impoverished single mothers should be faced with two choices on their child's birth: watch the child die of starvation or give the child up, to newly created state institutions in most cases.
He justifies this "social policy" on the ground that these mothers by definition are incompetent parents whose offspring (especially in inner cities) present grave social problems.


USX-Marathon Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amoco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Economic Scene; Breathable Air For Swap or Sale
HOW in the world is the city where nobody walks going to cut air pollutants by 85 percent?
Not easily or cheaply: A ballpark estimate by the David Harrison and Albert Nichols of National Economic Research Associates in Cambridge puts the cost of meeting Federal standards at an astonishing $1,200 a year for every resident of the Los Angeles sprawl.
But many economists are convinced that the bill could be reduced sharply if the job of deciding who cuts emissions, and how, were left to markets rather than regulators.
And they are on the verge of convincing the California's South Coast Air Quality Management District to give it a try.


Personal Health
FECAL incontinence is not a subject people talk about in polite company.
In fact, it is not a subject people talk about at all.
And as a result of reticence born of embarrassment and ignorance, many thousands of children and their families suffer needless humiliation and deep social and emotional scars as the problem persists year after year without proper treatment.
The condition, formally called encopresis, involves lack of control over bowel movements after the age of 4.


Alton Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Illinois Central reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Out of Uniform, Into Service
The Democratic candidates seem agreed on the need for deep cuts in the defense budget, perhaps to fund tax cuts for the middle class.
The Congress is sure to go along with them.
Cutting the budget will mean severe adjustments.
Consider the people affected.
There was a great outcry when General Motors announced plans to lay off 74,000 workers by 1995.
Defense budget reductions envisioned by Congressional leaders would require Gen.
Colin L. Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to lay off about 500,000, many of them combat veterans.
They would be thrown almost casually into an uncertain and troubled economy.


Warner-Lambert Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cato Family Home Burns
A fire broke out Sunday afternoon in the home of Carmel Cato, the father of Gavin Cato, a 7-year-old Brooklyn boy whose death in a car accident led to several days of racial violence in Crown Heights in August.
"There was heavy damage to the apartment," said Tom Kelley, a Fire Department spokesman.
Fire marshals investigated the blaze and determined it was accidental, he said.
The cause was tentatively believed to be children playing with matches.
At the time, the Fire Department said, there were about 20 people in the apartment, on the first floor of 1611 President Avenue.
The family was relocated by the Red Cross.


In a Cold Setting, Numbing Speeches
If they happened to be paying attention, delegates and assorted hangers-on at the Moscow peace talks got tipped off to what lay ahead for them as soon as they stepped off the plane.
Pasted to a broad pillar at the airport was a sign saying "Middle East Conference."


Tyson Side Protests a Juror's Dismissal
The racial composition of the jury took center stage in the Mike Tyson rape trial today, as his lawyers accused the prosecution of excluding a man from the jury for the sole reason that the man is black.
The legal skirmish came on the second day of jury selection in the trial of the former heavyweight boxing champion.
Tyson is charged with raping an 18-year-old woman when she visited his hotel room during a beauty pageant here last summer.


Cone and Mets at Critical Point
Negotiations on a multiyear contract for David Cone have reached a critical stage, and both the Mets and the pitcher's agent have said that a determination on whether an agreement can be reached is expected by the end of this week.
A stalemate on a long-term deal would undoubtedly raise the specter of Cone's filing for free agency at the end of the 1992 baseball season.
Steve Fehr, the agent for the right-handed starter, whom the Mets regard as one of the elite pitchers in the National League, on Monday presented a series of proposals to the Mets, including formulas for deals of one, three or four years.


Merck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Journalists' Death Toll High in Yugoslavia
More journalists have died covering the first seven months of fighting in Yugoslavia than in an equal period in any war in recent memory, a press group says.
Assuming that two Soviet reporters who disappeared last fall without a trace in Serbian-held territory are dead, at least 22 journalists have died since the war began in late June, the group's statistics show.
Almost half the victims were foreigners; most were photographers or television cameramen.


Betting, in Harmony With Nature
Atlantic City and Las Vegas have the glitz and glamour, with neon cowboys and glittering marquees beckoning gamblers inside to a world of fantasy and chance.
Here, they have windows.


60-Minute Gourmet
THE cut of meat normally called a shell steak goes by several other names, including New York steak and club steak.
It comes from the short loin, one of the most tender parts of the beef.
Shell steak can be prepared in many ways; one of my favorite quick recipes is with a snappy black pepper sauce.
Ask your butcher for four boneless shell steaks that weigh about eight ounces each after excess fat is trimmed.
Crush the whole black peppercorns on a hard surface with a mallet or the bottom of a heavy flat-bottom skillet.
Do not crush the peppercorns too far in advance: peppercorns, like coffee beans, lose their flavor when exposed to air.


Kreisler Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Books of The Times; The Masters of War and the Monster They Made
The Death Lobby  How the West Armed Iraq  By Kenneth R. Timmerman  Illustrated. 443 pages.
Houghton Mifflin. $21.95.
Among the growing number of books about the Persian Gulf war and its aftermath, "The Death Lobby," by Kenneth R. Timmerman, is the most shocking.
It's about that familiar enemy of peace, the international arms merchant, a subject that has been around in fact, fiction and drama at least since World War I. This strongly documented book is essential reading for anyone interested in understanding how the most sophisticated shooting irons were sold to Iraq and what the shooting was all about.


Alaska Air Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  ASSESSING DINKINS'S PLANS


PHM Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Witco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Justin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bytex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Suit Charges Extortion Bid Over Condos
A Manhattan real-estate developer filed a lawsuit today charging that a Westchester neighborhood association demanded $300,000 in exchange for not opposing a condominium development in Purchase.
The developer, Hickory Pine Associates, filed the suit in State Supreme Court here against the Purchase Environmental Protective Association.


Playboy Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Florio Says He May Back Sales-Tax Cut
Having angered Republicans on Monday by announcing details of a budget that seemed to ignore their plan to cut the sales tax, Gov.
Jim Florio went before the Legislature today to say that he would be happy to sign a tax-cut bill if his budget goals could be met.
"I know that many of you would like to reduce our sales-tax revenues," he said during his annual budget speech to the Republican-controlled Legislature.
"I've never been fond of the sales tax, and I'm not here to mount a defense of it.


Editorial Notebook; Digging for Water, and Peace
Caleb's daughter, Achsah, was a shrewd and forward-looking Old Testament bride.
The Bible reports that when the Israelites returned from bondage in Egypt, Achsah asked for land with "springs of water" as a dowry -- a gift so valuable that nations struggle for it still.
"The challenge," said Meir ben Meir, former head of Israel's Agriculture Ministry, at a Tel Aviv University forum, "is to prevent or limit competition for water resources so that on the regional level it does not become a
casus belli.
" The threat is real. Disputes over water rank high on the agenda at the Mideast peace meetings that began yesterday in Moscow.


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Handley Was 'Insecure'
A former Giant aide, RON ERHARDT, the Pittsburgh Steelers' new offensive coordinator, spoke yesterday about his unhappiness under Giant head coach RAY HANDLEY.
Erhardt was the offensive coordinator for 10 years, but when Handley took over from BILL PARCELLS, Erhardt was relegated to the press box, where he was linked only to the special teams' coach.
He was let go by Handley on Jan. 7.


Review/Film; Under Scrutiny: TV Images Of Blacks
"Color Adjustment" is Marlon T. Riggs's cogent and thoughtful survey of black America as represented by American television, from the demeaning stereotypes of "Amos 'n' Andy" to the subtler, more insidious ones of "The Cosby Show." It is Mr.
Riggs's well-supported opinion that today's would-be positive images of prosperous, assimilated characters are every bit as damaging as the buffoonish images of the past.
Mr.
Riggs also documents television's continuing identity crisis as he contrasts the idealized black figures seen on sagas and sitcoms with the harsher, angrier ones provided by the news.
In a straightforward, informative manner, Mr.
Riggs elicits opinions from the stars and producers of landmark shows in black television history, pausing occasionally for a well-chosen observation from James Baldwin's writings.
Each of the shows discussed here emerges as a source of both pain and pride.
Diahann Carroll and Tim Reid, both of whom later starred in television series important to Mr.
Riggs's argument, discuss their changing reactions to "Amos 'n' Andy," the show about which the N.A.A.C.P. said "every character is either a clown or a crook." Ms.
Carroll says her family was adamant about not watching "Amos 'n' Andy," and only later could she see through the show's offensiveness and find its humor.


Suppliers Set to Ship To Macy
Now reassured that they will be paid for any new shipments to stores operated by R. H. Macy &amp; Company, many of the retailer's suppliers were busily arranging yesterday to deliver goods they had held on to until the retailer filed for bankruptcy protection.
At the same time, the thousands of dress makers, contractors and electronics companies that are Macy's largest unsecured creditors reacted with a mixture of relief, caution and silence to the company's bankruptcy filing on Monday.


CHRONICLE
Brother F. PATRICK ELLIS, the president of La Salle University in Philadephia, has been named as the 13th president of Catholic University of America.
Brother Ellis, a De La Salle Christian Brother, will succeed the Rev.
WILLIAM J. BYRON, a Jesuit priest, who plans to leave in June to pursue writing projects and to assume parish duties at Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in the Georgetown section of Washington.
Asked about the mission of Catholic University, which has 6,700 students at its Washington campus, Brother Ellis said yesterday, "It fills a vacuum in principles." which he contends is especially important in Washington.


Losses at Weyerhaeuser
The Weyerhaeuser Company today reported a loss for the fourth quarter and year that ended Dec. 29.
It was the company's first loss since it began publicly reporting financial results in 1933.
The fourth-quarter loss of $256.4 million compared with earnings of $58.8 million, or 30 cents a share, in the 1990 quarter.
Sales grew 2 percent, to $2.13 billion.
Fourth-quarter 1991 results included restructuring charges of $283 million.
For the year, the loss of $161.9 million compared with earnings of $393.7 million, or $1.87 a share, in 1990.
Sales declined 4 percent, to $8.7 billion.
Results for 1991 included a charge of $61 million for accounting changes.


U.S.-Japan Group to Explore Big Energy Field Off Siberia
Russia today granted a Japanese and American consortium the right to explore what are believed to be huge reserves of oil and gas just off Sakhalin Island, in what may be one of the biggest and, for the Japanese, politically most important business deals since the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
The $8 billion to $10 billion project will be conducted by the Mitsui Corporation, the giant Japanese trading concern; the Marathon Oil Company, which is owned by the USX Corporation, and McDermott International Inc., a leading company in the construction of oil platforms.


Wine Talk
A DOZEN or so years ago, when Alex Hargrave began to produce first-quality white wines on the North Fork of Long Island, he took his success in stride and told anyone who asked, "What I really want to do is make great red wine."
The same people who had expressed doubts about Long Island white wines when he started Hargrave Vineyard at Cutchogue in 1973 shook their heads again, implying, "Why can't he be satisfied with what he's got?" or "How far is he going to push this thing?" Or something like that.


Defense Portrays Husband In Triangle as a Philanderer
Through tough questioning of Paul Solomon, who was at the vertex of a love triangle, Carolyn Warmus's lawyer today elicited a portrait of a philandering husband who lied to his wife and deceived his mistress.
Ms.
Warmus's lawyer, William I. Aronwald, asked a squirming Mr.
Solomon in minute detail about sexual relations he had had with two other women years before he met the defendant.
Mr.
Aronwald also tried to show that the obsession prosecutors said his client harbored for Mr.
Solomon never existed.


City College Chief to Seek Removal of Jeffries as Department Head
The president of City College, Dr.
Bernard W. Harleston, has told the trustees of the City University of New York that he will seek to remove Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. as chairman of the college's Afro-American Studies Department by June.
The move reinforces an understanding reached three months ago by the City University board when the board reappointed Dr.
Jeffries to a limited eight-month term, instead of the usual three years.
At the time, Dr.
Harleston said publicly that he did not wish to recommend the removal of Dr.
Jeffries then out of fear of causing turmoil on campus.
Racially Charged Comments
Dr.
Jeffries caused a storm last summer by making racially charged comments at a black cultural festival.


A Fancy Food Store Now Stresses the Food Over the Fancy
LASH back to the old Dean &amp; DeLuca, one of the fanciest food stores in the world.
Fruits and vegetables were works of art.
Piled high in the front of the store, they were exotic, frightfully expensive and, for some people, inspirational.
In the new Dean &amp; DeLuca, fruits and vegetables are
food
.
They look good; they smell good; they are laid out neatly.
Despite the $2.95 pears from Japan and $5 melons from New Zealand, this is mostly food for everyday cooking: celery and potatoes; apples, oranges and pears.


THE 1991 CAMPAIGN: Almanac; Swing Votes
Congressional seats that moved from one state to another because of reapportionment.
The House has 435 members. 1942: 9 1952: 14 1962: 21* 1972: 11 1982: 17 1992: 19 *Includes one seat for Alaska and two for Hawaii.
Both became states in 1959. (Source: Congressional Quarterly)


Stuart Hall reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Pools of Memory, Waves of Dispute
Henry Burkhardt is scheming to ambush the computer industry.
His radically different supercomputer, intended for both scientific and commercial markets, has still not been formally introduced, although a handful of university and government research labs are putting prototypes through the paces of Big Science number crunching.
But in recent weeks, Mr.
Burkhardt's design has fired an emotional debate inside the usually clinically calm community of elite scientists and engineers who build the world's fastest computers.


Interleaf Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Knicks Close to Championship Level But They Have a Long Way to Go
It took Dave Checketts one second to respond to this question: Is he happy the Knicks have reached the midway point of the season with a 26-15 record?
"You bet," the Knicks' president said.
"We're talking about a team that won 39 games last year. We knew going into the season that we weren't ready to compete for a championship yet, but this is the first year of a long-term process. I hate to disappoint people by saying that, and in New York expectations will always be high, but that's reality.


International Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Delta Woodside Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


New Shopper's Guide
The Council on Economic Priorities yesterday announced publication of its 1992 edition of Shopping for a Better World, a guide to corporate social policies aimed at influencing consumer buying habits.
The 1992 booklet rates 166 companies on 10 social issues, ranging from specifics like investment in South Africa to general categories like charitable giving and environmental performance.
Listings that cover Japanese and British companies selling products in American supermarkets were included for the first time.
They were based on research by Asahi Journal in Tokyo and New Consumer, a nonprofit British organization based in Newcastle.


ARAB-ISRAEL ON REGIONAL ISSUES START IN MOSCOW
A Middle East conference opened here today, with Israel for the first time sitting down for talks on regional cooperation with Saudi Arabia and the other Arab gulf countries, but the meeting was overshadowed by the Palestinians' absence.
The Palestinian spokeswoman, Hanan Ashrawi, said the Palestinians were barred from the conference by the United States and Russia, who objected to the presence of Palestinians from East Jerusalem and from outside the West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Brinker International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Metro-Richelieu Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tyson Side Protests a Juror's Dismissal
The racial composition of the jury took center stage in the Mike Tyson rape trial today, as his lawyers accused the prosecution of excluding a man from the jury for the sole reason that the man is black.
The legal skirmish came on the second day of jury selection in the trial of the former heavyweight boxing champion.
Tyson is charged with raping an 18-year-old woman when she visited his hotel room during a beauty pageant here last summer.


Scripps Howard Broadcasting Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


STATE OF THE UNION: Washington Memo; Darman on Outskirts of Inner Circle
For Richard G. Darman, who has been a dominant figure in shaping President Bush's domestic policy, the sudden White House order this week to rewrite an Administration statement on health policy was a rare rebuke.
It is hard to tell how seriously Mr.
Darman, the President's budget director, will be damaged by the incident.
But he has been momentarily humiliated, and his future influence is threatened for several reasons.


P.&amp; G. Profits Are Up 6.7% In Quarter
Fueled by strong sales in the United States and overseas, the Procter &amp; Gamble Company yesterday reported profits for its second fiscal quarter that were better than expected, sending the company's stock up by more than 5 percent.
For the three months that ended on Dec. 31, Procter &amp; Gamble's net earnings totaled $523 million, up by 6.7 percent from the $490 million reported in the comparable period in 1990.


New York Law on Auto Rentals Needs Easing
To the Editor:
The Hertz Corporation's lamentable decision effectively to withdraw from a large part of the New York City car-rental market by imposing steep surcharges (news article, Jan. 3) could have been prevented if the New York State Senate joined the Assembly in approving my bill to make a renter's automobile insurance policy or credit card-related policy primarily responsible for property damage.


Prominent Educators Oppose National Tests
Intensifying the debate over national tests for schoolchildren, more than 50 prominent educators and testing experts have released a statement opposing such examinations just as a major educational advisory panel has endorsed them.
Last Friday the advisory panel, the National Council on Education Standards and Testing, which is composed of both political and educational leaders, made public a final report calling for national curriculum standards and national tests as the best way to insure that all schools improve.
This would be a radical departure from the longstanding American tradition of local control of curriculums that has led to a patchwork of uneven course requirements, tests and school results.


FMC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Compaq Earnings Off 51%; Sun Microsystems Up 21%
The Compaq Computer Corporation said yesterday that its net income in the fourth quarter was about half what it was in the 1990 period.
But sales and earnings rose modestly from depressed levels in the second and third quarters of 1991, exceeding Wall Street estimates.
Sun Microsystems Inc., the leading supplier of computer work stations, continued to grow through the recession, chalking up 21 percent gains in net income and revenues for its second fiscal quarter.


Ark Restaurants Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


A Perfect Place for a Lesson on Shapes. Well, One Shape, Anyway.


EASTERN GERMAN OUSTED FROM POST
The Premier of one of Germany's five eastern states, Thuringia, has been ousted after disclosures that he had collaborated with the Communist Government that ruled East Germany until 1990.
The Premier, Josef Duchac, was a leader of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union, and his fall was the latest in a series of political reverses for the Christian Democrats.


Greenstone Roberts Advertising Inc. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Memory Returns; Jury Convicts
A man was found guilty today in a 1975 killing after the victim's son suddenly recalled what happened the night of the crime.
The son, John Mudd Jr., testified that during an argument with a friend in 1990 he suddenly remembered details of the night 16 years earlier when his father, John Mudd Sr., was shot dead in their home.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Campaign; After Hoopla, a Repositioning, Not a Call to Arms
Billed for weeks by the White House as the kickoff to his re-election campaign, President Bush's State of the Union Message tonight was, by extension, also intended to begin his comeback from an astonishing tumble in the public opinion polls.
Despite the buildup though, there was little revolutionary in the speech.
It was more a careful attempt at repositioning, with Mr.
Bush reminding voters of past accomplishments while signaling his concern over the state of domestic affairs.


Allegheny Ludlum reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Many Surgeons Reassure Their Patients On Implants
Like all physicians, Dr.
James L. Baker Jr., a plastic surgeon practicing near Orlando, Fla., has spent his professional life making medical decisions in a climate of scientific uncertainty.
But he does seem certain about one thing: the safety of silicone gel breast implants.
Whenever scientific studies have questioned this assumption, Dr.
Baker, like most of his colleagues, has given these implants the benefit of every doubt.


Weyerhaeuser Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Bay State Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Boston Names Chief for Assets Unit
After years of working with one of the giants in asset management, John J. Cook Jr. has decided to try to build his own powerhouse.
Mr.
Cook, the head of institutional asset management with Fidelity Investments, was named yesterday to the new position of chairman of First Boston Asset Management and Credit Suisse First Boston Investment Management.
In the job, Mr.
Cook, 48 years old, will be responsible for running First Boston's asset management business throughout the world.
Although he is moving to a large investment bank, First Boston does not have a strong presence in the asset management business.
Mr.
Cook said in an interview that he planned to build the division rapidly.


Enron Wins Gas Contract, One of the Largest in U.S.
Entering into one of the largest and longest-duration contracts for natural gas supplies in the United States, the Enron Corporation said today that it had agreed to deliver $3.5 billion to $4 billion worth of natural gas over 20 years for a new co-generation plant to be built in upstate New York.
The agreement is with the Sithe Energies Group, of New York, which plans to build a 1,000-megawatt plant in Oswego, N.Y., that would be the biggest co-generation plant built by an independent power producer in the United States.


Magma Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Market Place; Stock Prices As Measured By Inflation
JUST how high are stock prices?
By one measure, they are nearing, but have not yet reached, the level set more than 23 years ago, back when Richard M. Nixon was winning the Presidency and a subway token was 20 cents.
That measure of stock prices is adjusted for inflation, comparing the prices of stocks with the Consumer Price Index.
Rather than measure stock prices in dollars, as normal indexes do, that calculation measures them in the context of what other things cost.
The Consumer Price Index reflects the cost of a basket of items purchased by consumers; this measurement effectively shows how many such baskets an investor would need to give up to buy a representative sample of American stocks.


Quotation of the Day
"We are going to lift this nation out of hard times inch by inch and day by day, and those who would stop us had better step aside. Because I look at hard times and I make this vow: This will not stand." -- PRESIDENT BUSH.  [ A17:5. ]


Results Plus
YACHT RACING  A Wrong Turn for Italy


Acxiom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Fashion; In Paris, Clothes Without Cliches
After the Italian domination of the runways on the first few days of the spring and summer couture showings, the French took over today.
It was still every man for himself, but Claude Montana made a strong case for pure, clean, uncluttered clothes that express many people's conception of modern fashion.
His collection for Lanvin made a clear statement that left his own space-age look of the recent past far behind.
There are no echoes of other decades or even other centuries as the designer comes to grips with how women want to look, or should want to look, today.


Sybase Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


STATE OF THE UNION: Looking to Short Term; Economists Say Bush Offers Gifts for Many But Probably Won't Deliver Lasting Growth


Empire District Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A New Rebuke From Iacocca
In the latest round of harsh exchanges between American and Japanese auto executives, Lee A. Iacocca today rebuked recent criticisms of him by Yutaka Kume, president of the Nissan Motor Company and chairman of the Japanese Automobile Manufacturers Association.
In a statement, Mr.
Iacocca, chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, said the association would "better serve the Japanese auto manufacturers if it spent more time restraining Japanese business and Government officials from attacking American workers, American management and the American political system than on criticizing me."


Transcript of Democratic Reply by House Speaker
Following is the transcript of remarks last night by Thomas S. Foley, the House Speaker, for the Democratic response to the State of the Union Message, as recorded by The New York Times.
My fellow Americans:
Tonight I speak for the Democratic Party.
But I also speak for working families and the middle class; for those who worked hard to move ahead, but now find themselves falling behind; for so many of strength and spirit and skill who watch with increasing uncertainty as so many of their hopes have been threatened.


Devils Sign Top Pick
The Devils yesterday signed right wing Bill Guerin, their top pick from the 1989 draft.
Terms were not announced.
Guerin, who was released last week by the United States Olympic team, will report immediately to Utica of the American Hockey League.
He scored 40 goals in two years at Boston College. (AP)


International Rectifier reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


He's Back in the Saddle: Colts Hire Marchibroda
TED MARCHIBRODA returned yesterday to coach the Colts, the team he took from the depths of the league to three American Conference East championships in the 1970's.
Marchibroda, the offensive coordinator for the Buffalo Bills the past two years, coached the Colts from 1975-79 when they were in Baltimore.
His 10-4 record in his first year followed the Colts' 2-12 record the previous season and marked the greatest turnaround in National Football League history.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly  COMMITTEE ON THE ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


A Retirement At Bell Atlantic
The Bell Atlantic Corporation, one of the nation's largest providers of local telephone service, said yesterday that its president for the last three years, Anton J. Campanella, planned to retire at the end of the year.
A successor for Mr.
Campanella, 60 years old, was not immediately identified.
Raymond W. Smith, Bell Atlantic's chairman and chief executive, will remain.


Theater in Review
Kafka: Father and Son  La Mama E.T.C.  74A East Fourth Street Manhattan Through Feb. 9 By Mark Rozovsky; adapted from Franz Kafka's "Letter to His Father" and "Judgment" translated by Elena Prischepenko.
Directed and designed by Leonardo Shapiro.
Design associate, set construction and technical director, Michael Casselli; design associate, costumes and props, Liz Widulski; lights by Blu; music by Marilyn Zalkan; sound by Kyle Chepulis; production stage manager, Paul J. Smith.
Presented by La Mama E.T.C. and the Shaliko Company.
WITH: George Bartenieff and Michael Preston.
In "Kafka: Father and Son," Mark Rozovsky, a Russian writer and director, has taken Kafka's "Letter to His Father" and "Judgment," an earlier story about an obedient son who throws himself in the river when his father condemns him to death by drowning, and tried to cobble a play from them.


A 60-ish Murray Louis Still Dances (and Thinks)
In nearly four decades as a choreographer, Murray Louis has carved a substantial place for himself in American modern dance.
The company he runs with Alwin Nikolais opened a two-week engagement at the Joyce Theater last night.
While Mr.
Nikolais, who describes himself as an abstract expressionist, has enchanted generations of dancegoers as a theater magician of light and shape, Mr.
Louis fills the stage with antic, scribbling motion for himself and others.
A much-admired solo performer, Mr.
Louis has earned a reputation as an outspoken, sometimes controversial observer of the dance scene.
The subject of a new piece he has created for himself, one of four premieres in the season, is dancing itself.
And he finds himself thinking a lot these days about what it means to be a modern dancer in the economically difficult and artistically confusing 1990's.


For the Public, Pebble Beach May Become a Missing Links
To a golfer walking its cliffside fairways this week at the A.T.&amp;T.
Pebble Beach National Pro-Am, the famous course on Monterey Bay has never looked better.
Indeed, for the United States Open in June, Pebble Beach is being meticulously restored to accent its rugged, linkscharacter.
But to financial analysts charting the bottom line, Pebble Beach has some serious problems.


FirstMiss Gold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Robert Brooks, 86, Dean at Williams And Labor Expert
Robert R. R. Brooks, an expert on labor economics who had been the dean and a professor at Williams College in Williamstown, Mass., died yesterday at the house of his sister-in-law, Ruth Brooks, in Nyack, N.Y.
He was 86 years old and lived in Williamstown.
Dean Brooks, who was a deputy administrator of the Office of Price Administration in World War II, died of cancer of the pancreas, his family said.


Is Islamic Fundamentalism a New Red Scare?; The State of the Law
To the Editor:
"Algeria Chooses Islam" (editorial, Jan. 3), unwittingly proffers an answer to a question that has troubled Muslims since the abolition of the caliphate in 1924: Is it conceivable for vibrant Islam to exist without Islamic dominion?
Muslim fundamentalists say no, and you seem to agree, provided the imposition of Islamic law in Algeria proves "wise, merciful and just."


MAGELLAN MISSION TO LOSE FINANCING
Just as the Magellan spacecraft was being rescued from its latest technological adversity, space agency officials raised a problem yesterday that no amount of engineering skill can fix: After September 1993, there will be no more money for the mission to map Venus.
Officials of the Magellan project said yesterday that the spacecraft had resumed mapping Venus and sending back radar images of the cloud-shrouded planet.


Pfizer Narrows List For Visine Account
In the review for the creative portion of the Visine eye-drops account, the consumer health-care division of Pfizer Inc. has narrowed the field to four New York agencies: Calet, Hirsch &amp; Spector; Grey Advertising Inc.; Partners &amp; Shevack, and Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore.
Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York had withdrawn from the competition; two other New York agencies, Lowe &amp; Partners and Sudler &amp; Hennessey were eliminated.
A final decision on the $8 million account, which was resigned by Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. in New York, is expected in April.


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Alco Standard reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Is Islamic Fundamentalism a New Red Scare?; Shiites and Sunnis
To the Editor:
Re "At the Center of the World" by M. J. Akbar (Op Ed, Jan. 10), on the growing role of Iran:


Review/Film; Murderer Whose Chair Is Electric
"Guilty as Charged," which opens today at the Eighth Street Playhouse, tries very hard to satirize moral corruption and succeeds only in being a numbingly eccentric melodrama about lawlessness and disorder.
Kallin (Rod Steiger), a rich meat packer, has taken it upon himself to execute all convicted murderers who, as he sees it, deserve the capital punishment that the state does not allow.
Kallin has his own electric chair in which he dispatches his victims after a lot of sermonizing and a last supper, which may be either a Big Mac, fries and a chocolate shake or Kentucky Fried Chicken.


Southeast Asia Nations Sign Free-Trade Accord
Leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations agreed today to take their first step toward creating a common market, a response to economic alliances being formed in Europe and North America.
Under the agreement, the six-nation association will attempt to integrate its economies, which are some of the fastest growing in the world, by reducing or eliminating tariffs on nonagricultural goods within 15 years.


Yvonne Bryceland Is Dead at 66; Actress in Plays by Athol Fugard
Yvonne Bryceland, who was best known for her performances in the anti-apartheid plays of her fellow South African Athol Fugard, died on Jan. 13 at Royal Free Hospital in London.
She was 66 years old.
She died of bronchial pneumonia as a result of cancer, said Brian Astbury, her husband.


United Illuminating reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Fundamentalist Finds a Fulcrum in Sudan
For 40 years, the urbane, Western-educated Hassan al-Turabi has maneuvered through democracies and dictatorships in the Sudan, sometimes serving in a Cabinet, sometimes sitting in a jail cell, but always pushing the cause of Islamic fundamentalism.
Now, with his National Islamic Front controlling the military Government here, Mr.
Turabi, as polished and, some would say, as beguiling as ever, is orchestrating a bigger goal: the spread of fundamentalism to the moderate Arab countries and the rest of Africa.


Arbor Capital reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.00
6.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.81
3.84
6.21
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.89
3.93
6.27
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.76
6.88
7.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.66
7.72
8.19
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.77
8.85
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.67
6.68
7.41
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


McDonnell Douglas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Doctor, 90, Recalls Many Roles in Life
"I'm happy you're here," said the gentleman in the immaculately tailored herringbone jacket.
"I am pleased."
Sun streamed in the window of the spacious apartment near Gramercy Park, the fire crackled merrily, the cake was homemade, the coffee strong.
Dr.
Richard Berczeller, a gracious and learned man, sat on a couch and talked about his life -- a wondrous, winding life that will be 90 years long next Tuesday.


THE 1992 CAMPAING: Finances; Candidates Scramble For Dollars
The Ohio Presidential primary is not until May.
So why did Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, who is in a hard primary fight in New Hampshire, travel here the other night, and in a snowstorm no less?
For the same reason that Senator Bob Kerrey took time out from New Hampshire to go to Minneapolis not long ago, Gov.
Bill Clinton went to Memphis, Edmund G. Brown Jr. went to Manhattan and Paul E. Tsongas went to Tampa.
They went for money.


USX-U.S. Steel Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hanson Denies Imperial Bid
The chairman of Hansonz P.L.C. said today that the British conglomerate had no current plans to bid for Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C.
Hanson bought a 2.8 percent stake in Imperial last May, raising speculation that it might make a bid for Britain's biggest industrial company.


STATE OF THE UNION: The Tax Plan; For Most, the First Effect of the White House's Tax Plan Will Be Larger Paychecks
While a main feature of the tax incentives in the White House's economic recovery plan is aid for the sagging real estate market, the first thing most people will experience is fatter paychecks because of less tax being withheld by employers.
The recovery plan, which senior officials said would not increase the deficit, also includes a new deduction for people who sell personal residences at a loss.


San Diego Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Altera Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hudson Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 4


Olin Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


VIETNAMESE TO GET FULBRIGHT AWARDS
This year, for the first time since the end of the Vietnam War, Washington will be offering scholarships for Vietnamese to study in the United States under the 46-year-old Fulbright fellowship program.
Fifteen scholarships have been set aside for 1992 and another 15 for 1993 as part of the legislation that provides money for running the State Department and the United States Information Agency.
The agency, which has been allocated $300,000 for the program, is now beginning the process of recruiting competitors for the awards in a country with which Washington does not have diplomatic relations.


A Victory and a Loss: Kocur Injures Shoulder
Three games into their trip, the Rangers remain unbeaten.
But their joy tonight in a 4-2 victory over the expansion San Jose Sharks at the Cow Palace was tempered by their concern over Joe Kocur.
Kocur sustained a separated left shoulder in the opening period and the team did not know how long he would be out.
But the Rangers, now 2-0-1 in a five-game trip that continues Thursday in Los Angeles, carried on.


Ukrainians, Rich in Rubles, Hunt Bargains Next Door
Moldovans are alternately worried and fatalistic about prices that have multiplied tenfold, thirtyfold, even a hundredfold since the beginning of the year.
But they are furious about people from neighboring countries, especially Ukraine, offering to pay large amounts of rubles for Moldovan goods.


Ross Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American Express Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


So Far, Nothing Has Been Easy for U.S. Hockey Team
Can a team learn to win by losing? We shall see.
After months of change and controversy, the United States hockey team can finally be called a team.


Transcript of President Bush's Address on the State of the Union
Following is a transcript of President Bush's State of the Union Message tonight, as recorded by The New York Times.
Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, Mr.
President.
Mr.
Speaker, Mr.
President, distinguished members of Congress, honored guests and fellow citizens, thank you very much for that warm reception.


Cilcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yeltsin Reappears, But Puzzles Remain
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia reappeared in public as abruptly as he disappeared, making an unexpected visit to the disputed Black Sea Fleet in a demonstration of Russia's claim to the former Soviet Navy.
The trip solved the mystery of Mr.
Yeltsin's whereabouts, but not that of why he canceled a meeting with Japan's Foreign Minister and left Moscow while Middle East talks were under way, just days before his trip to Britain, the United States and Canada.
Article, page A6.


MBIA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Compaq Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lavalintech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Storage Technology Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Brooklyn and Queens Democrats Win Special Assembly Elections
Democratic-Liberal candidates easily won seats in the State Assembly yesterday in two special elections held in districts in Brooklyn and Queens.
In the 44th Assembly District in Brooklyn, Joni Yoswein, a former legislative aide to former Assembly Speaker Mel Miller, captured 76 percent of the vote to fill Mr.
Miller's seat, vacant since he resigned last month after his conviction on mail-fraud and conspiracy charges.
Ms.
Yoswein's Republican-Conservative opponent, Albert Millus, a lawyer, won 24 percent of the vote.


Consolidated Edison reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday about leveraged buyouts misstated the condition of the USG Corporation, the parent of U.S.
Gypsum.
Although USG has defaulted on bond payments and bank loans, it has not filed for bankruptcy protection and hopes to avoid doing so.


McDonnell Posts Profit
A year after a financial crisis that left its viability in doubt, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation posted strong fourth-quarter earnings yesterday, continuing a steady comeback despite cuts in the Pentagon budget and a weak market for commercial jetliners.
The nation's largest military contractor and second-largest builder of commercial aircraft said it earned $211 million, or $5.50 a share, in the fourth quarter, compared with a loss of $1 million in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Revenues for the period were $4.8 billion, an increase of 18 percent.


Ruland Out for 4 Weeks
A magnetic resonance imaging test has confirmed that Philadelphia 76ers center JEFF RULAND has a partial tear of the right Achilles' tendon.
He will miss about four weeks.
Ruland returned to the N.B.A. last month after five years in retirement following a knee injury. (AP)


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Campeau Corp., Toronto, the real estate and retail concern, said creditors and shareholders voted to reorganize the company into a smaller property developer called Camdev Corp.
Robert Campeau, the founder, will own a 2 percent stake. *
Friden Alcatel, Haywood, Calif., a marketer of mailing and shipping equipment, was acquired by an investment group headed by Lazard, Freres et Cie, Paris, a merchant bank.


South Jersey Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Scripps (E.W.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Teppco Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Many Orders For Storage Technology
The Storage Technology Corporation said yesterday that it had orders for more than 150 of its radical new Iceberg computer storage systems and that it expects to sell as many as 1,200 of the systems during 1993.
Analysts believe the new systems, introduced yesterday, will be part of a fundamental transformation starting to take place in the style of modern computing.
The optimistic order report drove the company's stock up by $10 a share to close at $66.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.


How to Greet Li Peng
In China, one leader more than any other is associated with the Tiananmen Square massacre two and a half years ago.
On Friday that leader, Prime Minister Li Peng, will be in New York to attend a United Nations summit meeting.
Such meetings can be useful.
The five permanent members of the Security Council have emerged as coordinators of the post-cold-war order.
Their cooperation permitted Kuwait's liberation and the Cambodia peace agreement.
Fresh efforts are needed -- for example, to raise funds for expanded peacekeeping.


Continental Medical Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eating Well
THE rush to create low-fat foods has sent food scientists scurrying to their beakers and Bunsen burners in search of fat substitutes.
One method for creating fake fat that mimics the taste and texture of the real thing is to rearrange ordinary components of foods into something entirely new.
Caprenin (pronounced ka-PREE-nin) is the most recent fat substitute to be heralded as the laboratory's answer to the battle of the bulge.
And the patent holders, the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, want you to know that because it is made up of ordinary food components, it is, unquestionably, safe.
Others say more testing should be required.


Advest Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tokyo Stocks Off a Bit
Share prices closed slightly lower on the Tokyo Stock Exchange today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues finished at 21,362.26, down 28.26 points, or about one-tenth of 1 percent.
On Tuesday, the index gained 383.41 points, or 1.8 percent.


First Mississippi reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Imclone Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cooper Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  MIDEAST TALKS MOVE TO MOSCOW
Another round of the Mideast peace conference opened in Moscow, with Israel sitting down for talks on regional cooperation with Saudi Arabia and other gulf Arab nations.
But the Palestinian delegation was absent.
A1  Negotiations without directions, but rather abstractions.
A8  U.S.
Jews warn Shamir on settlements and loan guarantees.
A8  GETTING TOUGH ABOUT HAITI
U.S. diplomats said they were considering new steps to bring stability to Haiti amid indications that the O.A.S. embargo is not promoting a settlement.
They said some type of military action might be necessary, although as a last resort.
A1  YELTSIN APPEARS WITH THE FLEET
Reappearing in public, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia visited the disputed Black Sea Fleet, mounting the cruiser Moskva in an apparent demonstration of Russia's claim to the former Soviet Navy.
A6  A civilian copter was shot down over disputed Nagorno-Karabakh.
A5  With prices soaring, big-spending visitors infuriate Moldovans.
A6  PRETORIA SEIZES NEO-NAZIS
South Africa arrested the top leaders of the far-right Afrikaner Resistance Movement.
The arrests, including that of the neo-Nazi chief, Eugene TerreBlanche, marked the most aggressive action taken against the white group, which is resisting the dismantling of apartheid.
A3  FROM THE SUDAN, ISLAMIC FERVOR  With his National Islamic Front controlling the Sudanese military Government, Hassan al-Turabi is orchestrating a wider goal: the spread of Muslim fundamentalism to moderate Arab countries and to the rest of Africa.
A3  EMBARRASSMENT FOR TOKYO
Five months after deporting a Chinese woman who had fled there for political asylum, Japan expressed embarrassment over a report that she had been arrested and imprisoned in her home province.
A7  Arcatao Journal: Unease in isolated Salvadoran villages.
A4  At least 22 journalists dead in the seven-month Yugoslav war.
A6  U.S. will award Fulbright scholarships to Vietnamese.
A7  Premier of eastern German state ousted for Communist collaboration.
A9  National A12-18  BUSH OFFERS MODEST PLAN
Counting on an economic turnaround by the summer, President Bush offered modest proposals in his State of the Union Message to help middle-class taxpayers and counter criticism about his sensitivity to the nation's problems.
A1  Transcript of the President's speech.
A16  Transcript of the Democratic response.
A17  SOMETHING FOR EVERYBODY
News Analysis: President Bush promised something for almost everyone, except, perhaps economists, who said the proposals would do little to halt the recession.
A1  FATTER PAYCHECKS FOR MOST
The plan to spur the economy includes a surprise decision to update income-tax withholding tables, which means less tax will be withheld by employers.
A18  ATTEMPT AT REPOSITIONING
News analysis: The President's speech was a careful attempt to remind voters of his past accomplishments and to signal his concern over the current state of affairs.
A17  DARMAN'S INFLUENCE THREATENED
Political Memo: The President's rebuke of Richard Darman over the White House statement on health policy signals that the budget director's future influence is being threatened.
A15  AGREEMENT ON JOBLESS BENEFITS
Sidestepping a potentially bitter election year issue, President Bush and House leaders have agreed on another 13-week extension of unemployment benefits for the unemployed.
A18  ANTI-CANCER BARK GOES TO WASTE
The Forest Service has received dozens of complaints that the bark of the Pacific yew, whose bark contains a cancer-fighting drug, has wound up in the waste piles of logging operations in the Northwest.
A1  TSONGAS TAKES TO THE AIRWAVES
Former Senator Tsongas has turned to advertising to sweeten the appeal of his tough prescription for the economy, which he had hoped would carry his campaign by itself.
A14  CANDIDATES WORK MONEY TRAIL
The need for money for television commercials, travel and salaries keeps Presidential candidates darting around the country in a scramble for contributions.
A14  Clinton, sidetracked by accusations, returned to the political fray.
A14  SENATE PASSES EDUCATION BILL
The Senate passed a $850 million Democratic education bill to channel money to schools in poor neighborhoods and schools that try experimental improvements.
A12  FINAL HUFFS AND PUFFS
Final preparations began for an attempt to fly around the world in a single balloon flight.
A13  Education Page B9  A center for the study of immigration wrestles with multiculturalism.
Winners of the annual Westinghouse Science Scholarships are announced.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-10  No more hissing the ham: food is now a star.
C1  For men from Calvin Klein: topcoats to bottoms.
C1  Clothes without cliches.
C8  Wine Talk C10  Health Page C12  For many doctors, trust in breast implants persists.
C1  Personal Health: Fecal incontinence, a hidden problem.
C12  Arts/Entertainment C15-20  In his 60's Murray Louis still dances (and thinks).
C15  Film: "Color Adjustment." C15  Word and Image: Is David Letterman mad at NBC?
No and yes.
C15  "Empire of the Air: The Men Who Made Radio." C15  Sports B10-15  Baseball: Cone and Mets at crucial point in negotiations.
B11  Basketball: Knicks' midseason report.
B11  Boxing: Legal skirmish over jury selection in Tyson trial.
B13  Column: Anderson on the Seattle Mariners.
B11  Golf: The future of the famed course Pebble Beach is uncertain.
B11  Obituaries D21  Yvonne Bryceland, actress.
Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  Shedding the C.I.A.'s cloak.
How to greet Li Peng.
Budget pretense in N.J.
Mitchel Levitas: Water.
Letters A20  Anna Quindlen: The littlest patients.
A21  Adam Walinsky: Out of uniform, into service.
A21  John McCormick: Can't see the forest for the sleaze.
A21  George Dawson: In a jam?
Blame Japan.
A21  Neediest Cases B3


Engraph reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hutchinson Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Police Union Files Lawsuit Over Funds
The new leadership of the New York City Housing Authority police officers' union yesterday sued the union's former president, charging him with misappropriating $76,000 and with having a secret financial deal with a consultant who managed a $300,000 union welfare fund.
Timothy Nickels, who took over as president of the Housing Patrolmen's Benevolent Association on Jan. 1, made the allegations against his predecessor, Jack M. Jordan, who had been the head of the 1,800-member union for 16 years.


Shedding the C.I.A.'s Cloak
As the K.G.B. emerges from the shadows, the C.I.A. may also be starting to open up.
A task force established by the new Director of Central Intelligence, Robert Gates, recommends that he make officials and files more accessible and declassify long-held secrets.
The question remains, however: Will this be mere window-dressing?
The C.I.A. has always made selective disclosures to burnish its image, and Mr.
Gates has left the unfortunate impression that he intends to do more of the same.
At his confirmation hearings he spoke of "symbolic steps" to suggest a change in the agency's "cold war mentality" and to encourage "the people to have trust that the agency is playing by the rules."


United Water Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Manipulation Case Settled
The president of Southland Communications, a small Southern California pager company, agreed yesterday to give up $874,000 in profits and interest on his trades in the company's stock, which the Securities and Exchange Commission said he had manipulated.
Ahmad N. Bayaa of Long Beach, Calif., also consented to an injunction that bans him from serving as an officer or director of a public company for 18 months.


Production Operators reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arcatao Journal; Rebel Villages Weary of War, but Wary of Peace
At first, Arcatao seemed empty or asleep, a setting waiting for the characters in a tropical novel to be introduced.
Then signs of life became evident: women baking bread in the dark interior of an adobe building, four women at sewing machines in another, and in a corner of the plaza a horse tethered to a post with men and boys gathered around.


Landauer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Officer Shot, Boy Held, But Few Even Notice
The shot shattered Officer David Pitchon's ankle and landed 15-year-old Rasheem Smith in jail.
But perhaps the most remarkable thing about the sniping incident outside a school in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn eight days ago was how unremarkable it seemed: an act that would have been unthinkable not too long ago drew barely a flicker of public attention and surprised almost no one, least of all the wounded officer himself.


Citicorp Offers Debentures
Activity in the investment-grade corporate bond market was highlighted yesterday by new issues from big bank companies, including Citicorp's first public debt sale in the domestic market since November 1989.
The bank holding company offered $150 million worth of 10-year subordinated debentures through an underwriting group led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Review/Fashion; For Men From Klein: Topcoats to Bottoms
FOR the finale of Calvin Klein's men's fashion show Monday, the models came out in their skivvies.
Some of the women in the audience were in stitches, although Madonna didn't raise a plucked eyebrow.
Many of the men seemed slightly embarrassed.
The models seemed terrifically abashed.


Micros Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


STATE OF THE UNION: Unemployment; Accord on Extending Jobless Benefits
Agreeing to sidestep a bitter election-year issue, President Bush and House leaders decided today to spend $2.7 billion on another 13 weeks of unemployment benefits for about two million long-term jobless people.
Democrats in the Senate did not commit themselves to the plan immediately, but Senator Lloyd Bentsen, the Texas Democrat who heads the Finance Committee, said he was confident a bill could be sent to Mr.
Bush for signing "by the end of next week."


Sports of The Times; Approve The Seattle Nintendos
For those who think of baseball's 26 owners as the only members of a snobbish country club but could never prove it, proof is now available.
When a Seattle group, including the Japanese son-in-law of the owner of the Nintendo video-game empire, announced its intention to buy the Seattle Mariners in order to prevent the franchise from being relocated to St.
Petersburg, Fla., the baseball hierarchy blanched.


Senate Approves Bill to Improve Schools
After scuttling the heart of President Bush's school program, the Senate today overwhelmingly passed an $850 million Democratic education bill that would channel money to schools in poor communities and schools trying experimental improvements.
Even supporters of the bill say its financing, the equivalent of what it takes to build one B-2 Stealth bomber, is insufficient to improve the performance of most American schools.
But the bill is intended to set new national goals to improve teacher performance, increase graduation rates and expand student access to training in science and mathematics.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
President Bush staked his political fortunes on predictions that the economy will right itself by summer, delivering a State of the Union Message that offered modest proposals to ease the immediate pain of middle-class taxpayers.  [ Page A1. ]  The President proposed little new to strengthen the economy in the long term, many economists said.  [ A1. ]  Bush and House leaders decided to spend $2.7 billion on 13 more weeks of unemployment benefits for about two million long-term jobless people.  [ A18. ]
Americans became more pessimistic about their financial and job security despite lower interest rates, a survey showed.  [ D6. ]


Europe Venture Plans Nutrasweet Challenge
After years of battling the Nutra sweet Company in Europe and Canada, the Holland Sweetener Company is gearing up to take on Nutrasweet in the United States, the world's largest market for the no-calorie sweetener.
Holland Sweetener, a joint venture of two huge chemical companies -- DSM N.V. of the Netherlands and the Tosoh Corporation of Japan -- announced yesterday that it planned to greatly expand its factory in the Netherlands that makes aspartame, the artificial sweetner, with the aim of exporting to the United States.


Bias Unit Reviewing a Letter to Dinkins
Mayor David N. Dinkins has received a letter that includes racist slurs and threats against him and his family, and the police have classified the correspondence as a bias incident, the police said yesterday.
The bias unit is investigating.
The Mayor has received hundreds of such letters since the beginning of his term.
But the contents of the letter, which was opened at City Hall on Monday morning, demanded special attention, the police said.
The contents of the rambling three-page letter were not made public.


Theater in Review
The Home Show Pieces  Public/Martinson Theater 425 Lafayette Street Manhattan Through Feb. 16  Written and directed by David Greenspan; set by William Kennon; costumes by Elsa Ward; lighting by David Bergstein.
Presented by the New York Shakespeare Festival, Joseph Papp, founder; JoAnne Akalaitis, artistic director; Jason Steven Cohen, producing director; Rosemarie Tichler, associate artistic director.
WITH: Ron Bagden, Tracey Ellis and David Greenspan.
Before he became a director at the New York Shakespeare Festival and began staging his own maladroit deconstructions of classics ("The Way of the World"), David Greenspan was the author of plays like "2 Samuel II, Etc.," a provocative and highly personalized re-evaluation of the story of David and Bathsheba.
In "The Home Show Pieces," a revival of four one-act plays presented several years ago at the Home for Contemporary Theater and Art, Mr.
Greenspan is once again in his autobiographical mode, but with diminished dramatic returns.


Here, Immigrants' Past Is Saved for the Future
No one knew exactly what was inside the four large boxes that had come from Los Angeles, but they were treated like treasures.
Each was a foot high and a foot wide and covered with gray duct tape that had been carefully wound several times around to keep safe the secrets inside.
Opened, the boxes revealed a collection of old books, newspapers and manuscripts from a Ukrainian immigrant community in California.
Such deliveries are made regularly to the small industrial building just off Ellis Avenue here that houses the Immigration History Research Center at the University of Minnesota.


Ball Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fort Dearborn Income reports earnings for As of Dec 31


Seles Still Hitting Out
MONICA SELES, coming off her victory in the Australian Open last week, responded yesterday to comments that were critical of her game.
MARY JOE FERNANDEZ, whom Seles beat, 6-2, 6-3, for the Australian title, said it was a mistake that the No. 1-ranked Seles was not adding different looks to her powerful baseline game.
Appearing at an autograph-signing session at the opening of a Fila boutique in Manhattan, Seles said, "Definitely, I'm learning to come to the net more often. You've got to keep improving. Everyone wants the the No. 1 spot. You can't sleep on the No. 1 spot."


Man Killed and 15 Hurt in Car-Van Crash
A man was killed and 15 people were injured yesterday when a car hit a van carrying 13 mentally retarded adults in Setauket, L. I.
The van was carrying its passengers from the Anita Smith Day Care Treatment Center to their home at the Family Residence and Essential Enterprises when it made a left turn onto Route 347 and collided with the car, the Suffolk County Police said.
One of the van's occupants was thrown from the vehicle and died of his injuries at University Hospital in Stony Brook, a hospital spokeswoman, Maxine Simpson, said.
Officials did not release the name of the man or the victims injured in the 3:30 P.M. crash.


Sun Microsystems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Review/Film; And Now, the Sunny Side of Death
"What is this thing called death? Is it the great leveler?" "Does it give meaning and purpose to life or is it a thing to get depressed about?" "And what is eternity anyway?"
Those are only a few of the many questions posed by Scowling Jan, a cutout cartoon representation of Jan Oxenberg, the film maker, as a child in her quirky autobiographical documentary, "Thank You and Good Night."


Dow Climbs by 31.53, to a Record 3,272.14
Blue-chip stocks resumed their record setting in heavy trading yesterday, while the broader market ended the day just about where it began.
The Dow Jones industrial average, after taking an 11-day break following a string of records earlier this month, once again climbed to new heights, gaining 31.53 points, or nearly 1 percent, to 3,272.14.
A large part of the strength came from just 2 of the 30 companies that make up the Dow: Walt Disney and Procter &amp; Gamble.


Review/Television; The Box Spouting Those Voices
Tonight is alive with the sounds of radio.
There's plenty here to stir nostalgia -- "Out of the fog, out of the night, comes Bulldog Drummond," with foggy music and sound effects -- but there is much more to this history.


Food Notes
CBS and Your Health
When CBS's "60 Minutes" talks, people listen.
After the Nov. 17 broadcast of "The French Paradox," a report that associated the consumption of red wine in France with a low rate of heart disease, United States sales of all table wine, but especially red wine, increased sharply.


If You Don't Taste as You Cook, None of the Below Will Help
THE vegetable soup had been cooking for two days, but it was still missing something.
The doorbell was ringing.
People were moving toward the kitchen.
I begged a friend who happens to be a chef to do something.
He tasted, and without hesitation began pouring in balsamic vinegar and Worcestershire sauce.
The soup was suddenly better.
Chefs may run on a mix of instinct, guts, talent and training, but they do know certain tricks: some make the cooking process easier; some result in more sophisticated food.


Study Faults Trade Count
The United States undercounts its exports and the nation may be more competitive globally than Commerce Department trade figures show, according to a study issued today by the National Research Council.
The chairman of the panel that conducted the study, Robert Baldwin, said the official United States trade deficit for 1987 was $148 billion, but research estimated the actual shortfall was $64 billion.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 24
Jan. 17
Jan. 25
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
7.1
6.7
Distillate production, daily
2.8
3.0
2.8
Gasoline stocks
228.9
228.5
220.9
Distillate stocks
133.6
139.7
115.4
Crude imports, daily
5.7
5.8
5.7
Product imports, daily
1.1
1.5
1.8
Crude stocks
338.8
333.0
324.4
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
81.1
85.0
82.3
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Varian Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


People
*
Robert Calandruccio has been named president and chief operating officer of Vitt Media International Inc., New York.
He succeeds Roy A. Muro, who became chairman and chief executive last November. *
Gerard Commerot has been appointed general manager for Europe at Ketchum Advertising International, Pittsburgh.
He also remains president and chief executive of CIA Ketchum, Paris.


Man and Woman Die in Brooklyn Shootings
A man and a woman were shot to death in separate incidents in Brooklyn last night, the police said.
In both cases, the killers escaped.
In one shooting, the owner of a bodega at Dean and Saratoga Streets in Brownsville was killed by two men who robbed his store of $500 in cash.
The victim, whom police identified as Taher Abdallah of 363 Howard Avenue in Brownsville, had apparently given the robbers the money without resistance.
But as they were walking out of the store, one turned and shot Mr.
Abdallah once in the head, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


11 Neo-Nazis Arrested in South Africa
The South African police arrested almost the entire leadership of a far-right white organization early today.
Although the 11 officers of the neo-Nazi Afrikaner Resistance Movement who were seized in the raids were released on bond after a few hours, their arrest marked the most aggressive action taken against the militant organization that has sought to generate defiance against the Government's efforts to dismantle apartheid and negotiate with blacks on a new Constitutional arrangement.


Fielder's Big Cut


Is Letterman Mad At NBC? He Says No And He Says Yes
Having sworn off his famous Top 10 lists -- for the moment, anyway -- David Letterman will not identify the No. 1 reason he got angry at NBC.
But if he did, he said, the top item would surely
not
be that NBC named Jay Leno the new host of the "Tonight" show.


Maxim Integrated Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Phelps Dodge Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Public &amp; Private; The Littlest Patients
The first time I heard the story I thought it was merely bizarre.
The second time I thought it was a coincidence.
The third time I began to wonder what was going on.
And when a distinguished doctor described the treatment modalities of some of his colleagues as "child abuse," it seemed clear that there was a problem worth noting.


WNYC Stations Give Value to Taxpayers
To the Editor:
"New York Needs Three Heroes, Not One"(Op-Ed, Jan. 6) by Charles Brecher and Raymond D. Horton of the Citizens Budget Commission on creating a more efficient city government, unfortunately identified as candidates for pruning two institutions that are civic successes.


Allied-Signal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Los Angeles Times Has Eastern Edition
The Los Angeles Times yesterday published its first Washington edition, for distribution there and in New York.
The 24-page, two-section edition, which is edited in Los Angeles and transmitted, via satellite, to a printing plant in Manassas, Va., will be published on weekdays.
The new edition is intended to carry a limited amount of advertising, said Laura Morgan, a Times spokeswoman.
Yesterday's edition, of which 2,000 copies were printed, carried three ads: a full-page ad from AST Computers, a small one from Pepperdine University and a full-page ad on the company.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Campbell Shapes Up All Around
THE Campbell Soup Company is ambitiously expanding its lines of pantry- and freezer-food products through one of the most comprehensive advertising programs being undertaken by a large American grocery marketer.
The company, which spends more than $250 million annually on marketing, is lifting the budget by 8 percent, up from a 5 percent increase announced last year.
The expansion involves everything from Campbell's traditional red-and-white cans of condensed soup, which are being dressed up in new labels featuring photographs of the ingredients inside, to new lines of lower-fat, lower-calorie foods under brand names like Mrs.
Paul's Healthy Treasures and Healthy Request.


International Shipholding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Judge Upholds Ban on Tuna
A Federal judge has refused to reverse his earlier decision tha, starting on Thursday will suspend imports of yellowfin tuna from countries that continue buying the fish from Mexico, Venezuela, and Vanuatu in the Pacific Ocean.
Federal District Judge Thelton E. Henderson on Monday denied a request from the American Tunaboat Association, a San Diego-based industry group, to delay the ban for 60 days.


Stolt Tankers &amp; Terminals (Holdings) S.A. (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Aero Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Stuyvesant Shines Again in Westinghouse Awards
Those who worry about the decay of New York City schools got some good news yesterday: Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan won four of the 40 prizes in the Westinghouse national science competition.
But at Stuyvesant, only the number of winners was news.
The tumbledown gray building in Manhattan has turned out 80 Westinghouse winners since the prestigious contest began in 1942 and is not mystified about why.


EXECUTIVES
*
MGM-Pathe Communications Co., Culver City, Calif., an entertainment production and distribution company, named Honey Berman director for syndication services worldwide. *
Morrison Knudsen Corp., Boise, Idaho, an engineering and construction company, named Louis E. Pardi executive vice president of its power division.


CHRONICLE
A campaign to collect a million books to send to Russia and neighboring republics has people throughout Britain delivering their used books to bookstores and publishers donating large quantities of remaindered volumes.
ROGER GRAEF, an American-born film maker who had the idea for the Book Aid project, said that the Russians hunger for books almost as much as they do for food.


Centerior Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Atalanta/Sosnoff Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bush's Economic Proposals


President of Centerior To Get Top Posts, Too
The board of the Centerior Energy Corporation, parent of Cleveland Electric Illuminating and Toledo Edison, yesterday elected Robert J. Farling as chairman, president and chief executive, effective March 1.
Mr.
Farling, 55, has been president and chief operating officer since 1988.
Richard A. Miller, 65, who has been chairman and chief executive of the Cleveland-based company since 1988, is retiring.


Allen D. Graves, 76, Former Oil Executive
Allen D. Graves, a former Mobil Oil executive who helped organize the Kuwait National Petroleum Company, died on Friday at his home in Hilton Head, S.C.
He was 76 years old.
He died of bone cancer, his family said.


LSI Logic Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S., Its Haiti Blockade Failing, Studies Other Means to End Crisis
United States diplomats said today that they were considering a range of new steps to bring stability to Haiti as indications grow that an international embargo is failing to promote a political settlement there and may instead be fueling an exodus of desperate refugees by boat.
Diplomats say that while no action is imminent, some type of military action might be necessary, although force is still seen as a last resort, a step fraught with daunting complications and discouraging historical precedent.


Israel Warned Again on Loans
Leaders of an American Jewish group have stirred controversy among some Israelis by advising Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir that he cannot expect housing-loan guarantees from Washington if he continues to settle Jews in the occupied territories.
Their comments have added to an emotional debate here over reported conditions set by the Bush Administration linking its agreement to guarantee $10 billion in loans to a curtailment of settlement-building in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
The money is to be used to build homes and expand Israel's job market to cope with the influx of hundreds of thousands of Jews from the former Soviet Union.


Yeltsin Makes a Surprise Visit to the Black Sea Fleet
Reappearing in public as abruptly as he disappeared, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia made an unexpected visit to the disputed Black Sea Fleet today, mounting the cruiser Moskva in an evident demonstration of Russia's concern for and claim to the former Soviet Navy.
Mr.
Yeltsin visited the fleet at Novorossisk, Russia's only major port on the Black Sea since the dissolution of the Soviet Union left the Crimea and much of the sea's north shore under Ukrainian jurisdiction, and the eastern shore in Georgia's.


Business Technology; Programmers May Benefit From Thinking the Old Way
Today's conventional single-processor computers generally execute one instruction at a time and can carry out a mathematical operation on only two pieces of data at once.
In contrast, parallel computers can carry out thousands of simultaneous mathematical operations.
Typically, though, massively parallel computers have placed special demands on the people who write programs for them.
Programmers have been forced to think about where each piece of data lies and have frequently needed to make manual adjustments to exploit the power of the machines fully.


Awards Are Announced For Children's Books
Phyllis Reynolds Naylor has been named the winner of the 1992 John Newbery Medal for the most distinguished work of American literature for children for her book "Shiloh" (Atheneum), and David Wiesner won the 1992 Randolph Caldecott Medal for the most distinguished illustrated American book for children for his book "Tuesday" (Clarion Books).
The medals are the most prestigious awards in children's literature in this country.


Crises Surmounted, Balloon Ready for Global Trip
For six anxious hours Tuesday night, a platoon of technicians, engineers and master balloonists in Akron, Ohio, wrestled with cables, machinery and tank trucks of helium gas as they inflated Earthwinds, whose crew hopes to be the first in history to circle the earth in a balloon.
After surmounting several heart-stopping technical crises, the team pronounced the $5 million balloon inflated and nearly ready to begin its perilous voyage.


Getting Through Bridge and Tunnel Tolls Cheaper and Faster
To the Editor:
Customers at New York City's Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority facilities are not limited to purchasing a single roll of nine discounted tokens as Josh Stern writes (letter, Dec. 20).
At any of our facilities, you may buy for $42 two nine-pack rolls of tokens, one loose token and the toll passage you are making.
We began selling tokens in smaller rolls when a survey showed more customers would use them.
This increased discount token sales nearly 20 percent.
To respond to Avrum Hyman (letter, Jan. 10), we are always looking for ways to improve traffic flow at our toll plazas.
Our goal is to make toll processing as fast and convenient as possible, especially in the morning and evening commuting periods.


Nationsbank Presses Bank Trade Groups
While many bankers are weary and bruised from last year's unsuccessful effort to revise Federal banking law so that banks could open branches across state lines, Hugh McColl, chairman of Nationsbank, Charlotte, N.C., is itching to renew the battle.
In a sharply worded letter to the 13 bank trade groups to which Nationsbank belongs, Mr.
McColl threatened to drop Nationsbank's membership in those groups that do not unequivacally support Nationsbank's desire to operate branches across state lines.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
INSTALLING sheet vinyl flooring can be challenging for an amateur.
Usually, though, a small bathroom or kitchen floor that requires only a single sheet can be managed the first time around.
Standard widths for sheets are 6 and 12 feet; you can order any length.


Despite Criticism, Bush Will Meet Chinese Premier
President Bush is to meet Prime Minister Li Peng of China in New York on Friday, the White House announced today.
It will be the first meeting between the leaders since Chinese troops crushed the democracy movement in Beijing in June 1989, killing hundreds of unarmed protesters.
Hundreds of others remain in prison.


The Federal Budget: Budget as Bush Campaign Manifesto; Bottom-Line: A Hands-Off Government
The budget that President Bush sent Congress today is essentially his campaign manifesto, and it delineates how starkly his views differ from those of his Democratic opponents, in Congress and on the campaign trail.
With minor exceptions, the new budget underscores Mr.
Bush's intention of maintaining the same course the country has been on for the last dozen years, one in which the Government uses tax and spending policy as little as possible to guide the nation's economic affairs.


California Proposal Would Let Industry Sell Pollution Rights
Southern California's air-quality regulators said today that they planned a radical new approach to controlling air pollution, allowing companies to purchase the right to pollute if they could not or chose not to reduce emissions on their own.
The new approach, which is still subject to formal approval, would supplant the current system of tight company-by-company regulation and would be the largest and most ambitious attempt yet to clean up the air by replacing regulatory fiat with free-market forces.


Trustco Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Franklin First Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Advanced Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Willie Dixon, Musician, 76, Dies; Singer and Writer of Classic Blues
Willie Dixon, who wrote blues standards and produced many classic blues albums, died of heart failure yesterday at St.
Joseph Medical Center in Burbank, Calif.
He was 76 years old and lived in southern California.
As a songwriter, producer, arranger and bassist, Mr.
Dixon was a towering figure in the creation of Chicago blues, which was in turn a cornerstone of rock-and-roll.
His songs were performed by leading blues figures, including Muddy Waters and Howlin' Wolf, and picked up by rock bands including the Rolling Stones, Cream and the Doors.
The lusty imagery, laconic humor and hints of mysterious ritual in his best songs made them sound like age-old folk poems.


BRITISH CHIEF SET FOR A CLOSE VOTE
Like President Bush, with whom he will have dinner in New York on Thursday night, Prime Minister John Major of Britain has to face an election this year in almost the worst possible economic circumstances: a recession whose end is not yet in sight.
Times have changed since the Conservatives threw over Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and the opposition Labor Party abandoned the radical left-wing policy positions of the early 1980's.
For the first time since then, because of the economic mess, it does not seem like a foregone conclusion that Mr.
Major and his party will win the next election.


New Jersey Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Allergan Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Asarco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


People
*
Estie Todtman, director of national broadcast at Lowe &amp; Partners, New York, has been promoted to senior vice president from vice president.


Gates/FA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clark Equipment reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Syntellect Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Alpha Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Firefighter Plucks Injured Man From Tank
A firefighter who was not too big and not too small, but just right, wriggled through a narrow opening into a fuel oil tank in a Bronx apartment building yesterday morning and rescued an unconscious and slippery man, fire officials said.
The man, Carton Gray, an employee of ABC Tank Cleaning Company in Brooklyn, had climbed into the 3,000-gallon tank in the basement of the building, at 4585 Park Avenue, near 183d Street in the Fordham section, to clean it.
He was overwhelmed by carbon monoxide and fumes given off by sludge at the tank's bottom, fire officials said.


Fishing for Tourists By the Musconetcong
The biggest fish story in New Jersey is not about the apocryphal whopper that got away, but about the big one that has yet to bite.
And while the story still has no ending, its beginning will probably be here in Warren County, in a picturesque trout run called the Musconetcong River.
In its waters just north of this colonial-era village, the State of New Jersey would like to release 300,000 young chinook salmon each year for five years to see if enough of them survive to start a multimillion-dollar sport fishing industry.


In a World of Symbols, One Brings Confusion
WE live in an age of icon overload.
The profusion of symbols is everywhere: in ever-obliging male silhouettes that indicate the location of the nearest trash receptacle, and in magazine articles that end in a flourish with a little square.
Look no further than the local supermarket.
The mere act of buying a soft drink has become a semiotic exercise.
What may interest cryptographers in years to come will be these hieroglyphics: the kosher food symbol, the swirling Nutrasweet symbol, the five rings of the Olympic Games, the revolving-arrow recycling symbols and those little checkout bar codes.


Yugoslav Republic Expects Recognition Soon
For Kiro Gligorov, the President of Macedonia, "it is a matter of time" -- soon, he believes -- until his republic receives broad international recognition.
Formerly a part of the six-member Yugoslav Communist federation, Macedonia was something of an odd man out as civil war swept the northern republics last year.
While it managed to avoid the fighting, Macedonia continued to feel especially vulnerable to external pressures, bordered as it is by Serbia, Bulgaria, Greece and Albania and with a sizable population of minorities.


The Secret Shame of Ostentation
"I'LL take it," a tall, elegant man whispered before slipping away into the crowd at the opening of the Winter Antiques Show in Manhattan.
"He'll take it," Blanche Greenstein echoed to her partner, Thomas K. Woodard.


Diagnostek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Triumph to Tragedy In a Year for Penguins
Now that they have dropped to a shaky third place in the six-team Patrick Division and to eighth over all in the 22-team National Hockey League, it is tempting to dismiss the Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins as one-year wonders returning to the mediocrity that marked their first quarter-century.
Such a demise would be a shame, especially if history overlooks or under appreciates their saga of the last 12 months.
In that span, this star-studded and star-crossed team has been the most compelling success story in professional sports.
For drama and trauma, pathos and bathos, no other team comes close.
Maybe no team would want to.


American Biodyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kenan Transport reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


C-Tec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NUI Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Knight-Ridder reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Tyson Judge Bars Motion On Evidence
Lawyers for Mike Tyson have charged that important evidence in the fighter's trial here -- the clothing worn by his accuser at the time she says she was raped by him -- has been "materially altered from the condition that it was in on the night in question."
The charge is contained in a motion that was filed under seal, but made public today when Judge Patricia J. Gifford refused to bar the prosecution from showing the clothing to the jury.


National Banc of Commerce reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prowling in Paris For Chic Sofas, etc.
BUYING a hand towel or a sofa here can be a small cultural event.
In a city where even dogs are allowed to eat baguettes at restaurants, the act of shopping is a social ritual, much more amusing than just spending money.
It is best accomplished with well-cut clothes and posture that verges on arrogance.
Prowling through boutiques is also a brief foray into French architecture.
New shops, one quickly realizes, are tucked into former bathhouses or 18th-century saddle factories.


Pikeville National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Enron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Second Life for China
Center Art Studio Ltd.  250 West 54th Street, Manhattan 10019; (212) 247-3550.
China breaks. But even when an object shatters, all is not lost.


Bracknell Corp. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Cordero Released From Hospital
The Hall of Fame jockey ANGEL CORDERO JR., who suffered multiple injuries in a four-horse spill at Aqueduct on Jan. 12, was released yesterday from Long Island Jewish Hospital.
The 49-year-old Cordero suffered internal injuries, a broken elbow and several broken ribs in the spill and underwent surgery to remove his damaged spleen the day after the accident.
He was moved out of the intensive care unit nine days later.
Cordero would not speculate on whether his injuries would force his retirement.


Devry Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chart House Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gift of Dymaxion House
IN the late 1940's, 30,000 people wanted to buy R. Buckminster Fuller's round Dymaxion House, which was made of aluminum and Plexiglas, assembled in a factory, weighed only 6,000 pounds and was designed to be disassembled, tucked into a cylinder and air-freighted anywhere in the world.
But only two prototypes were made, and William L. Graham, an entrepreneur from Wichita, Kan., bought both.
Last week, Mr.
Graham's family announced the donation of the prototypes to the Henry Ford Museum and Greenfield Village in Dearborn, Mich.
Mr.
Graham's family occupied one of the houses (plus an addition) from 1948 to 1972.
It will be disassembled this year and moved to the museum, where it will join the 80 buildings of Greenfield Village.
The other prototype was never assembled but held in reserve for spare parts.


A Dream Comes True For McKay
Scoring the winning goal at the Forum, the place considered the mecca of hockey in North America, is the dream of every young hockey player growing up in Montreal and that's what Randy McKay did tonight for the Devils.
The 25-year-old McKay, who was born here, broke a 3-3 tie with his second goal of the night and seventh of the season midway through the last period to give the Devils a 4-3 triumph over the Canadiens before a noisy crowd.


Northeast Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amcore Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cooker Restaurants Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


CHRONICLE
ABIE NATHAN, the swashbuckling Israeli philanthropist and peace campaigner, was to have received the Abraham Joshua Heschel Peace Award from the Jewish Peace Fellowship yesterday, but his daughter, SHARONA NATHAN EL SAIEH, had to stand in for him.
Mr.
Nathan is in prison in Israel.
In October, he was sentenced to 18 months for violating an Israeli law prohibiting contacts with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
He had met with YASIR ARAFAT, the P.L.O. chairman, in Tunis in July.


Catalina Lighting Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stocks Gain in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices rose today, pushed higher by bargain hunting and futures-related buying.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues gained 195.41, or just under 1 percent, to close at 21,557.67.
On Wednesday, the index fell 28.26 points.


Reebok International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Berlin Journal; Game Is Up, So Informers Inform on Themselves
Andreas Sinakowski was 19 years old when he was recruited as an informer for the East German secret police, the Stasi.
This was no large event in a place where nearly everyone was spying on everyone else.
But Mr.
Sinakowski wrote it all down, and a memoir that appeared last year has become a kind of roman a clef about the diplomatic and literary scene of old East Berlin.


Singer Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


New Man Taking Over At Pacific Power Helm
Paul Lorenzini, a nuclear engineer and lawyer, will take the helm on Saturday as president of the Pacific Power and Light Company, one of the largest investor-owned utilities on the West Coast.
The company is still in the throes of wrenching operational changes since its merger in 1990 with the Utah Power and Light Company.
Mr.
Lorenzini, 49, who is now executive vice president for operations for the Portland, Ore., utility, replaces Robert Moench, who is retiring.
His promotion is part of a management restructuring by the parent company, Pacificorp, to pave a smooth transition for the utility, which is trying to reduce costs and keep power prices low.


Delmarva Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Westinghouse Dividend Cut Because of Losses
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation slashed its quarterly dividend to 18 cents a share from 35 cents yesterday and announced accounting changes that were expected to reduce first-quarter earnings by about $300 million, or 88 cents a share.
The dividend cut was widely expected because of the huge losses that Westinghouse suffered last year on real estate and junk-bond investments made by its financial-services subsidiary.
Those investments cost Westinghouse more than $1.68 billion in the third quarter and led to the layoffs of 4,000 workers as top management tried to cut costs.
Losses in the Westinghouse Credit subsidiary caused the parent company to lose $1.09 billion last year.


Cary to Play in Japan
The former Yankee pitcher CHUCK CARY has signed a one-year, $1 million contract to pitch this season for the Tokyo Yomiuri Giants in the Japanese League.
Cary was waived by the Yankees on Oct. 28 after a poor season.
The 31-year old left-hander was 13-26 with a 4.08 earned run average during his major league career.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Southern California's air-quality regulators said they plan a radical new approach to controlling air pollution that will allow companies to purchase the right to pollute if they cannot or choose not to reduce emissions on their own.  [ Page A1. ]


Zygo Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Montana Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Baltimore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BRIEFS
*
Allied Waste Industries, Houston, a solid waste collection company, acquired National Scavenger Services Inc., Chicago, a waste hauling company, and R.I.
Inc., East Moline, Ill., a landfill company, for about 3.6 million shares of Allied common stock and $4.9 million in cash and notes. *
Biogenex, San Ramon, Calif., a biotechnology concern, opened foreign subsidiaries in Munich, Germany, and Tokyo.


Society for Savings Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Guilford Mills Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY HARSH WORDS FROM THE BENCH


Corrections
A front-page article on Tuesday about the bankruptcy filing by R. H. Macy &amp; Company, and a chart in Business Day yesterday listing the largest Macy creditors, included one company as a creditor erroneously because of an error in the bankruptcy documents.
Alexander &amp; Alexander, an insurance brokerage, is not a creditor.


The Big Store
One day this week a woman named Evie Wollman went to Macy's to buy sheets.
Coincidentally, her bed was also bought at Macy's.
The latter purchase, however, was over 40 years ago, when Mrs.
Wollman was 36.
Mrs.
Wollman's friend Ida Rubinstein accompanied her.
Mrs.
Rubinstein, it's safe to say, is about the same age as Mrs.
Wollman.
She must be.
Her Waring blender, which she still uses, came from Macy's "it must be 50 years ago."


Boole &amp; Babbage reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
The Credit Markets column in Business Day on Monday referred incorrectly to bidding activity by Salomon Brothers at Treasury note auctions last April and May where "squeezes" occurred.
Salomon's bidding at the April auction has not been questioned by regulators.
In a report last week, the Government said the squeeze in May appeared to have been caused by large awards of the securities to Salomon and some of its customers, but it has not been established whether that squeeze resulted from wrongdoing by Salomon.


Gateway Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


'Crazy He Calls Me' to Close
"Crazy He Calls Me," a play by Abraham Tetenbaum, is to close after the Saturday evening performance at the Walter Kerr Theater, 219 West 48th Street.
The play, directed by John Ferraro and starring Polly Draper and Barry Miller, will have had 16 previews and 7 regular performances.


Bell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton's Middle Class Hang-Up
With style and shrewdness, Gov.
Bill Clinton appears to have beaten the rap on his philandering and emerged stronger than he was before the Gennifer Flowers episode came up.
Unless a second shoe (or bedroom slipper) drops to indicate he's a liar, his national exposure during his troubles has helped establish him more clearly as the Democrats' front-runner and likely nominee.
Now he faces a real challenge: to move beyond poll-driven boiler plate to presentation of a strong, relevant agenda that will genuinely address the country's problems and give voters a real reason to elect him.


Bethlehem Halts Dividends And Plans Cuts After Loss
The Bethlehem Steel Corporation, after reporting a loss of $638.1 million for the fourth quarter, said yesterday that it would cut its work force by 6,500 and stop paying its annual stock dividend.
The job cuts at the nation's second-largest steelmaker will amount to about 25 percent of the work force.
The reductions will be made over the next two years through layoffs, early retirement programs and sales of parts of the company.


A Miniaturist of the Novel Who Finds Phones Erotic
"Vox" is the sound of two voices rubbing together and generating heat.
Random House, its publisher, is calling it "the breakthrough erotic novel of our time." To drive the point home, the publisher sent out advance copies of the book, a conversation between two strangers on a sex telephone line, in a plain brown wrapper.
Nicholson Baker, the book's mild-mannered, implausible-looking author, reached way out in left field to pull in the precise word for what goes on between his two characters: "interfingering."
"It's a geologic term my wife taught me," he said during a recent interview at his publisher's offices in midtown Manhattan.
"It's what happens when two layers of rock strata come together."


Quotation of the Day
"I believe the defendant conducted a rape of this country, of our Constitution and of our laws, and of people seeking to exist peacefully together." -- JUSTICE ALVIN SCHLESINGER, sentencing El Sayyid A. Nosair.  [ A1:3. ]


The Federal Budget; Budget Book: Reader Beware
Packed with facts, figures, outlay projections, physical capital activities, assumed economic conditions and Gross Domestic Product deflators, the budget does not make for easy reading.
Especially when 32 pages are upside down.


Nova Corp. of Alberta reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


KLA Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire; For Roomful of Faithful, Bush's Talk Meets Need
The blue Bush placards and brochures were stacked in the kitchen, and the 20-odd people gathered in Newbold and Nancy LeRoy's living room to watch the State of the Union Message Tuesday night were all die-hard Republicans, ready to give the President the benefit of the doubt -- several doubts, in fact.
But as Mr.
Bush started to speak, even in this group, not at all enamored of insurgents like Patrick J. Buchanan or Democrats like Bill Clinton, there were a couple of gibes at the image on the television screen.


Irving Olan, 85, Leader In Laundry Industry
Irving Olan, a longtime leader in the retail and wholesale laundry industry in the New York metropolitan region, died on Jan. 23 at his home in Floral Park, Queens.
He was 85 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Bankers Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cenfed Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


3 Commuters Die in Attack On Train Near Johannesburg
Three black commuters were killed and 15 were wounded today in attacks on trains running through black townships.
Black commuters at the Geldenhuis station east of Johannesburg said they had fled in panic along the platform as men armed with guns, axes, machetes and sticks attacked them.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Cason Sets Mark


11 Hospitals Facing Cuts In New York
The State Office of Mental Health today proposed shutting down or sharply reducing the number of patients at half of its 22 psychiatric hospitals, a move that would save millions of dollars over the next decade but would shift the burden of caring for the mentally ill to scarce community programs.
The proposals immediately caused an uproar in the districts where the hospitals are located and set the stage for what is sure to be a tense fight over which ones would eventually be closed.
Like Congressmen fighting to save their local military bases from closing, state legislators representing the affected districts said their communities would be shattered by the loss of money and jobs the hospitals provide.


Traveling Capital


Keithley Instruments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Suncor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yeltsin Denies Heavy Drinking
Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin, in an interview to be broadcast Friday, disputed rumors that he drinks to excess and said that unlike Mikhail S. Gorbachev, he does not consult his wife about political decisions.
Mr.
Yeltsin also denied reports that nuclear scientists of the former Soviet Union are now working in Libya in the wide-ranging interview, which was conducted in Moscow by the ABC News program "20-20." A portion of the interview was broadcast last Saturday.


Tyco Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Alza Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Candela Laser Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Old Story: Flowering Maple Is Newest Hit
"EVERYTHING that's new is old," said Rudy Nabel.
"Like hemlines. And the flowering maple."
Mr.
Nabel, a co-owner of Nabel's Nursery in White Plains, was referring to the plant with maple-like leaves and bell-shaped blooms that has recently climbed the popularity scale.
Again.


Bush Endorses New Jersey's Welfare Revisions
Buoyed by what he saw as President Bush's endorsement of New Jersey's new welfare revision laws during the State of the Union Message on Tuesday, Assemblyman Wayne R. Bryant, the author of the laws, said today that he expected White House support to speed their implementation.
Mr.
Bryant also said that he and Gov.
Jim Florio would go to Washington next week to testify before the Senate Finance Committee's subcommittee on Social Security and family policy about the laws, the most sweeping in the nation.


3 Architects to Share Wolf Prize in the Arts
Three architects have been named to share this year's Wolf Prize in the Arts, a $100,000 cash award given by the Wolf Foundation in Jerusalem.
The architects -- Frank O. Gehry of Santa Monica, Calif.; Jorn Utzon of Copenhagen, and Sir Denys Lasdun of London -- were chosen last week for "qualities existing well beyond the range of passing fashion, qualities that enhance use, transform construction and liberate the mind."


Threat of Lawsuit Enforces Product Safety; Caught in the Middle
To the Editor:
The Food and Drug Administration's moratorium on implanting silicone gel breast prostheses overlooked an important segment of the population -- patients who already are in the midst of breast reconstruction because of a mastectomy performed for breast cancer.
Many of these patients have undergone temporary insertion of a tissue expander in preparation for implantation of a permanent prosthesis, and are awaiting surgery, pending the F.D.A.'s final decision.
In the interim, the tissue expander could rupture.


Westmoreland Coal Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Family Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Oilmen See Russia's Pitfalls
More than 60 American oil industry executives who came here seeking ways to invest in Russia's oil industry ran into a raft of obstacles this week.
An essential obstacle lay in the struggle over control of the republic's crude oil.
Another was the absence of some important people who were supposed to be there.
Yet another was the lack of stable policies to govern foreign investments in oil, which Russian officials acknowledged might be difficult to achieve.


Some Cheers, Some Jeers for Bush Agenda
Leaders of American business offered a range of reactions to the economic proposals in President Bush's State of the Union Message, and disagreed sharply over the pressure the President put on Congress to enact legislation in an election year.
"The investment tax credit and the research and development credits are good ideas," said James L. Koontz, president of the Kingsbury Corporation, a producer of machine tools in Keene, N.H., adding that he hoped the research and development credit would be applied to collaborative research.


Market Place; Sales Surging At Mutual Funds
THE flow of cash into stock mutual funds, already at very high levels, zoomed still higher in January, leaving many mutual fund companies stunned by the level of business.
"Our sales in January will be up almost 50 percent from December and almost three times what they were a year ago," Jon Fossel, the chief executive of the Oppenheimer Management Corporation, said yesterday.


Money Fund Yields Drop but Slide Slows
Yields on both tax-exempt and taxable money funds continued to decline, but at a slower rate, for the seven-day periods ended Monday and Tuesday, respectively, IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report said yesterday. .
"Both tax-exempt and taxable yields are in the process of bottoming out, having both dropped this week, but not sharply," said Walter S. Frank, an economist for IBC/Donoghue's.


Bethlehem Halts Dividends And Plans Cuts After Loss
The Bethlehem Steel Corporation, after reporting a loss of $638.1 million for the fourth quarter, said yesterday that it would cut its work force by 6,500 and stop paying its annual stock dividend.
The job cuts at the nation's second-largest steelmaker will amount to about 25 percent of the work force.
The reductions will be made over the next two years through layoffs, early retirement programs and sales of parts of the company.


Our Place in the Western Community
To the Editor:
I don't believe you go far enough in "American Abdication in Europe" (editorial, Jan. 11).
It's not merely domination of Europe by Germany we have to worry about, but also our own position in the world.
By the end of the century, Europe will be united.
Even a reluctant Britain will have joined the European Community, which will expand to include the balance of the Western European countries and Eastern Europe as well.
Boris N. Yeltsin, the Russian President, has already asked for admission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the World Bank.
In a few years, Russia and the other commonwealth nations will be in both, probably also in the E.C., creating a European market stretching from the Atlantic to the Pacific, with close to a billion bright, industrious people, as inventive as we and richer in natural resources, especially with a developed Russian oil industry.


Arvin Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Jordan Reserves Rights
MICHAEL JORDAN has told the National Basketball Association it may no longer sell apparel bearing his image, giving Nike Inc. those rights exclusively.
The Oregonian in Portland, Ore., yesterday reported Jordan's decision, confirmed by the league.
The move, unprecedented in the N.B.A., means millions of dollars.


Books of The Times; Investigating a Murder Japan Wants Unsolved
Rising Sun By Michael Crichton  355 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
In his novel "Jurassic Park," Michael Crichton invented an island theme park where dinosaurs came to life and wreaked bloody havoc on visitors from the North American mainland.
In his new novel, "Rising Sun," he has dreamed up an even greater threat to Americans: the Japanese.


Bethlehem Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mets and Noboa Agree
The Mets, avoiding arbitration with yet another of their more marginal players, yesterday agreed to terms with JUNIOR NOBOA on a one-year contract.
Noboa, the utility infielder who had been seeking $320,000, settled for $272,000, up $62,000 from the Mets' arbitration figure.


Nalco Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Home Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Threat of Lawsuit Enforces Product Safety; Implant Alternative
To the Editor:
In the midst of the controversy over the silicone gel-filled breast implant, it is unfortunate that so little mention has been made of a frequently used, harmless and superior alternative -- the saline-filled breast implant.
Instead of containing liquid silicone, it contains salt water, which is sterile and completely compatible with the body's own fluids.
It is the same solution that is commonly given intravenously.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; In Manchester, the Charge Is Mellow Journalism
So far this campaign, all the Presidential candidates have resisted the traditional temptation to stand outside The Union Leader building and denounce its publisher as an irresponsible liar.
But the state's largest and most opinionated newspaper has had to confront even more troubling charges.
They were summarized in The Boston Globe's recent headline: "Mellowed Union Leader loses some influence on primary."
At The Union Leader they are not sure which is more repugant -- losing influence or becoming mellow -- and the paper has moved quickly to dispel both notions.
It is running advertisements that compare its circulation with The Globe's in New Hampshire (99,000 versus 61,000 on Sundays, 72,000 versus 30,000 daily) and conclude, "The Globe is right to be worried about influence."


Dow Corning Starts Investigation of Its Breast-Implant Production
The Dow Corning Corporation has hired former Attorney General Griffin B. Bell to investigate its behavior in the making of silicone breast implants, the company said today.
Mr.
Bell, a senior partner with the law firm of King &amp; Spaulding in Atlanta, will "conduct a complete investigation of Dow Corning's development, production and marketing of silicone breast implants," the company said.


At Home Abroad; Victims in Gaza
The town of Rafah is at the southern end of the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip, on the Egyptian border.
Even by the standards of Gaza it is a miserable place, much of it a refugee camp: 56,000 people living in concrete hovels, with waste water running through it in open ditches.
Driving down from Gaza City, we gave a lift to Khalid al-Mughier, 22 years old.
His family, 12 of them, live in the refugee camp -- but no longer in what had been their tiny home.


Yeltsin Tells Russians of Arms Cutbacks
Within hours of President Bush's announcement on Tuesday of deep cuts in America's military spending, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia went on television today to outline sharp arms cutbacks under way in the former Soviet armed forces.
Mr.
Yeltsin's program was in large part a summary of military reductions either previously pledged by Moscow or necessitated by the economic and political crisis in what is now the Commonwealth of Independent States.


McDonald's Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


News Summary
International A3-12
SLASHING 2 BIG ARSENALS
In advancing proposals to slash their nuclear arsenals, the United States and Russia envision eliminating a class of missiles viewed as the biggest threat to peace.
But President Bush is asking President Yeltsin to give up an advantage in land-based missiles in exchange for a concession that is not quite parallel.
A1
President Yeltsin outlined sharp cutbacks in arms spending.
A8  K.G.B.
AND THE VIETNAM WAR
The head of a Russian panel overseeing K.G.B. archives says he is prepared to let a few American historians search for evidence that could shed light on the fate of Americans taken prisoner during the Vietnam war.
But he says he has not found such documents himself.
A8
MIDEAST TALKS END IN PLEDGE


Boeing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Events: Design's Torch, As Wright Passed It On
Wright's Lessons  Pratt Manhattan Gallery, 295 Lafayette Street (Houston Street); (718) 636-3517.
An exhibition of original renderings, photographs, architectural plans, explanatory documents and videotapes illustrating the work and ideas of architects who studied with Frank Lloyd Wright runs from tomorrow through Feb. 29.


Chips &amp; Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Anti-Japan Auto Ads May Backfire
A RENEWED wave of harsh attacks on Japanese cars and trucks is inundating television and newspapers, as sort of the evil twin of the automotive industry's "Buy American" advertising.
Many of these new passionate, possibly xenophobic pitches seem the automotive equivalent of negative political advertising.
Instead of Willie Horton's mug shot, however, the villain is depicted by rising suns, backed by sour-sounding string music meant to mimic the tones of the Japanese koto.
And lest these be too subtle, there are remonstrations to remember Pearl Harbor.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section yesterday, showing three states' driver-registration breakdown by sex, compared with that of the United States at large, reversed the pie-chart labels in some copies.
Men, represented by the right-hand segment in each case, made up a larger percentage of drivers in New York, New Jersey and the United States and a smaller percentage in Connecticut, as shown correctly in the accompanying figures.


Ballistic Recovery Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Federal Budget: The Overview; PRESIDENT OFFERS CAUTIOUS CHANGES IN SPENDING PLAN
In an election-year budget of $1.52 trillion, President Bush called today for modest increases in a wide range of popular domestic programs, but he avoided any major change in spending priorities to fight the recession.
Most of the President's proposed budget carries out decisions and commitments made in the past.
Social Security overtakes military spending for the first time, as the Pentagon budget declines while cash payments to the elderly rise steadily.


As Suspects Wait, the Fear of Tuberculosis Rises
In the basement of the New York City Criminal Courts Building in Brooklyn recently, so many men were crammed into four small holding pens that most had only enough room to stand.
It would be at least one or two days before they were arraigned on charges as disparate as loitering and murder.
And prisoners' rights advocates and health experts worry that while they waited, some of them could have become infected with tuberculosis.


First Eastern Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


WLR Foods (X) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Essay; Yeltsin-Bush Summit
Potus's key sherpas finessed the Sotu to zero in on the build-down at David.
Translation of that pastiche of acronyms and bureaucratese: "The President of the United States' national security aides passed up much of the hype surrounding the State of the Union address to concentrate on proposals for nuclear-weapons reductions at his first summit meeting with the Russian President, Boris Yeltsin, at Camp David this weekend."


PARENT &amp; CHILD
A CHILD who learns that a parent is having an affair can be expected to react strongly.
Some children become angry or protective toward one parent or the other.
Others become withdrawn at school or start a string of sexual relationships of their own.
But underlying these different reactions is the same worry about the child's role in the possible disintegration of the parents' marriage and the same concern about who will care for the child if the family falls apart.


Bridge
A challenge match for a stake of $:50,000, about $90,000, was played in London on Monday and Tuesday.
It ended in a victory, by 70 imps, for an American foursome using scientific methods.
They were Bob Wolff and Bob Hamman of Dallas and Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., and Eric Rodwell of West Lafayette, Ind.
The losers were Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco of Brazil, the reigning world pair champions, and the British stars Tony Forrester and Andy Robson, who were required to play using totally natural methods.
The match was organized by Demetri Marchessini, a staunch advocate of natural methods and a member of the world's oldest card club, the Portland of London, dating from 1815.
His hope was to prove that experts playing natural methods can do just as well as those armed with scientific bidding weapons.


Bank of East Tennessee reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Armco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Santa Fe Energy Resources Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Destec Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Inco Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rochester Community Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Juno Lighting Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Teaneck Officer's Partner Tells Jury Victim Had Hand in Pocket
A Teaneck police officer offered a detailed account today of how and why his colleague, Gary Spath, fatally shot 16-year-old Phillip Pannell nearly two years ago.
The officer, Wayne Blanco, testified in Mr.
Spath's trial that only 20 to 30 seconds elapsed between the time the two policemen encountered Mr.
Pannell in a schoolyard and Officer Spath's killing him with the second of two shots.


Premier Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Russian Offers Americans Access to K.G.B. Files
The chairman of the Russian parliamentary commission that oversees the archives of the K.G.B. says he is prepared to invite American historians to search for evidence that could shed light on the fate of Americans taken prisoner during the Vietnam war.
The official, Col.
Gen.
Dmitri Volkogonov, speaking on the eve of President Boris N. Yeltsin's trip to the United States, said the Russian president wanted to assure the United States Senate that he was responding to a request for information on reports that some Americans might have been taken to the Soviet Union.


Robinson Nugent Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kaman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Rod Stewart  Madison Square Garden
On Monday night, Rod Stewart turned Madison Square Garden into a commercial for his greatest hits.
The setting was a two-tiered spotless white stage with invisible doors through which backing musicians came and left like doctors entering and exiting hospital rooms.
Everything was Conran's white, even the speakers, drums and Mr.
Stewart's cordless microphone.
The costuming was a set of suits in an interior designer's palette of bright hues.
There were backup singers who did Motown synchronized dance moves and horn players who struck silhouette-worthy poses.
There were two giant screens that showed stills from the previous number in between songs, like instant snapshot memories.
There was a corporate sponsor, Miller Genuine Draft.


A Tiny Gain For Economy Last Quarter
The nation's economy all but came to a standstill in the final quarter of 1991 after two quarters of small advances, the Commerce Department reported yesterday.
Neither fears of renewed recession nor the Administration's hopes of early recovery were confirmed by the report.
"Economic activity was essentially flat in the fourth quarter," said J. Antonio Villamil, the Commerce Department's chief economist.


Tyson Judge Bars Motion On Evidence
Lawyers for Mike Tyson have charged that important evidence in the fighter's trial here -- the clothing worn by his accuser at the time she says she was raped by him -- has been "materially altered from the condition that it was in on the night in question."
The charge is contained in a motion that was filed under seal, but made public today when Judge Patricia J. Gifford refused to bar the prosecution from showing the clothing to the jury.


Marion Merrell Dow reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tyson Judge Bars Motion On Evidence
Lawyers for Mike Tyson have charged that important evidence in the fighter's trial here -- the clothing worn by his accuser at the time she says she was raped by him -- has been "materially altered from the condition that it was in on the night in question."
The charge is contained in a motion that was filed under seal, but made public today when Judge Patricia J. Gifford refused to bar the prosecution from showing the clothing to the jury.


Imelda Marcos Is Arrested for Maintaining Bank Accounts in Switzerland


BancTexas Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sordid Business Booms in Queens
Roosevelt Avenue by day is a whirl of traffic and shoppers, to the roar and clatter of the I.R.T. passing overhead.
Nightfall brings traffic and trade of another sort.
As steerers walk the avenue openly soliciting clients, men emerge from cars, cabs and the subway and ascend to the low-rent, low-price brothel world that flourishes overhead.
There, women -- many of them undocumented immigrants -- do business in warrens of sordid cubicles behind second-story windows painted black.


Nynex Runs Into The Richmeister
This is how Richard (The Richmeister) Laymer, the annoying guardian of the copying machine on NBC's "Saturday Night Live," might describe his recent contretemps with the advertising industry: "It's the admeisters! The Saatch-skis and their client, the Nynex man! A commercialmundo. Bad scene! Bad scene!"
Translated into English, that means Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, produced a 60-second radio spot for a new client, Nynex Mobile Communications, in a style that many listeners said sounded like the Laymer character, a creation of the comedian Rob Schneider.
After Mr.
Schneider called to complain, the company pulled the spot.


Coverage of Smoking Linked to Tobacco Ads
A new report by researchers at the University of Michigan says that magazines that carry cigarette advertising have consistently restricted or softened coverage of the dangers of smoking, possibly out of fear of economic reprisals by cigarette manufacturers.
The study, which appears in today's issue of The New England Journal of Medicine, examined 99 American magazines published from 1959 to 1986.
Although other reports have offered anecdotal evidence about the relationship between cigarette advertising and the coverage of tobacco as a health issue, the new report is one of the most comprehensive statistical looks at the subject.


Violent Melodrama Of a Sizzling Movie Brings Rating Battle
For the handful of studio executives who have seen it, "Basic Instinct," a violent melodrama starring Michael Douglas that is set to open in March, is "a guaranteed blockbuster," "the steamiest movie of the year" and "hot, hot, hot."
For the Motion Picture Association of America's Classification Board, the movie is, one film executive said, "beyond boundaries" and may receive an unusual and financially risky NC-17 rating (No one under 17 admitted).
For the Carolco Corporation, which is teetering on the edge of collapse, the movie is either a lifeline from drowning or a lead weight that will sink the company.
For the Sony Corporation, whose Tri-Star Pictures is distributing it, the movie is one more potential headache after a year of financial migraines.
And for gay-rights groups the movie is a source of alarm.


Bic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Maxus Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about David Letterman's relations with NBC misstated the day for his 10th-anniversary program in some copies.
It is to be 9:30 P.M. next Thursday, not tonight.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Preferred Stock  *
BankAmerica Corp. plans to offer 8 million shares of cumulative preferred stock, series K, though Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Terms will be announced later.
Common Stock  *
Protein Design Labs Inc. of Mountain View, Calif., sold 3.5 million shares at $15 each through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. and Cowen &amp; Co.
The company makes antibodies to treat certain diseases.
*
Gulfstream Aerospace Corp. has filed for 5 million common shares to be sold through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The company makes business jet aircraft.
Ratings  *
Magna Group Inc.'s subordinated debt rating has been lowered by Standard &amp; Poor's to BB- from BB+ following its acquisition of a weaker bank, Landmark Bancshares Corp.
Magna and Landmark are both based in St.
Louis.
*
The City of Phoenix has received an AA rating on its $55.5 million of senior-lien street and highway-user revenue bonds, series 1992, and $92 million senior street and highway-user refunding bonds, series 1991.


BEI Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Howe Faces Delay
STEVE HOWE, the Yankee relief pitcher arrested last month on charges of possession of cocaine, faces yet another legal delay in being brought to trial.
An arraignment hearing scheduled for Friday in Missoula, Mont., has been rescheduled for Feb. 7.
The 33-year-old Howe, who lives in Whitefish, Mont., with his family during baseball's off season, is being charged with two Federal misdemeanor counts: attempted possession of a gram of cocaine when he was arrested Dec. 19 in nearby Kalispell, and possession of two grams of cocaine in Whitefish sometime between Nov. 23 and Dec. 19.


Judge Gives Maximum Term in Kahane Case
Sharply criticizing a jury's acquittal on murder charges, a Manhattan judge sentenced an Egyptian immigrant to the maximum sentence of 7 1/3 to 22 years in prison yesterday for gun possession, assault and coercion charges arising from the assassination of Rabbi Meir Kahane.
As hundreds of police officers kept chanting Arabs away from Jewish sympathizers outside the Manhattan Criminal Courts Building, State Supreme Court Justice Alvin Schlesinger said the jury's decision to acquit the immigrant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, of murder last month "was against the overwhelming weight of evidence and was devoid of common sense and logic."


Students' Demand For Condoms Seems Limited but Steady
The first day condoms were made available at Walton High School in the Bronx, a line of 30 students stretched outside Alan Ettman's door, like Russians waiting for sugar and eggs.
Now, says Mr.
Ettman, an English teacher, the lines are gone, and many of the faces he sees in his office are familiar, students who regularly use condoms and appreciate the chance to get them free.


Security Bancorp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Hawaiian Electric Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


One-Time Charges Cause Du Pont to Lose $240 Million
Du Pont lost $240 million in the final three months of 1991 because of one-time charges for cost-cutting and a recall of its fungicide, the chemical company said today.
The charges also contributed to a 39 percent drop in net income for the year.


Good Guys reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mideast Parley Ends in Moscow Under Shadow
The two-day Moscow round of Middle East peace talks ended today much as they had begun, with a pall cast over the future by the question of who will speak for the Palestinians.
Yet despite wobbly moments caused by this question of Palestinian representation, it was clear that the talks here focused on a panoply of issues affecting the entire Middle East, and that therefore the peace process did have a future.


Fidelity Bancshares (Tenn.) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSH AND YELTSIN PROPOSE DEEP CUTS IN ATOMIC WEAPONS
President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin made new arms control proposals this week that envision slashing American and Russian long-range nuclear arms by well over half and could eliminate the class of missiles considered the biggest threat to peace.
But Mr.
Bush's proposal, outlined in the State of the Union Address on Tuesday, asks Mr.
Yeltsin to take a step that no Soviet leader ever entertained: give up his advantage in one area of nuclear arms competition, land-based missiles, in return for an important concession but not parallel cuts in the area of American advantage, submarine-based missiles.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
4.00
6.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.81
3.81
6.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.90
3.89
6.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.86
6.76
7.89
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.74
7.66
8.22
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
8.77
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.70
6.67
7.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Daniel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


McDonald's Profit Up 8% In Quarter
The McDonald's Corporation said yesterday that profits increased 8 percent in the fourth quarter as it benefited from discount pricing in the United States and healthy sales overseas.
McDonald's, the world's largest restaurant operator, said fourth-quarter profits increased to a quarterly record for the company of $200 million, compared with $186 million for the corresponding quarter last year.
Earnings per share were 54 cents for the quarter, compared with 51 cents a share a year earlier.
Revenues rose to $1.73 billion from $1.70 billion.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Struggling to Be Heard, Kerrey Pounces on Clinton
In most sports, when the front-runner stumbles, his competitors gain a clear opportunity.
In politics, however, it is trickier.
Because when the front-runner stumbles, he takes all the television cameras with him.
This is the awkward situation now facing Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska.
For the last several days, he has been trying to draw Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas into a public debate on issues like health care and the environment.
But as Mr.
Clinton's campaign suffered under accusations that the Governor had carried on a 12-year extramarital affair, he ignored the gibes, and Mr.
Kerrey's campaign suffered even more -- from lack of exposure.


Prospects Warned About the Dangers of Life
Steve Palermo and Dr.
Lonise Bias would not seem to have a lot in common, one being a major league umpire, arguably the best in his profession, the second being a doctor of religion, blessed with the evangelical passion and fervor of a Martin Luther King.
But both, in a sense, are victims and survivors of sociopaths who have had the humanity stomped out of them, of a society that often sends such confusing messages that morality and ethics, the sense of right and wrong, are the first but not the last casualties.


Maritime Telegraph &amp; Telephone Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Deal Maker a Torchbearer? Trump Wants Olympics Here
Donald Trump once rebuilt the skating rink in Central Park in four months.
His latest dream is to bring the Summer Olympics to New York in the year 2004.
But it may be easier to get a casino permit in New Jersey than to convince the United States Olympic Committee that the Big Apple could manage the feat.
The city was turned down for the 1984 Games (awarded to Los Angeles) despite the efforts of a committee headed by a former city official and businessman, Richard Ravitch.


Iran to Sell Draft Exemptions
The Iranian Parliament authorized the Government today to sell draft exemption cards for $5,000 apiece, the Teheran radio said.
Two years of military service is compulsory for Iranian men over 18, and fear of conscription has discouraged thousands abroad from returning home.
The radio report, monitored in Cyprus, did not say how much was expected to be raised by the plan, which was authorized during a debate on a budget bill.
The report said the cards would be temporary but did not make clear how long they would be valid.


For Older Skiers, the More the Merrier on the Slopes
For a number of seasons, ski areas have sold discounted lift tickets to skiers 65 years old and over.
These "junior" tickets usually cost the same as those sold to youngsters 12 and under.
This season, the eastern division of the Professional Ski Instructors of America is testing midweek "senior-day" programs for skiers 50 years old and over.
"Last season, we asked senior skiers to fill out questionnaires to find out what they wanted," said Gwen Allard, who is the head of the instructors' educational committee.
"They have different social and physiological needs, so we developed a format to meet those needs."


Burlington Industries Capital Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


A Quiet, and Well-Guarded, Retreat


Insteel Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Central Louisiana Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Citizens Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mapco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Home Video
Next month Paramount will release "Papa's Delicate Condition" (1963), starring Jackie Gleason.
"Dances With Wolves" it isn't, but dealers are moderately enthusiastic.
"There are a lot of Jackie Gleason fans out there," said James Ulsamer, a senior vice president of Baker &amp; Taylor, a distributor in Chicago.
In general, old movies at low prices are getting more attention at Hollywood studios and in many video stores.
"Papa's Delicate Condition," for example, is one of 100 older titles -- from "Black Rain" (1989) with Michael Douglas to "Casanova's Big Night" (1954) with Bob Hope -- that will be released or rereleased this year by Paramount at reduced prices that generally range from $14.95 to $29.95.


Brooklyn Mother Saves Her Son, But Is Killed by a Hail of Bullets
A 36-year-old woman who had just picked up her 6-year-old son at his grandmother's house in Brooklyn was killed Tuesday night in a hail of bullets as she and her child sat in a car, the police said.
The victim, Avanelle Connell, spent her last moments trying to save the child's life as about nine of the more than a dozen bullets fired sprayed against the car moments after she and her son had entered it.


Dow Drops 47.18, to 3,224.96, After Remarks by Greenspan
Stock prices swung in a wide arc yesterday, ending with a sizable drop on fading hopes of further interest-rate cuts.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which posted solid gains earlier in the day, plunged after remarks on the economy by Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.
The Dow ended the day at 3,224.96, down 47.18 points, or nearly 1.5 percent.
But that was 74 points shy of the day's high, the biggest one-day spread since a 120-point swing on Nov. 15, 1990, when the market unraveled during a period when futures and options were expiring.


Review/Theater: Boesman and Lena; Fugard's Sad Wanderers, With Intimations of Now
Whether or not you get to the Manhattan Theater Club's revival of "Boesman and Lena," you can always see another, informal version of its drama day or night on a Manhattan sidewalk or subway platform or vacant lot.
Athol Fugard's image of an itinerant homeless couple sheltered within their scrap-heap possessions and awaiting the next official eviction is now as common in New York City, among other places, as it was in the South Africa where he set and wrote his play in the late 1960's.
Even at the time of its premiere, "Boesman and Lena" was recognized as a universal work that might speak to audiences long after apartheid had collapsed.
But who would have imagined that the universality would soon prove so uncomfortably literal?
The troublesome thing about the Manhattan Theater Club production, which Mr.
Fugard himself has directed with Keith David and Lynne Thigpen in the title roles, is that it is less searing than the version playing outside the theater.
The problem is not that real life has rendered "Boesman and Lena" redundant, for, as written, Mr.
Fugard's play can never be outstripped by events.
Boesman and Lena, a "colored" couple adrift from both blacks and whites in their own society, are more than a journalistic paradigm of homelessness or of South African racist oppression.
Their shared life, alternately a refuge and a brutal prison, is above all a marriage, observed by the author at a microscopic range Strindberg might have admired and as elemental and timeless as the primitive campsite where the play's single evening of action takes place.


Horizon Financial Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Norfolk Southern Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Occidental Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Remembering an Embodiment of Small-Town Life
There is an emptiness lately in this waterside village steeped in its own past, where the trim 18th-century cottages seem plucked from the pages of a storybook and where immortality, at least in the architectural sense, does seem possible.
It is all because of one resident, James L. Grote, who died this month after living here for almost 101 years.
A man blessed with a booming voice and a seemingly unquenchable thirst for public life, Mr.
Grote became a municipal one-man band, holding an array of official and unofficial positions that ranged from fire chief -- a job he retained for almost half a century -- to front-row worshiper at the local Catholic church.


Review/Dance; Twyla Tharp's New Company Makes Debut
Twyla Tharp and Dancers is the name of the ever-surprising Miss Tharp's latest venture.
Not a permanent company by the choreographer's account but a group formed last summer as a current creative outlet, this heterogeneous collection of dancers -- mostly extraordinary -- opened a two-week debut season at the City Center on Tuesday night.
Miss Tharp is nothing if not timely.
Gov.
Bill Clinton's wife, Hillary, had barely apologized to Tammy Wynette for a disparaging reference to the country singer's hit "Stand By Your Man" than the recording was heard that night full blast at the center of "Men's Piece," Miss Tharp's rather more detached treatise on male-female relations.


Applied Immune Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cadence Design Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; The Return of Knicks' G.O. Card
Many of today's middle-aged Knicks and Rangers fans grew up going to games at Madison Square Garden with what was known as the G.O. card.
Show the card, which attested to your being a member of the "general organization" at your high school, and pay half price for a seat in the rafters.
Half a century ago at the old Garden on Eighth Avenue between 49th and 50th Streets you showed your G.O. card, slid 25 cents to the ticket seller and hurried up several steep flights of stairs to the side balcony to watch the now legendary Ranger team that had won the Stanley Cup in 1940.


Hoyas Add to Redmen's Misery
The bold red letters on Jason Buchanan's chest had that shiny look of a brand new T-shirt.
MAKE IT HAPPEN, the shirt said.
That was the message St.
John's brought into the Capital Centre tonight, a renewed push against Georgetown with a season waiting to be saved.
But for the Redmen, nearly everything that happened just left them with more questions in an increasingly confusing season.
Their 61-48 loss to Georgetown, the third in three games and fourth in the last five, extended the worst start of a Big East season since the current seniors were freshmen.
With one major difference.
The 1989 season was regarded from its beginning as a transition year.
This St.
John's season began with the hope of a Final Four appearance, a dream that becomes less likely with each passing game. 4-5 in the Big East
St.
John's, 10-7 over all, fell to 4-5 in Big East play for the first time since the 1989 season that ended with a seventh-place finish.
Georgetown, 12-4 and 5-2 in the conference, won its third straight game and the fifth in the last seven.


People's Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kaydon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Source Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Noble Affiliates reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Israeli Parties Near Agreement for Election Date
Israel's dominant political parties indicated today that they were close to agreement on holding elections in June, but differed on the exact date.
Sarah Doron, head of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's Likud Party, said the opposition Labor Party had agreed on an election date of June 23.
"The Labor Party asked to approve it tomorrow," she said, "but I would say almost certainly there is agreement."


Florio's Whirlwind Makes Paramus 'Capital for a Day'
Gov.
Jim Florio moved the state capital here for a few hours today in an exercise that was part civics lesson and part political road show.
After declaring the borough New Jersey's first "Capital for a Day," the Governor and members of his cabinet fanned out around to meet with officials and community leaders; visit hospitals, a veterans home, a nutrition center for the elderly and the town jail, watch police officers rappel down a five-story building at the Garden State Plaza and drop off a $110,000 check for local road improvements before meeting with residents at a town meeting.


2 Officers Hurt in Queens
Two police officers were slightly injured late last night while investigating a dispute in Queens that erupted into gunfire, the police said.
A police spokeswoman said the officers were in front of 32-30 30th Street in Long Island City when shots were fired.
One officer was hit in the left foot by a ricochet, and his partner was cut on the right hip.
The police said Juan Velancia, 23 years old, of the 30th Street address, was arrested.
Neither officer was identified.


Marsh Supermarkets reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 4


A Quiet, and Well-Guarded, Retreat


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Politial Memo; Clinton Sets Off Spark, And Cuomo Fans Flame
Already troubled by allegations of marital infidelity, Gov.
Bill Clinton's Presidential campaign now faces mounting difficulties in New York -- and perhaps beyond -- because of an ethnic remark he made about Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
And, political strategists agree, Mr.
Cuomo has reacted with a bit of hardball politics that seemed designed to extract a heavy political price from the Arkansas Governor.
Mr.
Cuomo, who has a history of political differences with Mr.
Clinton, spent much of Tuesday transforming Mr.
Clinton's comment that Mr.
Cuomo "acts like" a member of the Mafia into an assault on all ethnic minorities.
He was not placated by Mr.
Clinton's apology, and made his displeasure known not only in a news conference in Albany but also in telephone interviews with a number of reporters.


U.S.S. Kentucky Journal; Run Silent, Run Deep, Beat Foes. (Where?)
The cold war is over and the Soviet Union has disintegrated, but Capt.
Mike Riegel and his crew still lurk in the depths of the Atlantic Ocean daily rehearsing a nuclear attack on the former superpower.
As the rest of the world adjusts to momentous changes, it is business as usual underwater for the men on the Navy's newest Trident II ballistic-missile submarine.
The actions and thoughts of the crew, as though suspended in time, remain riveted to a drill -- and a world -- that seems obsolete.
Within 30 minutes of receiving a coded order from the President, their mission would be to launch 24 missiles carrying as many as 192 warheads at preassigned military targets thousands of miles away.


Macy Getting Welcome Cash
With only $200,000 in cash on hand, R. H. Macy &amp; Company received some welcome interim financing yesterday.
The judge overseeing Macy's bankruptcy proceedings yesterday approved $60 million that the retailer will use to pay for merchandise and for daily operations until Feb. 13.


Big Selloff in Treasury Securities
Remarks by the Federal Reserve Board's chairman, Alan Greenspan, took precedence over other important developments yesterday, and a violent selloff in the secondary market for Treasury securities ensued after Mr.
Greenspan said an economic recovery appeared likely in the spring.
Mr.
Greenspan made his forecast in confirmation testimony before the Senate Banking Committee.
His remarks wiped out what had been a positive early response in the credit markets to President Bush's State of the Union address and a preliminary report from the Commerce Department showing that the economy expanded only three-tenths of a percent during the final quarter of 1991.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Big Time Sarah  Chicago Blues 73 Eighth Avenue (between 13th and 14th Streets) Through Saturday
There were plenty of men in the audience, but Big Time Sarah's performance at Chicago Blues on Tuesday night really belonged to the women.
Wearing a tight black jumper that celebrated every line in her ample figure, a gold incisor flicking shards of light into the club's farthest depths, this Chicago belter and growler played a set that brought together 70's funk, 60's soul and the raunchy urban blues of 1920's heroines like Bessie Smith and Ma Rainey.
"I'm a hot woman," Sarah announced at the outset, putting her flesh in motion with an original called "Blues All Along."


The Federal Budget: The Home Front; For the People of Groton, Peace Pays No Dividend
A Baptist minister walked into Mayor Catherine J. Kolnaski's office this morning and offered to say a prayer for her.
She gratefully accepted.
Across southeastern Connecticut and Rhode Island, tens of thousands of Electric Boat employees and their families had awakened to news worse than all their years working in the boom-and-bust weapons industry had prepared them for.
The cold war was won, President Bush had said, and their jobs were done.


One Valley Bancorp of West Virginia Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
DR.
OLIVER SACKS, the neurologist whose work with catatonic patients became the theme of the film "Awakenings," became curious several years ago about an autistic boy in London with unusual artistic talent.
His curiosity led Dr.
Sacks into a long friendship with the youngster, STEPHEN WILTSHIRE, now 17 years old.
On Monday, he will introduce Stephen at the Fifth Avenue Gallery in the Empire State Building, where Stephen is to sketch and autograph his third book of drawings, "Floating Cities," published by Summit Books.


Kaufel Group Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Southdown Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


High Recall Rate For Super Bowl Ads
Some critics complained after Super Bowl XXVI on Sunday that the commercials overwhelmed a dull game.
That might have helped the advertisers who spent $850,000 for each 30-second spot, according to a survey released yesterday.
The fourth annual Super Poll, conducted by Cramer-Krasselt of Chicago and Milwaukee, reported that of 1,000 viewers surveyed, 59 percent remembered commercials they saw.
That compared with an average recall rate of 24 percent for commercials shown during regular prime-time programming.


Herschel Walker Named To 2-Man Bobsled Team
Herschel Walker was apparently worth waiting for.
The United States Olympic bobsled coach, Jim Hickey, announced yesterday that Walker, the Minnesota Vikings runner, had made the two-man team.
Previously, Walker had been named the four-man's brakeman, or pusher.
"It takes a great athlete to be a pusher, combining speed and strength," said Hickey, speaking from Innsbruck, Austria, where the team is practicing.
"But you need those attributes particularly in Albertville, where there's a very flat start."


Zions Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Battle for School Aid
With anger over taxes cooling in the wake of the second state budget in a row that called for no increases, the most volatile issue in New Jersey this year, and perhaps for the next decade, is education: who pays, how much, who benefits and how the money is allocated.
At center stage is Gov.
Jim Florio's showcase Quality Education Act, passed 19 months ago, already revised once and still the focus of intense debate and vows by the Republican majority in the Legislature to revise it yet again.
The Q.E.A., as it is called, was intended to funnel money to poorer districts, inevitably at the expense of wealthier ones, and that alone stirred anger in many of the state's 592 school districts where voters thought they were being shortchanged.
Revisions in March cut the aid sharply, and that frayed tempers further.
While some adroit budget manipulations restored much of the lost money this week, the improvement was obscured by the complexity of the aid distribution formula and the heated debate -- driven by partisan politics -- that surrounds it.
Indeed, with the Republicans now holding overwhelming majorities in the Legislature, the battle over the Quality Education Act may be just beginning.
Confrontation Inevitable
No sooner had the revised aid figures been released Tuesday than the new Republican Majority Leader in the Assembly, Jack Collins, declared "major revisions" in the way aid is allocated among districts to be a top priority of the Republicans, who are strong enough in both houses to override any veto from Governor Florio.
For his part, the Governor has made the Quality Education Act his administration's proudest legislative accomplishment and has vowed to do everything he can to protect it.
A confrontation seems inevitable, and it is certain to be a highly public one.
Today, on the heels of Mr.
Collins's legislative declaration of war, two Republicans, Assemblymen John A. Rocco of Camden, the chairman of the Assembly Education Committee, and Lee A. Solomon of Haddon Heights, took up the sword.
At Issue: What's Fair?
"The Q.E.A. has been a public nightmare since it was hastily passed and signed into law by the Governor," said Mr.
Rocco, who announced a public forum Thursday night in Voorhees to debate the law and its impact on district finances.
His view, and that of most if not all Republicans in both houses, is not likely to be changed by discussion.
The law, he said, has created "fiscal chaos and confusion in many school districts. Mr. Solomon says it is time to create a new system that is "fair to all school districts."
What is "fair" in this case is very much in the eye of the beholder, and what's in a beholder's eye is very much a product of where the beholder happens to live.
Class and Politics
Poor districts, particularly big urban ones with typical urban problems -- such places as Newark and Paterson and Jersey City -- receive a lot of assistance under the aid formula because it tilts heavily toward districts with severe educational problems and little ability to pay.
They tend to favor the the Q.E.A. system, and they get a lot of money under its aegis.
But suburban school districts, which tend to be wealthier and in most cases have comparatively fewer problems, receive less assistance, so they would like to see the formula changed.
Added to this struggle along socioeconomic lines -- a sort of educational class struggle -- is widespread unease over the apparent unpredictability of how the aid formula will play out from year to year, a factor compounded by the complexity of the formula.
That volatility alone can be a political black hole.
Note the case of Gabriel S. Ambrosio of Lyndhurst.
Mr.
Ambrosio was a Democratic Senator in a normally Republican district, but he lost his bid for re-election on Nov. 5 against an almost unknown Republican opponent, John P. Scott.
The reason, Mr.
Ambrosio says, was Q.E.A.  'A Roller Coaster'
"I lost the election by 200 votes in my own hometown of Lyndhurst because of the fact that the commissioner of education sent a letter four days before the election revoking the aid for Lyndhurst. The Q.E.A. was a debacle. They first sent a letter saying Lyndhurst was getting a lot more money, then four days before the election, they sent a letter saying it was all a mistake. It was just a roller coaster, and I got caught on it."
Mr.
Ambrosio was the victim of a mistake, it seems, but even under the best of circumstances, the aid formulations can seem unpredictable.
This week, for example, a new infusion of $341 million, derived from a revision in the way state pension funds are assessed, altered the aid picture in 359 of the state's 592 school districts, and in some cases the change was radical.
The small district of Linwood in Atlantic County, as one extreme example, had been scheduled for $4,600 in the major aid category, called foundation aid, which is intended to give all districts a "basic foundation" of state support to smooth out educational disparities across the state, the major aim of the act.
With the revision, the district is slated to get $680,000.
In Bergen County, 14 districts, of which only two were originally listed for foundation aid totaling $880,000, ended up with $10.6 million.
The state's largest district -- and one of its poorest -- Newark, had been scheduled to receive total assistance of $267 million.
Under the revised plan, itis scheduled for a small increase to $269 million.
On the other hand, Cherry Hill Township, a relatively well-off district, was not originally scheduled for any foundation aid, but it will now get $2.7 million.
Confusion and Dissatisfaction
Judith Savage, the manager of planning and research for the Department of Education's Division of Finance, said the apparent quirks actually resulted from a strict application of the aid formula.
She acknowledged that the revision resulted in increased aid to middle-income districts but insisted that large percentage increases or decreases meant little because they were not "generally big dollar increases."
"A district in Sussex County last year got an increase of $140,000," Ms.
Savage said.
"They had $3,000, so that was 4,000 percent. Camden got $24 million, an increase of 31 percent. Which one is bigger?"
Moreover, she said, "I don't think there was that much confusion at the district level. How much is confusion and how much is just dissatisfaction?"
The projected infusion of money into middle-income districts is expected to quell much of the dissatisfaction.
But it can arise again because the budget on which it is based has not passed the Legislature.
And Republicans have made it clear that they are not satisfied with the aid formula, in any case.


MORE ON THE BUDGET
The Cut in Tax Withholding
The President's order lowering withholding will inject more than $2 billion a month into the economy.
But analysts warn taxpayers to be wary of a trap.
Article and table, page A17.
Weapons Jobs at Risk . . .


Review/Opera; The First Met 'Fidelio' of the Season
What happens to an opera production as it nears the end of its useful life?
To find out, one need only take a look at "Fidelio," which was given its first performance of the season at the Metropolitan Opera on Monday night.
The problem wasn't that the sets -- bare wood scaffolding and walls that looked like rusted metal collages -- weren't serviceable suggestions of the prison of the evil tyrant Don Pizarro.
It wasn't even that the concept was untenable: this 1970 production by Otto Schenk is relatively traditional in its treatment of character and plot.
The problem was that no one involved seemed to care very much one way or another about anything.
The stage directions of a generation ago have by now become formula.
It is live tradition hardened into rote ritual.


Chum Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Valley Capital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eldec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Yankees Sign Anderson For Minors
With no space on their roster but with the opportunity to give a rebounding pitcher a second chance, the Yankees yesterday signed a free agent, Allan Anderson, to a one-year minor league contract that will pay him $500,000 if he makes the major league club.
Anderson, who pitched with the Minnesota Twins for parts of the last six years, becomes the third free agent signed by the Yankees this month.
If Anderson does not make the Yankees, he will earn $60,000 to pitch at Class AAA Columbus.
If the left-hander does make it, he will receive $500,000 and could also earn $300,000 in bonuses for games started and innings pitched.
There is also a provision in the contract that allows Anderson to become a free agent if he is sent to the minors and the Yankees do not call him up by June 1.
Money-Saver on Mound?
Unlike the recent signings of the free agents Danny Tartabull and Mike Gallego, the Yankees may have actually saved money on the 28-year-old Anderson.
Craig Fenech, the player's agent, said that five teams had expressed interest in Anderson, and that the Yankees did not make the highest offer.
Furthermore, Bill Krueger and Eric King, two other free-agent starters New York was seriously considering, each signed more lucrative contracts yesterday with other teams.
Detroit signed King to a $1.2 million deal and Minnesota signed Krueger to a minor league contract that will pay him $550,000 if he makes the Twins with a chance for $450,000 more in incentives.


Panhandle Eastern Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Exide Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In West Bank, Jewish Settlement Building Goes On
Even as the Middle East peace talks were getting under way in Moscow, prefabricated homes were being trucked this week to a Jewish settlement 30 miles east of Tel Aviv in the occupied West Bank.
The Israeli army said yesterday that Israel has broken up dozens of Palestinian guerrilla cells in the occupied West Bank and arrested hundreds of their members in recent months. (Associated Press)


Arms Makers Brace for Peace
Even after six years of gradual Pentagon cuts, the Bush Administration's plan to slash military spending by canceling or scaling back a number of high-profile arms programs came as a jolt to weapons builders and to thousands of workers from Connecticut to California who are likely to lose their jobs in coming years.
Virtually every military contractor faces the loss of some business.
The ensuing job losses would affect communities across the country, especially as business cutbacks spread to subcontractors and suppliers.


Transit Authority and Union Reach Tentative Accord on Contract
The Transit Authority and the union representing 32,000 New York City transit workers announced last night that they had reached a tentative agreement on a new contract that calls for a raise of 4.5 percent this year and an additional 2 percent next year.
Subway conductors and motormen, token clerks, bus drivers, maintenance workers and other unionized transit employees have been working without a new contract for nine months.
The agreement is complex; it covers a total of 38 months and is retroactive to May 1991.


The Federal Budget: The Military; Pentagon Offers Some Deep Cuts But Stops There
The Bush Administration's proposed military budget for the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1 offers deep cuts in long-range nuclear arms and cancels several major weapons, but stops short of fundamental changes in response to the Soviet Union's collapse, budget and military analysts said today.
The budget request, which will be submitted to Congress next month, includes halting production of the expensive B-2 Stealth bomber at 20 planes, building only one Seawolf attack submarine, delaying the Comanche light helicopter being developed for the Army and eliminating several other programs designed to counter a Soviet threat that no longer exists.


Saudi King Takes On Islamic Militants
King Fahd of Saudi Arabia has stepped up a confrontation between militant Muslim fundamentalists and the ruling establishment, warning the fundamentalists of harsher treatment if they persist in challenging Saudi foreign and domestic policies.
The warning came after an attempt by religious fundamentalists and their militant supporters, under the umbrella of a movement called Islamic Awakening, to organize a public demonstration, which would be a grave affront to the conservative Saudi Arabian authorities.


The Tinkerer; Mr. Bush's New War, and Paper Sword
"This will not stand." George Bush's steely challenge to Saddam Hussein remains one of his most memorable expressions.
Tuesday night, mired in recession and fighting for his political life, Mr.
Bush invoked those words again in his State of the Union address.
"I look at hard times and make this vow: This will not stand." This will not fly would be more like it.
When the President resurrects the metaphor of Desert Storm to demonstrate his commitment to economic recovery, he might reasonably be expected to deliver a program to match the threat.
But nowhere did he come close to the economic equivalent of 550,000 troops.
What his speech and new budget offer instead is a laundry list with no main text.
What they disclose is not an anti-recession warrior but a tinkerer.


Boatmen's Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Big Ticket Items


Gold Mining Agreement Set
Two of North America's largest gold producers signed a pact today intended to speed the mining of one of the biggest gold fields in the world.
The Newmont Gold Company of Denver, the largest gold producer in the United States, and the American Barrick Resources Corporation of Toronto agreed to jointly develop the Carlin Trend in Nevada.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Zizi Pozzi  The Ballroom 253 West 28th Street Through Saturday
Zizi Pozzi, the fifth performer to appear in the Ballroom's winter festival of Brazilian music, represents a sophisticated change of pace from the exuberant, samba-driven sounds that have characterized much of the series.
A Sao Paulo native and popular Brazilian entertainer for more than a decade, Miss Pozzi is an asute connoisseur of quality songs, which she interprets with a riveting, mercurial intensity.


Laserscope reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Federal Budget: Taxes; Adjustment Brings In Cash, and Risk
Among the more than three dozen tax proposals in the budget request for 1993 that the Bush Administration sent to Congress today, the adjustment of withholding tables for most taxpayers to cut the amount taken out of each paycheck stands alone in needing no Congressional assent.
But while the adjustment will inject more than $2 billion a month in spending into the economy this year, some analysts warned that it would also create a potential trap for the unwary.


House Inquiry Is Expanded Into Research Overcharges
The investigation into universities' overcharging the Federal Government for scientific research that began at Stanford University has widened to include not only dozens of other major research universities but also contractors for two Government agencies and the officials who negotiate the research contracts.
Government officials told the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations today that the universities -- including the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the University of California at Berkeley and Harvard Medical School -- had overbilled the Federal Government millions of dollars in inappropriate expenses.


New Nets Look Like Old Nets As Suns Get 33-Point Victory
When the Nets started their western road trip, things were looking better for the franchise than they had in years.
The young team had just rallied to defeat the Phoenix Suns for their fifth consecutive victory and were within two games of uncharted territory: the .500 mark.
Whatever they were doing right, they left the formula at home.
For a second consecutive night, the Nets played virtually no defense, allowed their opponent to score seemingly at will, and exhibited a minimum of emotion.
The result was a third successive loss, 128-95, to the Phoenix Suns.


Anthony Pisani, Orthopedist, 80; Was a Sports Doctor for 2 Teams
Anthony J. Pisani, a noted orthopedist who performed surgery on sports players as a team doctor for the Brooklyn Dodgers and the New York Giants, died Friday at his home in Boynton Beach, Fla.
He was 80 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Philip Morris Companies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bills Dismiss Assistant
One day after the offensive coordinator, TED MARCHIBRODA, left to become head coach of the Indianapolis Colts, the Buffalo Bills lost another assistant today when they dismissed their defensive line coach, CHUCK DICKERSON.
Dickerson, 54 years old, gained attention during Super Bowl week by making disparaging comments about the Washington Redskins' offensive line, remarks he said were meant as a joke. (AP)


Summcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Computer Identics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Letdown? That's Not in the Knicks' Vocabulary
Circumstances were perfect for the Knicks to suffer a letdown last night, yet they avoided it.
When the season ends, few people will remember the details of New York's 101-89 victory over the Washington Bullets at Madison Square Garden.
But after returning home from their successful West Coast trip, it would have been natural for the Knicks to take this game lightly.
Perhaps Knick teams of the past would have.


Despite Ups and Down, Calcavecchia Hangs On
When Mark Calcavecchia birdied the last four holes to win the Phoenix Open last Sunday, he broke a victory drought of two and a half years and revived his battered confidence.
He also prevented the most vivid collapse under pressure in recent golf history from becoming the defining moment of his career.


Logicon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Buchanan Says Bush Stole His Ideas
The conservative columnist Patrick J. Buchanan, seeking to embarrass President Bush in this state's Feb. 18 primary, today accused Mr.
Bush of stealing his agenda in his State of the Union Message and called on the President to debate him.
As he has done often since he announced in December that he would seek the Republican Presidential nomination, Mr.
Buchanan said Mr.
Bush had betrayed conservative principles while in office.


Odor Receptors Discovered in Sperm Cells
Sperm cells possess the same sort of odor receptors that allow the nose to smell, suggesting that swimming sperm navigate toward a fertile egg by detecting its scent, scientists have found.
Dr.
Marc Parmentier of the Free University in Brussels and his colleagues report today in the journal Nature that they have observed evidence of odor receptors in the precursor tissue that gives rise to adult sperm.
Until now, such smell receptors had been found to be active only in the nasal cavity.


Gateway Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wrigley (Wm.) Jr. Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Hard Times, Boarders in the Suburbs
AS her bills piled up last year, Grace G. became so worried about her finances that she felt she had only one option: to give up part of her home in a Westchester village to a stranger.
The stranger sleeps in an upstairs bedroom in the split-level brick house, prepares meals in the kitchen and keeps a toothbrush and a jumble of toiletries in the family bathroom.
And each month, she pays Grace G. $325 in rent.


Rangers Moving Up and Taking It in Stride
Maybe it's because of their history -- so many failures in so many years -- that the Rangers are taking their success now with a kind of collective shrug.
They win, but they press on.
Next game.
They have been down this path before, winning in the regular season and then folding in the playoffs.
So they seem to take nothing for granted in January.
April is still far off.


Russia's Gas Cut-Off Idles Poland's Industry
From the Gdansk shipyards to the Galician metalworks factories, much of Poland's industry lay idle today, seven days after Russia reneged on a trade deal and cut off natural gas shipments.
Since Jan. 23, steel mills, glass and ceramics works, fertilizer plants and automakers have been burning only essential amounts of gas to save machinery from damage.


Clark Tippet, Choreographer, 37; Ballet Theater Principal Dancer
Clark Tippet, a choreographer and principal dancer with American Ballet Theater, died on Tuesday at the Labette County Medical Center in Parsons, Kan.
He was 37 years old.
He died of AIDS, said Kelly Fowler, his sister.


Norwich Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Weis Markets Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


MassBank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


USF&amp;G Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Garden State Derby
To the Editor:
Unfortunately, Avrum Hyman (letter, Jan. 10) is incorrect in stating that "every other tolling authority and toll facility in the country" except the Triborough Bridge separates automatic lanes from attended lanes.
The toll booths on New Jersey's Garden State Parkway not only lack such separation, but also seem to change status from day to day.


Du Pont (E.I.) de Nemours &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Dance; Premiere Opens Season For Nikolais and Louis
Alwin Nikolais and Murray Louis have been marching to their own choreographic drummer for a long time now.
The feast of dance they presented on Tuesday night, when Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance opened a two-week season at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street), was refreshingly new and familiar at the same time.
Mr.
Nikolais and Mr.
Louis are still creating dances that look like no others.
And those dances look anything but tired.
A case in point is Mr.
Nikolais's dazzling new "Aurora," a full-company piece danced to a shrewdly textured score by Jon Scoville.
Mr.
Nikolais is at it again here with lights, mirrors and brilliant colors and patterns, a lush world through which dancers move, all noble bone and muscle here in skimpy flesh-colored costumes, appearing and disappearing as if by magic.


Protests Bring Ouster of Third Mexican Governor
In a development that seems to underscore the unsteady nature of Mexico's progress toward greater democracy, opposition charges of electoral fraud have apparently led to the removal of another state governor.
With his resignation on Tuesday, Gov.
Salvador Neme Castillo of Tabasco State became the third sitting or chosen state leader in five months to give up his job under attack by opposition parties.


Threat of Lawsuit Enforces Product Safety
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen's poignant statement that the furor over dangerous silicone breast implants is not about breasts (column, Jan. 19) is frighteningly true.
It is about all of us!
"It would be grand," she states, "to know that those who manufacture body parts hold themselves to a higher standard than the makers of acrylic sweaters." It would be grand if the manufacturers and users of asbestos, silica, vinyl chloride, lead, nickel and a whole host of other toxic substances had adequately warned workers and others exposed to their effects.
All have caused a myriad of diseases, including cancer.
Drug and medical device manufacturers that have placed such products as DES and the Dalkon Shield on the market might also have sought a standard higher than the bottom line.


Puerto Rico Gripped by Its Watergate
Nearly 14 years after two young members of a radical pro-independence group were executed by police officers on a remote mountaintop, Puerto Ricans remain gripped by the case and riveted to its latest twist: televised hearings on whether high-level Puerto Rican and Federal Government officials helped plan the killings and cover them up.
The case, known as Cerro Maravilla for the mountain where the killings occurred and already the subject of two books and a movie, is now the focus of hearings by the Judiciary Committee of the Puerto Rico Senate.
An earlier Senate investigation of the killings exposed them as murders and led to the conviction of 10 police officers.


Security Council Is Still Debating Wording of a Summit Declaration
As the United Nations Security Council prepares to hold its first summit meeting, its 15 members are still divided over how much support should be given to such goals as safeguarding human rights and promoting democracy and disarmament in the declaration to be issued Friday.
China, India and some of the so-called third world nations on the Council are resisting any ringing endorsement of these goals, arguing that by doing so the Council would be involving itself in the domestic affairs of other countries and that disarmament is outside its sphere of competence.


IPALCO Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rhett to Have Tests
South Carolina forward JOE RHETT must pass two tests before he can play basketball again: One is medical, the other legal.
Rhett, who had a pacemaker implanted two years ago to regulate his heartbeat, will undergo medical tests today to determine his condition after collapsing in a game Saturday.


Accreditation Peril Faced By Kings County Hospital
Kings County Hospital failed an inspection conducted by a national monitoring group last fall and will probably lose its accreditation at the end of next month, jeopardizing residency training programs at the hospital, officials familiar with the group's report said yesterday.
Inspectors from the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care Organizations cited deficiencies that included fire hazards in the aging, sprawling Brooklyn medical center and inadequate quality controls in several medical departments, particularly radiology.


Georgia-Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Figgie International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cadmus Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Caere Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Why U.S. Grew Less Wheat Last Year
To the Editor:
I share Frederick S. Lightfoot's concern about the deterioration of the world environment in "Protectionism Not Root of Wheat Loss" (letter, Jan. 16).
However, I find him misleading.
The approximately 30 percent reduction in United States wheat production in 1991 against 1990 was due not only to drought and excessive temperatures but also to a more than 10 percent decline in the area planted.
The acreage reduction was determined primarily by Government policy.
The policy was influenced by low United States wheat exports, which were in part a consequence of European farm subsidies.


Ex-Producer Sues Manager of New Kids
The former music director of New Kids on the Block has filed a lawsuit against the group's founder for breach of contract, and has charged that the group was involved in musical fakery.
The former director, Gregory McPherson, who also produced the group's records for two years, is suing Maurice Starr, who founded the group in 1984 and manages it but is not a member of it, for creative infringement and breach of contract.
Mr.
McPherson says in the suit, which was filed last week in Massachusetts Superior Court in Boston, that he should have received 2 percent of what was probably at least $20 million in gross revenues from the group's "Hanging Tough Live" video, but that he has received nothing.


Schult Homes Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to DEc 28


Imperial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


EXECUTIVES
*
Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Co., New York, named Kyosuke Hashimoto partner of the firm and head of its Tokyo office.
He is the first partner to be based outside the United States. *
First American Corp., Nashville, named Robert A. McCabe Jr. president of the general bank division of its First American National Bank unit, John W. Boyle Jr. president of its corporate bank division and Robert E. McNeilly Jr. president of its First American Trust Co. unit. *
Gulfstream Aerospace Corp., Savannah, Ga., a unit of Forstmann Little &amp; Co., named William C. Lowe chief executive.
He will retain the positions of president and chief operating officer.
*
Himont Inc., New York, a plastics manufacturing unit of Montedison Group named Italo Trapasso chairman, succeeding Alexander F. Giacco, who resigned. *
Microsoft Corp., Redmond, Wash., named Jeff Raikes senior vice president-U.S. sales, marketing and service, succeeding Scott Oki, who will retire. *
MCA Records, Universal City, Calif., a unit of MCA Inc., appointed Bruce Tenenbaum senior vice president-promotion.  *
The Outlander Group, New York, a unit of the Leslie Fay Companies Inc., appointed Leonard Feinberg chairman, a new position. *
Ponce Federal Bank, F.S.B., Ponce, P. R., named Hans H. Hertell vice chairman and chief executive and Rafael Blanco president and chief operating officer.
Raytheon Co., Lexington, Mass., named Sheldon Rutstein chief financial officer, a new position.
He retains the titles senior vice president and controller. *
Rollins Burdick Hunter Group, Chicago, the commercial insurance unit of Aon Corp., named Timothy J. Danis senior vice president. *
Seagate Technology, Scotts Valley, Calif., appointed Robert A. Kundtz senior vice president-administration. *
Sterling Winthrop Inc., New York, a pharmaceutical and consumer health products manufacturer, named Christopher J. Coughlin chief financial officer, succeeding George S. Benjamin, who retired.


Quality Food Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Philip Morris Income Falls Because of Special Charges
The Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that its fourth-quarter net income fell 12.8 percent, to $767 million, because of charges related to an accounting change and the costs of revamping its worldwide food operations.
Excluding the charges, the tobacco and food company's quarterly profits jumped 21 percent from the period a year ago, to $1.06 billion.


Fed Chief Won't Back Tax Cuts
Saying he expected the economy to recover in the second quarter, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, told Congress today that he did not think the White House and Congress needed to cut taxes to lift the economy.
A day after President Bush disclosed a tax-cut package to stimulate the economy, Mr.
Greenspan, the Government official with the most influence over the economy, told the Senate Banking Committee that he feared that all the competing stimulus proposals now circulating on Capitol Hill would be added together and end up pushing up the budget deficit and long-term interest rates.


ILC Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Cuomo Cancels 4-Day Trip to Switzerland
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today canceled a four-day trip to Switzerland where he was to address a gathering of economists this weekend.
It was the second time in the last year and a half that Mr.
Cuomo has put off a trip to Europe.
In the fall of 1990, he bowed out of a planned visit to Poland, where he was to present a collection of Lincoln speeches and writings translated into Polish.


Wesbanco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Belo (A.H.) Corp.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mavericks in Turmoil
The Dallas Mavericks, losers of 13 of their last 14 games, are taking it out on each other.
Yesterday, the team suspended center JAMES DONALDSON for one game without pay for fighting with guard ROLANDO BLACKMAN during a scrimmage on Tuesday.
The chief casualty in the fight was guard DEREK HARPER, who received two scratches under his eye while trying to break up the scuffle. (AP)


Review/Fashion; Saint Laurent Finds Beauty In Perfect Cut
Caught between the glories of its past and the uncertainties of its future, the haute couture industry has been presenting a fragmented image in the showings of its spring and summer collections this week.
Forgetting that fashion is based on change, some couturiers are reliving their past successes and others are marching in place, while a few are showing eccentric clothes.
Discussions are going on at every level as to whether the rules for acceptance to the Chambre Syndicale de la Couture Parisienne should be changed, as if that will solve everything.
Twenty-one designers are members of the government-supported group that organizes the haute couture industry and schedules its twice-yearly showings.


Piper Jaffray Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


'L.A. Law,' to Halt Slide, Reaches Back to Bochco
Steven Bochco, who created the hit NBC series "L.A. Law," will return to an active role in the production of the show in an effort to resurrect the show's popularity.
He will be assisted by David E. Kelley, who succeeded him as executive producer of the series but left at the end of last season.
Mr.
Kelley won the Emmy Award as the best drama writer in television the last two seasons for his work on "L.A. Law."


Coachmen Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Next Chief Is Picked By Northeast Utilities
Northeast Utilities has named its president and chief operating officer, Bernard M. Fox, to succeed William B. Ellis as chief executive in July 1993.
The announcement marks the start of a long succession process for New England's largest utility; Mr.
Ellis will continue as chairman until he retires in 1995.
Mr.
Ellis, 51 years old, said the announcement was made 17 months early in part to lock in Mr.
Fox as his successor.
Mr.
Ellis said he was concerned that Mr.
Fox would have been recruited to lead another company if Mr.
Ellis had not made his early retirement official.
Mr.
Ellis also noted that in 1993 he will have been president or chairman for 15 years.
"I wanted to give the company a break," he said.
Mr.
Fox, 49, was unavailable for comment.


Mylan Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corestates Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Haiti: Tighten the Embargo
Rampaging military hard-liners have torpedoed a promising Haitian political compromise mediated by the Organization of American States.
As a result more Haitians are dying, more are fleeing for their lives, and the eventual task of reconstruction has been made more difficult.
The hard-liners seem unlikely to permit any settlement unless forced to by a more stringent regional economic embargo.
The embargo was imposed by the O.A.S. in the aftermath of the Sept. 30, 1991, military coup against Haiti's first freely elected President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Though it applied only to Western Hemisphere countries, the embargo was effective at first.
By late November, critical supplies of gasoline were nearly exhausted.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Patch of Mid-America Not Impressed by Bush Talk
Theoretically, this quaint patch of middle America should be a Republican President's dream.
It is 4.5 square miles of well-educated, white-collar, voting literate types who read the Op-Ed pages, who can cite Keynesian theory and who keep up with the minutest changes in the tax law.
When President Bush speaks of lowering the capital gains tax or making it easier to withdraw from individual retirement accounts, he is talking to Oak Park.


Accounts
*
Hyundai Electronics Asia, Singapore, to BSB Singapore, the office in that country of Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Andre Prost Inc., Old Saybrook, Conn., to Holland Advertising, New York, for two of its brands, Kjeldsen butter cookies and Odense marzipan and almond paste.
Billings were not disclosed.


Keeping Up a Tradition In Giving to the Neediest
An editorial published during the first campaign in 1912 defined the purpose of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund: "not giving, but elevating into self-support and self-respect." As it has achieved that goal, the names of the poor, sick and disabled New Yorkers it benefits have changed from year to year.
But a large measure of the fund's success has been the continuity of those contributors who have made a tradition of pulling up those who have fallen into need.
"This is my 70th straight year of contributing to your wonderful fund," Virginia Miles of Englewood, N.J., wrote in a note with $100.
"I began when I was a small child by contributing my entire holdings, 10 cents."


Smith's Food &amp; Drug Centers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Valero Natural Gas Part.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Alltel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INDIA ANNOUNCES FULL ISRAELI TIES
In another step in its changing approach to the rest of the world, India announced today that it was establishing full diplomatic relations with Israel.
For several weeks India has expressed a desire to take part in the Middle East peace talks, the latest round of which ended today in Moscow.
Israel said that India's presence would not be possible until full recognition by the New Delhi Government had been granted.


Market Place; Doubts Trail Sun Microsystems
Sun Microsystems, the enfant terrible of the computer industry, turns 10 years old next month.
Throughout its short life people have always predicted that the fast-growing company, whose young executives frequently thumb their noses at older, stodgier computer companies, would stumble.
But except for one quarterly loss in 1989, Sun has kept on growing and is now approaching $4 billion in annual revenue.
But questions are again being raised about whether Sun can keep its perch atop the intensely competitive market for work stations, desktop computers that generally offer more power than personal computers.
Work stations are used by engineers, researchers and scientists who need to manipulate large amounts of data and numbers.
Profits Rise but Stock Falls


Caribbean Tourism Account Is Awarded
McCaffrey &amp; McCall in New York was named yesterday as the first agency for the Caribbean Tourism Organization, a marketing group representing 28 Caribbean countries including Aruba, Barbados and Jamaica.
Michael Youngman, the organization's marketing director, said that 29 agencies participated in the account review.
The other finalists were Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, and Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.


Term Starts At Campus Hit by PCB's
With sections of the campus cordoned off because of PCB contamination, students began returning to the State University of New York here today for the spring semester.
For many, the usual excitement was replaced by anxiety, confusion and anger.
Some students, like Tracy Wolf, a freshman, were still dealing with the loss of their possessions.
They were contaminated last month when a power surge caused electrical transformers containing PCB's in several campus buildings, including two dormitories, to overheat.


Deal for Orion Is Revised
The Orion Pictures Corporation yesterday disclosed a revised plan for the New Line Cinema Corporation and the Metromedia Company to take over the ailing Orion.
The new plan offered bondholders a more favorable package and required Orion to pay New Line a fee if it should agree to a bid from another company.
Several bidders are rumored to be considering offers for Orion, most notably, Turner Broadcasting System, but no firm bid has emerged.


Detection Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tax Nominees Backed
The Senate Finance Committee, in a briefhearing today, approved the nominations of Shirley D. Peterson as Commissioner of Internal Revenue and Fred T. Goldberg Jr. to be Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Tax Policy.
A confirmation vote by the Senate is expected within the next several days.


People
*
Jon P. Kraushar has been named president of Ailes Communications Inc. in New York, succeeding Raymond Kraftson, who resigned.
Mr.
Kraushar had been president of Ailes's corporate communications group. *
Ella Strubel, senior vice president of the corporate affairs department of the Leo Burnett Co., Chicago, has been promoted to executive vice president.


Review/Theater; Stoppard In Russian From Israel
"Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead," Tom Stoppard's virtuosic play on "Hamlet," vaults a time and language barrier in the Gesher Theater Company production, performed in Russian, through Sunday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
While retaining its essence as an existential comedy about a pair of classic outsiders caught up in the confusion at Elsinore, the play gains new relevance in this production and in the light of recent political turmoil in the former Soviet Union.
This refreshing, swift-paced version of Mr.
Stoppard's youthful travesty is directed by Yevgeny Arye, leading an Israeli company of emigre Russian actors.
Simultaneous translation back into English is provided over headsets, adding a further Stoppardian twist to the multi-cultural experience.


Household to Cut Back Its Commercial Lending
In an announcement that caught Wall Street off guard, the Household International Inc. said today that because of continued high losses it was shutting down much of its commercial finance operation.
Among the businesses to be eliminated are lending for commercial real estate, leveraged buyouts and higher-risk companies.
Even though Household will be abandoning those businesses to focus on its mainstay consumer finance operation, the company, based in Prospect Heights, Ill., said it expected loan losses to continue to mount.


Are Champagne Prices in Store for Beer?
The local economy may be a mess, crime a constant threat and living costs still ruinous, but one of New York City's consolations has been some of the nation's kinder prices for beer.
Now, the nation's largest beer producer is pitted against the city's independent beer distributors in a battle whose outcome, the distributors and city officials say, could create a wholesaling monopoly and raise prices by a dollar or more a case.
Anheuser-Busch Companies Inc., which supplies more than half of the city's beer, added a dollar a case on Monday to wholesale prices statewide on its most popular brands.
The company will issue rebates only to those retailers who buy all their Budweiser and other company brands directly from the company's four franchised wholesalers.


CHRONICLE
For Judge GUSTIN L. REICHBACH, receiving an award from the New York State Bar Association yesterday was a bittersweet milestone in his career on the city bench.
The David S. Michaels Award for "courageous efforts in promoting integrity in the criminal justice system" was given to him for having distributed condoms and information on AIDS to prostitutes and other people brought before him in Criminal Court in Manhattan and Brooklyn.
But last fall he was transferred to Civil Court in Brooklyn, a move he says was motivated by his efforts to fight AIDS.


Review/Film; A Variation on the Oedipus Theme
European film makers are restless these days.
They are roaming the world in search of something, though exactly what remains unclear.
Possibly financial backing, maybe subject matter, perhaps something to believe in.
Wim Wenders took his cast and crew through seven countries before finally settling down in Australia to conclude his enjoyably peripatetic new-age comedy, "Until the End of the World."
Volker Schlondorff displays the same itch in his "Voyager," which was shot in Mexico, France, Italy, the United States and Greece.
The new film, opening today at the Lincoln Plaza, is no less new age than Mr.
Wenders's, though it considers the world in terms that evoke classic Greek tragedy rather than Jean-Luc Godard.
The multi-national auspices behind these films, and the variety of locations in which they were shot, appear to reflect an increasing rootlessness within the European film industry.
As recent political and economic upheavals are evident in the manner in which the movies are made, the conditions are also manifest in the concerns expressed in the films themselves.
Politics and party lines are to be avoided.
They may be out of date next week.
In some ways, Mr.
Wenders, Mr.
Schlondorff and other European film makers today appear to be as uncertain as the characters within their films.
"Voyager," directed by Mr.
Schlondorff and adapted by Rudy Wurlitzer from the 1957 Max Frisch novel, "Homo Faber," is about nothing less than fate and predestination as they operate in the curious story of Walter Faber (Sam Shepard).
The film is a modern variation on the Oedipus myth, recalled in flashbacks within flashbacks that start in June 1957, at the airport in Athens.
Walter, an engineer who works with the United Nations, is a man who travels light or, as he tells someone: "Three or four days with a woman is the absolute maximum. After that I dissimulate."
He recalls his student days in Switzerland, just before World War II, when he abandoned Hannah (Barbara Sukowa), his pregnant lover, to return to the United States.
He had told himself that he wasn't being a cad.
Hannah had promised to get an abortion and his best friend, a German student named Joachim (August Zirner), had promised to look out for her.
Some years later, in another flashback, he remembers hearing that Joachim and Hannah had married, had a child and divorced.
Still later he remembers taking a ship from New York to France and meeting Sabeth (Julie Delpy), a spectacularly pretty and sweet young student with whom he falls in love, at least in part because she reminds him of Hannah.
What with all of Walter's musing on the soundtrack about probability and coincidence, the audience is alerted to the truth about Sabeth's parentage long before it dawns on Walter.
He only catches on after he and Sabeth have had an idyllic motor tour across the continent, and Walter is about to deliver the young woman to her mother in Greece.
In the film's abrupt and rather brutal conclusion, the gods intervene to punish Walter for his earlier transgression.
The man of technology and science is brought to heel by laws that have nothing to do with his universe.
All of this plays with a lot more intelligence than you might expect.
The English dialogue often sounds as if it had been translated from something else, but there is an engaging leisureliness, almost a lassitude, about the pace that invites contemplation.
Walter, as played by Mr.
Shepard, is seriously eccentric and self-aware.
He's a character of some stature.
So is Sabeth.
Because Miss Delpy is a most attractive actress, the love affair takes on such weight and meaning that the inevitable revelation seems an arbitrary intrusion by a doomily schematic plot.
It also seems to be worlds away from the world in which the film was made.
"Voyager" has been handsomely photographed in all sorts of exotic locations, though it might have been just as effective if shot in two or three fewer countries.
It is well acted by Mr.
Shepard and Miss Delpy, and is full of moments so particular and odd that they invite belief.
Yet its tale of fate and predestination seems, at last, to be not timeless but absurd.
"Voyager," which has been rated PG-13 (Parents Strongly Cautioned), deals with incest.
Voyager
Directed by Volker Schlondorff; screenplay by Rudy Wurlitzer, based on the novel "Homo Faber," by Max Frisch; directors of photography, Yorgos Arvanitis and Pierre L'Homme; edited by Dagmar Hirtz; music by Stanley Myers; production designer, Nicos Perakis; produced by Eberhard Junkersdorf; released by Castle Hill Productions.
At Lincoln Plaza, Broadway at 63d Street, Manhattan.
Running time: 110 minutes.
This film is rated PG-13.
Faber . . .
Sam Shepard Sabeth . . .
Julie Delpy Hannah . . .
Barbara Sukowa Herbert Henke . . .
Dieter Kirchlechner Charlene . . .
Traci Lind Ivy . . .
Deborah-Lee Furness Joachim . . .
August Zirner Kurt . . .
Thomas Heinze


Time to Rethink National Policies on Race; Place of Responsibility
To the Editor:
Bravo, Barney Frank ("Race and Crime: Let's Talk Sense," Op-Ed, Jan. 13), for saying that "people who assault, rape, rob or otherwise terrorize others are bad people from whom the innocent majority must be protected." So often the public has been fed the information he alludes to regarding the social causes of crime, and has been pushed to accept that criminals are victims of their environment and so have no responsibility for their actions.
Few come out and say, these people are bad.
Not only do liberals need to appear less sympathetic to criminals, as Mr.
Frank states, but all those attempting to handle the causes of crime need to recognize to what degree individual responsibility plays a role in creating a criminal.


CHINA SAID TO SELL PARTS FOR MISSILES
American intelligence reports indicate that China is continuing to sell missile technology to Syria and Pakistan despite statements by Chinese leaders that they are willing to curb missile exports, according to senior Administration officials.
Beijing has recently delivered to Syria about 30 tons of chemicals needed to make a solid-fuel missile and plans to deliver an additional 60 tons in March or April, said the officials, who added that the amount was enough to make a "significant" number of intermediate-range missiles.


Boris, Lend Me a Hand
When the "reactionary forces" in Congress recently voted to slash financing for President Bush's "perestroika" plan to privatize public housing and empower low-income residents to become homeowners, I couldn't help but notice the irony.
Today, Russia may be on the verge of the most exciting experiment in entrepreneurial capitalism since 1776.
The Russian Government is chopping away at the status quo with enthusiasm.
Meanwhile, the most stultified legislative bureaucracy since the fall of the Supreme Soviet -- the U.S.
Congress -- is resisting our efforts to launch a historic new war on poverty.


Tyson's Accuser Tells Jury of Assault
The 18-year-old woman who has accused Mike Tyson of raping her last July took the stand today and described what she said was a dream come true that turned into a horrifying assault during which the former heavyweight champion repeatedly warned: "Don't fight me. Don't fight me."
The attack, she said, caused her "excruciating pain," and when she wept "he started laughing like it was a game or something, like it was funny."


Tyson's Accuser Tells Jury of Assault
The 18-year-old woman who has accused Mike Tyson of raping her last July took the stand today and described what she said was a dream come true that turned into a horrifying assault during which the former heavyweight champion repeatedly warned: "Don't fight me. Don't fight me."
The attack, she said, caused her "excruciating pain," and when she wept "he started laughing like it was a game or something, like it was funny."


METRO DIGEST
REVIEWING BUSH'S SPENDING PLAN
By continuing the trend of shifting the cost of social programs to the cities and states, President Bush's budget proposal would aggravate the increasingly desperate fiscal plight of the New York region, officials from the region said.
B2.
NEW YORK CITY DINKINS BUDGET: CUTS ALL AROUND


Bills' Nicolau Follows Marchibroda to Colts
NICK NICOLAU, the Buffalo Bills' receivers coach, was chosen as the new offensive coordinator of the Indianapolis Colts yesterday.
Nicolau's former boss, TED MARCHIBRODA, was the Buffalo offensive coordinator until just three days ago when he was named head coach of the Colts.
Nicolau, 58 years old, and Marchibroda will try to rejuvenate an offense that established a league record last season as the lowest-scoring team since the N.F.L. went to a 16-game schedule, with 143 points, and a league-worst 1-15 record.


Analytical Surveys Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Midlantic Posts Loss
The Midlantic Corporation, New Jersey's second-largest banking company after the First Fidelity Bancorporation, said yesterday that it lost $81.3 million in the fourth quarter of 1991 and $543.3 million for the year.
That compares with a loss of $12.6 million in the fourth quarter in 1990 and a $195 million loss for the full year.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Weighing the Budget
The Administration will firmly resist Congressional efforts to use savings from the military budget to pay for domestic programs, as many Democrats want, Bush's budget director said.  [ A14. ]
Builders reacted with enthusiasm to Bush's proposal to stimulate housing sales.  [ A14. ]  Throughout the real estate industry, hopes rose that Congress would adopt a tax change.  [ A14. ]


Books of The Times; Growing Up Too Near Mother's Drunken Lover
Rose By Rose Boyt  201 pages. Random House. $19.


Islanders Can Still Dream
Here's a bizarre scenario to tease the playoff fantasies of Islander fans.
The Pittsburgh Penguins, reeling from injury and suspension, continue to slump from their current fourth-place status in the Patrick Division.
The fifth-place Islanders, gradually getting their injured players back, surge upward toward mediocrity.
In the final two months of the season, the Islanders overcome a 13-point deficit and overtake the defending Stanley Cup champions to secure the final playoff berth.


Review/Art; Paley's Gift, a Paean To French Masters
THE WILLIAM S. PALEY COLLECTION," which opens Sunday at the Museum of Modern Art, places before the public for the first time an extraordinary private collection. Its nearly 80 paintings, drawings and sculpture, the best of them by French modern masters, also constitute the most significant gift the museum has received in recent years.
On the short list of the high points of the Paley gift, which a museum spokeswoman termed "priceless," are Picasso's "Boy Leading a Horse" of 1905-06, a landmark on the artist's path to maturity, as well as paintings by Gauguin and Andre Derain that strengthen the museum's Post-Impressionist and Fauvist holdings.
In addition, a 1927 Matisse portrait becomes the museum's first real masterpiece from the artist's Nice period.


Leaders Want to Enhance U.N.'s Role
At the first Security Council summit meeting, on Friday, President Bush and other world leaders will ask the new United Nations Secretary General to propose ways of improving the United Nations' peacemaking role, including the possible creation of what would amount to a standing United Nations army.
To reinforce the pledge they will make to give the Security Council prime responsibility for preserving peace in the post-cold-war era, the meeting's participants will ask Secretary General Boutros Ghali to report by July 1 on ways of strengthening the United Nations' capacity for "preventative diplomacy, for peacemaking and for peacekeeping."


Syndicator Gives ABC Easy Fast Break on Profit
The future of network sports comes into a slightly sharper focus Sunday when college basketball returns to ABC at 1 P.M. with a doubleheader package of games featuring U.C.L.A.-Louisville and Kentucky-L.S.U.
It will dribble and quack like network college basketball.
But it won't be.
The games are produced by Raycom Inc., the Charlotte, N.C., sports syndicator, in what is called a time buy.


Triumph Isn't Flashy, But It's a Big 2 Points
There was truly nothing impressive about it, but the way the Rangers have been going lately, even a dullish victory still has some sheen.
They continued their unbeaten trip tonight with a 4-1 victory over the Los Angeles Kings at the Forum, but there was also this: It gave the Rangers 68 points this season and allowed them to pass the Montreal Canadiens for first place in the National Hockey League's overall point standing.
Richter Hurt
Mike Gartner scored two goals and Paul Broten and Jan Erixon one each for New York.
Goaltender John Vanbiesbrouck, summoned to replace the injured Mike Richter after the first period, held the Kings scoreless until Tony Granato's goal late in the game.


America West Air reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Foreign Affairs; Tomorrowland Glimpsed
Five years from now, historians will scan this week's events and say they snapped into focus, briefly yet sharply, the future of world politics.
That future was barely glimpsed in President Bush's mostly backward-looking State of the Union address.
But it was splashed all over the newspapers.
The news revealed a world where money is talking as perhaps never before.
Money power is dictating not just economic choices but political futures, from Western Europe to China.
Money is on the verge of being used with astonishing creativity to deal with conflicts in the Middle East and nuclear safety in the old Soviet Union.
Money is reshaping battle lines between nations and international corporations in maddeningly unpredictable ways.


Banking Regulation; All of the Oratory in New Hampshire Isn't Likely to Make Borrowing Easier
When President Bush castigated regulators in his State of the Union Message on Tuesday for treating banks too harshly and creating a shortage of credit, he sounded a theme also heard from Democratic Presidential candidates but rejected by the regulators and many bankers.
These latest election-year outbursts are unlikely to loosen the strict standards of the nation's more than 10,000 bank examiners.
Regulators still contend that failing to force banks to admit their mistakes would mislead investors and allow greater problems to fester untreated.


Testimony Begins in the Dahmer Trial


INSIDE
North Korean Atomic Accord
North Korea signed a pact calling for international inspection of its nuclear plants, but left doubts that it would admit inspectors soon.
Page A2.
Key AIDS Ruling by Judge
Citing the public's right to know, a Long Island judge ordered the estate of an AIDS-infected dentist to surrender records of his practice.
Page B1.
Adoption by a Lesbian Upheld
A Surrogate Court judge in Manhattan has approved the adoption of a 6-year-old boy by the lesbian partner of the child's natural mother.
Page B1.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL Rockets Hold Off Bulls


Allstar Inns L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Art in Review
Allan Wexler Ronald Feldman Fine Arts 31 Mercer Street SoHo Through Feb. 8


Dinkins Orders Deep Cuts In an Austere Budget Plan
Mayor David N. Dinkins put forward an austere $29.4 billion spending plan yesterday that called for heavy cuts for all city agencies except the Police Department in the next fiscal year while holding the line on property taxes through 1996.
"I won't be glib," he said.
"This plan does not contain much good news for New Yorkers in the short run. Someday I hope to be a good-news Mayor, presiding over good economic times."


Corel Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sharp Rise in Tokyo
Stock prices rose for the second straight day in Tokyo this morning on the highest volume of the month.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues finished the day up 465.38 points, or 2.1 percent, to 22,023,05, with 330 million shares traded.
At midday, the index was up 528.91 points, or 2.4 percent.
The buying rally, which traders said was linked to bargain hunting and futures-related trading, extended into the afternoon, pushing the Nikkei as high as 3.1 percent before backing off later in the session.
On Thursday, the index gained 195.41 points.


Reviews/Film; Learning to Trust Again As a Holocaust Survivor
In the cloyingly sensitive "Alan and Naomi," a stickball-playing Brooklyn boy is urged by his parents to befriend a strange, troubled young girl who is a Holocaust refugee.
The year is 1944, and Naomi Kirschenbaum (Vanessa Zaoui) has recently arrived from France.
Still suffering the effects of her wartime experiences, Naomi "has to learn to trust again," in the words of one of the film's many meddlesome characters.
So she does nothing but tear scraps of newspaper and clutch her doll, Yvette, until Alan Silverman (Lukas Haas) tries to approach her.
Eventually, she will declare that "Alan makes me laugh when I'm crying inside."
This breakthrough arrives only after a long and laborious courtship stage.
At first, it is only with the aid of a ventriloquist's dummy that Alan is able to engage Yvette in conversation.
But after a while, Naomi is talking, too.
She and Alan develop the kind of tender, budding friendship that places "Alan and Naomi" in the dread coming-of-age-film category, although it devotes equal energy to developing a kind of hothouse Brooklyn atmosphere.
"Eat
dat
with your pickled herring!" goes one line of dialogue.


Facing Life's Biggest Challenge at a Tender Age
At first, they sound just like teen- agers the awkward pauses to insure that they don't say the wrong thing, the almost palpable social discomfort, the exaggerated concern over blending with others, the "awesomes," the "uhms" and the "I mean likes."
But then, in conversations, something doesn't quite ring adolescent.
These young people seem too wise, too weary, too wary.
At a time when they should be concerned with pimples, pencils and passing passions centered on the latest unshaven, shirt-free rock band requiring mass adulation, these boys and girls know far too much about vincristine, Cytoxan, Methotrexate, Adriamycin and Cis-platinum.
They talk with the scarred openness of war-worn veterans twice their age about losing friends, limbs and battles.


Tyson's Accuser Tells Jury of Assault
The 18-year-old woman who has accused Mike Tyson of raping her last July took the stand today and described what she said was a dream come true that turned into a horrifying assault during which the former heavyweight champion repeatedly warned: "Don't fight me. Don't fight me."
The attack, she said, caused her "excruciating pain," and when she wept "he started laughing like it was a game or something, like it was funny."


Sounds Around Town
Punk and Poetry
Henry Rollins, Wetlands, 161 Hudson Street, Manhattan, (212) 966-4225.
The one-time front man for California's punk-rock magnates Black Flag and the current leader of his own hard-core band, Henry Rollins puts a great deal of his steamroller energy these days into words alone.
His spoken performances are antagonistic and funny, mixing verse with verbose diatribes on all manner of subjects, from feminism to political corruption to David Lee Roth.
He blurs the lines between punk and poetry, reinventing the macho pose with a vulnerable core.
Performance is Sunday at 6 P.M.
Admission is $10.
Female Identity
Boss Hog, Bikini Kill and Kitten, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J. (201) 798-4064.
Girls, girls, girls.
Each of the bands on this triple bill deals in some way with the female identity filtered through an alternative-rock consciousness.
Boss Hog is led by Cristina, who puts supermodel posturing in an industrial-guitar context.
Bikini Kill screams about being socially disprivileged against a primitive three-chord backdrop; Kitten is the side project of the Sonic Youth bassist Kim Gordon and the guitarist Julia Cafritz from the band Pussy Galore.
Guitar distortion, structural anarchy and sister power will reign supreme.
Tonight at 10:30.
Admission is $6.


MIYAZAWA ASSURES BUSH ON IMPORTS
Trying to smooth over tensions in the American-Japanese trade relationship after President Bush's trip to Japan this month, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa assured Mr.
Bush last night that Japan would make good on its promises to import more American products.
The two met shortly after Mr.
Bush arrived in New York for a special session today of the United Nations Security Council.


Review/Art; Paley's Gift, a Paean To French Masters
THE WILLIAM S. PALEY COLLECTION," which opens Sunday at the Museum of Modern Art, places before the public for the first time an extraordinary private collection. Its nearly 80 paintings, drawings and sculpture, the best of them by French modern masters, also constitute the most significant gift the museum has received in recent years.
On the short list of the high points of the Paley gift, which a museum spokeswoman termed "priceless," are Picasso's "Boy Leading a Horse" of 1905-06, a landmark on the artist's path to maturity, as well as paintings by Gauguin and Andre Derain that strengthen the museum's Post-Impressionist and Fauvist holdings.
In addition, a 1927 Matisse portrait becomes the museum's first real masterpiece from the artist's Nice period.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finances; Brown Avoids Doing the Expected, Even With His Own Money
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California has always been a politician willing to take the big risk and the contrarian course, and he manages his personal finances in exactly the same way.
Over the last 20 years he has accumulated about $1 million in land, buildings and stocks, which in many instances, though not all, are holdings well out of the economic mainstream.


Sports of The Times; Are 'Experts' Accurate This Time?
Fear is more acceptable than intolerance.
I am talking about the people who are uncomfortable about Magic Johnson's playing in the National Basketball Association All-Star Game and the Summer Olympic Games.
There are people who think Johnson should not be honored because of his bad moral example in saying that he contracted H.I.V. from having sex with perhaps 2,000 women.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Executives Give Bush a Tepid Greeting
President Bush told jokes about Boris Yeltsin and the Super Bowl.
He denounced "sweet-sounding quick fixes," "empty symbols and slogans" and "feel-good gimmicks." He tried out a new slogan for his economic growth programs: "It will work."
He even appeared before just about the friendliest audience the White House could find, the Philadelphia Chamber of Commerce, as he took to the road today to begin the campaign to sell his economic proposals outside of Washington.
Polite but Unenthusiastic
But having announced that he would hold his political fire until after the March 20 deadline he set for Congress to pass his programs, Mr.
Bush found himself restricted largely to a textbookish reprise of his State of the Union Message, without the oratorical flourishes of Tuesday night's speech or any of what he likes to call his "red meat" political lines.


Restaurants
Chelsea Central
Larry McIntyre, the owner of Chelsea Central on 10th Avenue, must sometimes feel like the coach of a successful minor-league baseball team: the better his team, the greater the chance his best slugger will be drafted up to the big leagues.
Of course, in the restaurant game the cleanup hitter is the chef, and in the last five years Mr.
McIntyre has seen some prize players come and go.
In 1987, Richard Moonan was recruited to create a refined American menu; he later moved to the River Cafe in Brooklyn.
Then came Tom Valenti, another ace with American cuisine, who left for Alison on Dominick Street in SoHo.
After him came Stephen Meyers from Le Bernardin and the Sign of the Dove.
He stayed until last July, when he was tapped by the Century Cafe in midtown Manhattan.
The current chef, Paul Zweben, who was a sous-chef at the River Cafe, follows an impressive roster of alumni.
Chelsea Central has a turn-of-the-century charm, with its long mahogany bar, stamped tin ceiling, tile floor, stained glass trim, Art Deco posters and cafe tables with bentwood chairs.
Tulip sconces diffuse soft light on the brick walls and white napery.
It's the kind of place you can go wearing anything from blue jeans to a business suit and feel comfortable.
Mr.
Zweben's menu combines traditional American fare and colorful contemporary creations, plus a couple of curve balls like duck confit egg rolls.
These crisp, light cylinders hold rich duck confit, scallions and ginger bound with a chicken mousse, all are moistened with a rice-wine vinaigrette.
Iced Pine Island oysters are an enticing way to start, as is the sweet-tinged onion soup.
Hummus, the Middle Eastern chickpea puree, is prepared here with white beans and garlic.
While the flavor is pleasing, this unnecessary modification leaves the puree mushy like potatoes, rather than faintly grainy as with chickpeas.
Little cornmeal-encrusted crab cakes are all crust and little crab.
But the garnishes -- salsa made of corn, fennel and basil, and basil-tomato oil -- are delicious.
Chelsea Central has a very well-rounded wine selection, with prices that match the food tab.
Among whites, you would do well with the sharp, clean 1989 sauvignon blanc from Silverado Vineyards ($19), or the 1990 Muscadet from Domaine de l'Alouette ($16).
Two of the many reds to consider are a 1989 Dolcetto d'Alba Cantina del Glicine ($20) and the 1988 petite sirah from Guenoc Vineyards ($20).
The restaurant's servers are casual but attentive.
The pace of a meal here is agreeable, too, never rushed or laggard.
Chelsea Central is the sort of pub environment in which you would want to have a steaming shepherd's pie.
My experiences with it were mixed.
On a first sampling, it was a rough, clumsy assembly of lamb chunks and carrots in a lackluster sauce.
A fellow diner ordered it on a second visit, against my advice.
This time it was totally different, with tender slices of lamb and carrots in a rich, well-seasoned lamb stock and sealed with chive-flecked mashed potatoes.
A third sampling (I'm tenacious when it comes to shepherd's pie) also was superior.
Take your chances.
One of the most consistently good dishes is grilled duck breast and buttery confit of the legs, with a cabernet sauvignon sauce.
A meaty sauteed pork chop comes with tasty red-pepper polenta, zucchini and sauteed escarole, while a nicely blackened Black Angus steak that is wonderfully beefy is served with golden-brown spatzle and spinach.
Red snapper is prepared several ways; in one, the fillet is seared until crisp and set over a bright mixture of bok choy, pickled ginger and portobello mushrooms.
Fruitwood-grilled salmon is enhanced with corn, black beans and potato pancakes.
Some desserts sound as if they were ordered for a birthday party at summer camp.
Peanut butter chocolate pie with chocolate sauce is recommended only for those who still have a peanut-butter-and-jelly habit.
Pumpkin ice cream in a chocolate coating is a diverting combination, and cappuccino creme brulee (I've had three at various restaurants in the last month, which makes it as a trend) is harder to swallow conceptually than literally.
The creamy coffee flavor is not bad at all.
Rounding it out are two winners: pear and apple crisp with vanilla ice cream, and a fudgelike flourless chocolate cake with creme anglaise.
One needs a score card to keep track of chefs at Chelsea Central.
But as long as Mr.
Zweben is in control, one can be assured of solid American fare that is thoughtfully conceived and prepared with generosity of spirit.
Indochine
When Indochine was last reviewed, in 1988, I noted that at this Southeast Asian hot spot in Greenwich Village one could expect a colorful downtown crowd, long waits for tables, indifferent service and provocative food.
Recent visits require some modification: few crowds, no wait for tables, languid service and still-invigorating food.
Despite its attitude problem, Indochine remains the best bet for authentic and lightsome Vietnamese and Cambodian cooking.
Like so many restaurants that have had long, successful runs, Indochine has let down its guard.
No one appears to be in charge of the dining room, certainly not the sullen hostess dressed in black who spent most of the evening leaning against the bar.
Servers were only slightly more attentive.
The long rectangular room has a tentative tropical theme, with palm fronds painted on the walls, greenery scattered here and there, dark green banquettes and white tablecloths.
Now that the dining room is not crowded -- at least not on the January evenings I was there -- noise is not a major concern.
Those who have been to Indochine in the last two, four or six years will recognize most dishes on the menu.
It rarely changes, which must be monotonous for repeat customers with inquisitive palates.
One standard that remains compelling is the sweet-and-sour shrimp in a sweet pineapple-and-tomato broth seasoned with tamarind.
This multi-dimensional creation strikes first with the sweetness of the pineapple, then yields to the sour elements, finally leaving the palate with an earthy tamarind sensation.
Another is fillet of gray sole, steamed in a banana leaf with sweet coconut milk and citric lemon grass.
Banh cuon are steamed Vietnamese ravioli, three big ones, stuffed with minced chicken, black mushrooms and bean sprouts, then garnished with more chicken and bean sprouts.
The ravioli are not particularly tasty by themselves, but they come alive when dipped in nuoc cham, the Vietnamese condiment made with salted anchovies and vinegar.
A light, satisfying starter is a simple salad of chopped chicken breast, cabbage and basil with a dressing of fermented fish sauce, sugar, lime juice and sweet pepper.
Everyone at my table attacked the sprightly little shrimp-filled dumplings that are wrapped in mint and lettuce leaves, then dipped in a sweet sauce.
The shrimp have some fire in them that is tamed by the soothing mint.
In contrast, rouleaux de printemps, or spring rolls, are a cool combination of rice paper rolled around vermicelli, bean sprouts, and mint with a peanut sauce for dipping.
A house special for many years has been the deep-fried boned chicken wings stuffed with vermicelli, bean sprouts, carrots, lemon grass, galangal (in the ginger family) and diced chicken.
The texture is delightful, but the stuffing could use more seasoning.
Once again a dipping sauce came to the rescue.
Another special is terrific roast duck, the meat juicy and the skin brittle, in an assertive ginger sauce.
Ginger also brightens cubes of grilled chicken breast sprinkled with sesame seeds.
It was difficult to detect any lemon grass in the sweet little pork spare ribs, but the house rice with it, studded with peas and shrimp, was hard to stop eating.
Indochine has a small, moderately priced wine selection that marries well with this complex food.
Prices are right, too.
The Vietnamese are not big dessert-eaters, although they do make some sweet fruit puddings and soups.
I doubt that one would find lemon tart and hazelnut mousse cake on a Vietnamese table.
Verisimilitude aside, Indochine's lemon tart is better than average, and its mousse cake is outstanding.
Fruit sorbets and ice creams are well made, too.
It is not so easy to recommend Indochine these days.
Those who enjoy a lively and affable setting might well be put off by the somber staff; on the other hand, diners who care primarily about the food might love it.
For now, it gets the benefit of the doubt, and the hope that the service shapes up.
Chelsea Central **
227 10th Avenue, at 23d Street, Manhattan, (212) 620-0230.
Atmosphere: Relaxing, publike atmosphere; low noise level.
Service: Casual, but attentive and efficient.
Recommended dishes: Oysters, duck confit egg rolls, onion soup, grilled duck breast with confit of duck leg, Black Angus sirloin, sauteed pork chop, red snapper with bok choy and ginger, salmon with corn and black beans, apple-pear crumble, pumpkin ice cream in chocolate, flourless chocolate cake.
Wine: List well matched to the food; reasonable prices.
Price range: Lunch: appetizers $4 to $7; main courses $7 to $13; dinner: appetizers $5 to $9; main courses $14 to $21.
Credit cards: American Express, Visa and Mastercard.
Hours: Lunch: Monday to Friday, 11:30 A.M. to 3 P.M.; dinner: Monday to Thursday, 5:30 to 11 P.M.; Friday and Saturday, 5:30 to midnight; Sunday brunch: 11:30 A.M. to 3 P.M.; Sunday dinner: 5 to 10 P.M.
Reservations: Requested.
Wheelchair accessibility: Three steps up to dining room; restrooms on same level.
Indochine **
430 Lafayette Street, between Fourth Street and Astor Place, Manhattan, (212) 505-5111.
Atmosphere: Long, open room with tropical decor; moderate noise level.
Service: Indifferent and inattentive.
Recommended dishes: Sweet-and-sour shrimp soup, spring rolls, steamed Vietnamese ravioli, fish steamed in banana leaf with coconut milk and lemon grass, salad of chopped chicken breast with basil, roast duck with ginger sauce, lemon tart, hazelnut mousse cake, ice cream.
Wine: Short selection, well chosen and moderately priced.
Price range: Dinner: appetizers $6 to $11.25; main courses $10.50 to $17.75.
Credit cards: All major cards.
Hours: Dinner: daily from 6 P.M. to 12:30 A.M.
Reservations: Requested.
Wheelchair accessibility: Several steps up at entrance; otherwise on one level.
What the stars mean: (None) Poor to Satisfactory *
Good **
Very Good ***
Excellent ****
Extraordinary
Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction primarily to food, with ambiance and service taken into consideration.
Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
The Times Restaurant Line offers capsule reviews by cuisine, price and location (in New York City and suburbs), published in the last 18 months.
Touch-line telephones only: 1-900-988-0101 (75 cents a minute).


Acting Chief Named for Transit Police
George A. Latimer, the deputy chief of the New York City Transit Police, has been named acting chief of the department, pending the selection of a permanent replacement for the current chief, William J. Bratton, who steps down today, the president of the Transit Authority, Alan F. Kiepper, said yesterday.
Chief Bratton has announced that he would resign from the transit police to take the No. 2 position in the Boston Police Department.


Dominion Textile reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Estate to Release Files of H.I.V.-Infected Dentist
In a decision that could influence the national debate over the risks of the public's exposure to AIDS from health-care workers, a State Supreme Court justice today ordered the estate of a dentist who died of AIDS to turn over records of his practice to the State Health Department.
In granting the request for the records of Dr.
Philip Feldman of Coram, Justice Peter F. Cohalan ruled that the public's right to the information should prevail.
He rejected arguments by Dr.
Feldman's estate that the medical records were protected under doctor-client confidentiality.


N.B.A. Does What It Does Best: Rebounds
As skilled at selling itself as any professional sports league there ever was, the National Basketball Association might market its 1991-92 season with the following slogan: Ya Gotta See It to Believe It.
Just when it seemed to be sailing on calm, crystal blue waters toward next summer's international N.B.A. clinic and shoe-sales convention in Barcelona, storm clouds suddenly appeared and dumped a torrent of controversy on the wildly successful stewardship of Commissioner David Stern.


Mental Hospital Closings Draw Few Cheers
There is a certain purity to the logic of the case being made by state mental health officials that half of the state's 22 psychiatric hospitals should either be mothballed or reduced in size by the end of the decade.
The state has a dire need to expand community services for the mentally ill.
But about 70 percent of its $2.4 billion mental health budget must be spent to maintain anachronistic hospitals that house only 12,500 of the estimated 185,000 New Yorkers with serious mental illnesses.


Leaders Gather in New York to Chart a World Order
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia last night joined a parade of world leaders gathering in New York for today's summit meeting at the United Nations, but diplomats said he was looking beyond a high-profile debut in Big Power politics to crucial talks with President Bush tomorrow on nuclear arms cuts and aid to his troubled homeland.
Three decades after Nikita S. Khrushchev banged his shoe on a desk at the United Nations, creating one of the most enduring images of the cold war, the leaders of 15 nations -- the permanent and temporary members of the United Nations Security Council -- are coming together in a new spirit of cooperation with an avowed purpose of shaping a more humane and peaceful world order.


Century Telephone reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
The music of ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER has not always been received with warmth, but rarely have remarks about it been quite so cutting as those made earlier this month by MALCOLM WILLIAMSON, the composer who has been Master of the Queen's Music since 1975.
Mr.
Williamson told a British reporter that "the difference between good music and Andrew Lloyd Webber's is the difference between Michelangelo and a cement mixer."


UJB Fight By Chilmark
Chilmark Capital Partners, a New York investment group, said yesterday that it planned a proxy fight for one or more board seats at the UJB Financial Corporation, a Princeton, N.J., bank-holding company.
Chilmark, which acqured 9.9 percent of UJB late last year, said it had retained Dewe Rogerson Inc., a proxy soliciting firm, to aid in the contest for the April 20 shareholder meeting.


THE FEDERAL BUDGET: Personal Savings; An I.R.A. Plan for Middle-Class Needs
It goes by the name flexible individual retirement account, but what President Bush proposed this week might better be described as a savings program for middle-income people.
"It's a misnomer to call it a retirement plan," said Stephen Corrick, a tax partner at the Washington office of Arthur Andersen.
"But it certainly is flexible and it provides tax-advantaged savings, and there's nothing wrong with that."


A Doff of the Cap to Cosell
The first time I met Howard Cosell he hit me with a tape recorder.
It was no accident.
I was in his way.
This was in 1962, at the New York Mets' first spring training.
Cosell, desperately swinging his 30-pound Nagra, whaled his way through a pack of reporters surrounding Manager Casey Stengel.
Cosell whacked me on the left flank.
He would not have cared if it were my head.
The welt eventually faded, as did my anger, replaced first by disdain for this storky, nasal, pushy radio hack, and later by admiration for his humor and intelligent doggedness in pursuit of a story, and finally by an enormous appreciation for the most important sports journalist of this century, and one of the most influential electronic voices of our time.


Coca-Cola Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wanda M. Jablonski, 71, Dies; Oil Expert and Newsletter Owner
Wanda Mary Jablonski, an expert on the international oil industry and founder of the Petroleum Intelligence Weekly newsletter, died on Tuesday at New York Hospital.
She was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of heart failure, said Edward L. Morse, the newsletter's publisher.


On My Mind; The Best in Him
The President gave the State of the Union Message the very best he had in him, and that is the saddest part of all.
Nobody had to tell him how important it would be to the nation and his own future.
He had said so for weeks.


Panel Sues Landlords To Protect SoHo Sites
Only a long view from across Canal Street fully reveals the bizarre anomalies of buildings like No. 375, on the corner of West Broadway.
Built as a home in the early 19th century, the shabby, four-story brick structure retains a charming, sort of Charles Addams-style black mansard roof with attic windows under cast-iron filigree.


Nassau's Bond Rating Is Lowered Over Fiscal Questions
With Nassau County's government locked in a stalemate and its celebrated Rebublican political machine in disarray, Moody's Investor Service yesterday lowered the county's bond rating, citing "substantial uncertainty" about its fiscal stewardship.
The rating, lowered from A1 to A, the fifth of seven investment grade ratings, remained one notch above ratings in neighboring New York City and Suffolk County, areas also hard hit by the recession.
But rating officials warned that the county's rating could be lowered still further.


Philippine Plan for U.S. Bases
The Philippine Senate has approved a law to convert two United States military bases to commercial use after American troops complete their withdrawal.
The measure, approved late Wednesday, will create a free port zone at the Subic Bay naval station and a special economic zone at Clark Air Base.


Review/Film; Sissy Spacek With a Lout For an Ex
"Hard Promises" is a barren little comedy that means to be romantic, set in small-town America where the lady next door bakes cookies, everybody knows everybody else and small children are full of snappy comebacks.
After a 12-year marriage, most of which he's been away, Joey (William Petersen), a good-looking, egocentric drifter, returns home in high dudgeon to stop his wife, Chris (Sissy Spacek), from marrying another man.
Joey didn't know that Chris had divorced him until he received an invitation to the wedding.


Colonial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Congress Expected to Pass Scaled-Down Energy Plan
Stripped of its most controversial provisions, the National Energy Strategy proposed by President Bush during the Persian Gulf crisis seems likely to pass this year, according to lawmakers, energy company executives and others.
The Senate version of the bill has been introduced again, minus the provisions on drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and on stricter gasoline mileage standards for new cars, and may reach the floor as early as Monday.


Topics of The Times; Post Yuppies
Is there a
mot juste
that categorizes the generation following the yuppies?
One writer pushed the term Generation X, without much success.
Now some shrewd New York journalist has come up with an apt tag for Americans coming of age in a country that is post-modern, post-cold-war, post-baby-boom, post-prosperity: posties.
Yuppie is an acronym for the young urban professionals of the affluent 1980's.
The word was a deft variation on Yippies, derived from the Youth International Party of Jerry Rubin and Abbie Hoffman in the yeasty 1960's.


Review/Film; Spoofing Movie Stars And a War
Of the two subjects being lampooned in "Into the Sun" -- the war in the Persian Gulf and vain, self-involved Hollywood movie stars -- only one is funny.
This film's portrait of Tom Slade (Anthony Michael Hall), a visiting celebrity at a military air base in Sicily, is its main comic attraction.
With his moussed hair, dark shades and ultraserious manner, Tom has arrived to study real airmen as he prepares for his latest film role, which only goes to prove that "Hot Shots!" was not the last word in flyboy satire.
When shown fighter planes, Tom says dismissively: "F-14, F-16, whatever. I'm not good with numbers. I've got accountants for numbers."


India Drops a Ban on Foreign Trademarks
In steps aimed at opening the economy further, India's central bank announced today that it was dismantling an 18-year-old law that banned big foreign companies from selling products under their internationally known trademarks.
It also ended an earlier rule that blocked the companies from owning property in India.
The developments came as Prime Minister P.V.
Narasimha Rao, who heads a minority Government and is pushing ambitious economic changes, traveled to New York to attend a special United Nations Security Council meeting called by Prime Minister John Major of Britain.


On Stage, and Off
Tickets at Bloomingdale's
A new price war in the theater has begun between the Theater Development Fund, which operates the TKTS half-price ticket booths, and, if you please, Bloomingdale's.
In the store's new partnership with Ticketmaster, America's largest computerized ticket service, customers can now buy seats for certain Broadway and Off Broadway shows at the store for a discount beginning at 10 A.M. rather than waiting until the TKTS booths open at 3 P.M.
The Nederlander Organization, which owns nine Broadway theaters, is participating, along with 13 Off Broadway shows that already use Ticketmaster.
Nederlander is the only one of the three major Broadway theater owners involved in the Bloomingdale's program; the Shubert Organization and Jujamcyn Theaters do not use Ticketmaster.
With what Fred Rosen, the Ticketmaster chairman, calls flexible pricing, customers will be offered discounts ranging from 10 to 75 percent, depending on the kind of full-price sales a show is having on any given day.
And this ticket counter is indoors.
"At Bloomingdale's you can use a credit card to buy tickets at discount," Mr.
Rosen says.
"At TKTS, you have to use cash. And there's more flexibility. If a really hot show is having a slow week and wants to offer only a 10 percent discount, they can. Why not let the producer decide the value of the tickets every day? We're just trying to provide more opportunities to go to the theater. This is about serving the public." It is also about good business.
The service charge will vary from $2 to $4 a ticket, Mr.
Rosen says.
The Theater Development Fund is outraged, even though the Nederlanders will also continue to use TKTS.
In a statement, the fund's president, David D. Holbrook, calls the new counter at Bloomingdale's "a blatant attempt to undermine the mission and good work of Theater Development Fund."
"The theater and the public at large have a stake in preserving the integrity of TKTS against splinter efforts such as this one to market discounted tickets for profit on a piecemeal basis," he says.
Because the nonprofit Theater Development Fund supports many of its programs with the $2 service charge for each ticket sold at TKTS, those programs may now be in jeopardy.
They include low-cost tickets for those who could not ordinarily afford them and the Theater Access Project, which has assisted nearly 90,000 handicapped people.
In the 1990-91 season, the fund accounted for 22 percent of all Broadway admissions and 13 percent of gross revenues.
Henry Guettel, the executive director of Theater Development Fund, says, "This unilateral action by the Nederlander Organization constitutes a real threat to T.D.F.'s programs in support of the theater and the growth of its audiences."
James Nederlander, the president of the company, responds: "It is not our intention to harm T.D.F. We're trying to make it easy for the customer by offering a flexible forum for discounting." Drama Behind 'The Extra Man'
"The Extra Man," a new play by Richard Greenberg, will begin performances at Manhattan Theater Club on April 28.
The play, says Mr.
Greenberg, who also wrote "Eastern Standard," is about an editor at a small publishing house, quietly unhappy in her marriage, who is seduced by one friend into an affair with another friend.
The play landed at Manhattan Theater Club after its tryout last fall at the South Coast Repertory Theater in Costa Mesa, Calif., only after much offstage drama between the playwright, the director, Michael Engler, and the star, Peter Frechette, all of whom contributed to making "Eastern Standard" a hit.
Although "The Extra Man" was well received in Costa Mesa, the playwright and the director had come to a crossroads.
"We were getting too complacent with each other instead of pushing each other the way we used to," Mr.
Engler says.
"Like a marriage, you have to reinvent a collaboration sometimes, say things you haven't said."
While they were saying them, Mr.
Greenberg's agent, Helen Merrill, called Mark Lamos, the artistic director of the Hartford Stage Company, first about the possibility of presenting the play there, then about Mr.
Lamos's directing it himself.
Then the phone calls stopped.
"I'm not sure exactly what happened," Mr.
Lamos says.
"I knew Lynne Meadow wanted it for Manhattan Theater Club. Richard and I had talked about what he needed in order to rethink the production. Next thing I know, I was sharing a cab with Lynne and she was doing it."
Mr.
Greenberg says: "Helen is a fan of having an interim production before a play comes to New York, for prudent, protective reasons. I know Mark wanted to do it, and for a while I leaned toward that, too. But a first production is a director's first draft. Michael and I were reinvigorated about going back and approaching it fresh."
Which, they decided, meant recasting, even Mr.
Frechette's role.
Mr.
Greenberg says all four actors in the cast were sent letters late last week breaking the news.
"It was artistic selfishness to recast," he says.
"No one did anything wrong." Victor Latino, Mr.
Frechette's agent, says he was unaware of the decision and had no comment.
Mr.
Greenberg is also busy with "Pal Joey," the Rodgers and Hart musical, for which he has rewritten the book.
Jujamcyn Theaters will present a reading directed by David Warren on Feb. 13 and 14 with Burke Moses and Judy Blazer.
Singing the Bradys' Praises
The theater could use a few more promoters like Ron Delsener.
The rock impresario, who has presented everyone from Simon and Garfunkel in Central Park to the Rolling Stones at Shea Stadium, is also the executive producer of "The Real Live Brady Bunch" at the Village Gate, in which scripts of the hit television show are presented as theater.
Recent ads have quoted Mr.
Delsener saying, "Absolutely the hippest, most hilarious show I've ever seen." The other person quoted in the ad is one Paula Vasallo, who happens to be Mr.
Delsener's secretary.
"I figure I have good taste, so I can tell people to go," he says.
"The 70's are very in right now. And I don't really care about critics. We did a survey and found that most of the people who come to the show are there through word of mouth. One review called it a bunch of drivel. So I used that in an ad that ran in college newspapers, and it sold. Kids love camp." Mr.
Delsener is betting they will love it in Los Angeles, too.
He and MCA are to co-produce a "Brady" show there in April.


Profits Post 18.1% Rise At Johnson
Buoyed by strong sales gains in pharmaceutical, professional and consumer products, Johnson &amp; Johnson said yesterday that profits in the final quarter of 1991 rose 18.1 percent, to $274 million, or 83 cents a share, on $3.15 billion in worldwide sales.
Net income in the final 1990 quarter was $232 million, or 70 cents a share, on $2.79 billion in sales.
For all of 1991, Johnson &amp; Johnson, the world's largest health-care company, said net earnings were a record $1.46 billion, or $4.39 a share, up from $1.14 billion in 1990, when the company wrote off $125 million, after taxes, on Latin American operations, primarily in Argentina.
Excluding the one-time charge, 1990 profits were $1.27 billion, or $3.81 a share, and the 1991 gain was 15.2 percent.


Time to Rethink National Policies on Race; Created the Problem
To the Editor:
From "Race and Crime: Let's Talk Sense" (Op-Ed, Jan. 13), it appears Barney Frank still doesn't get it.
Average Americans, especially conservatives, condemn liberal Democrats for being soft on crime because they perceive them as having helped create the problem.
Welfare, a liberal concept, has unfortunately helped destroy the black family in the inner city by acting as surrogate father.
There doesn't appear to be any incentive to stop births out of wedlock, which statistically appears to be the single greatest cause of poverty and its consequential criminal behavior.
Some of the solutions are going to be punitive and that, of course, is anathema to liberals.
RICHARD MERCHANT Cazenovia, N.Y., Jan. 15, 1992


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Democrats Anxiously Monitor Clinton's Strength
These are jittery days for the Democrats, as they monitor the vital signs of Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign and watch the horizon for signs of a new candidate.
One Democrat on Capitol Hill described it as "CNN emotions," the unending ripples of political anxiety in the party since a supermarket tabloid leveled accusations that Mr.
Clinton conducted a 12-year affair with a cabaret singer.


H. Gregg Lewis, 77, Theorist in Economics
H.
Gregg Lewis, a leader in modern labor economics, died last Saturday at his home in Chapel Hill, N.C., after a long illness.
He was 77 years old.
For 36 years beginning in 1939, Dr.
Lewis taught at the University of Chicago, where he was long the director of the graduate program in economics.
He was considered a principal member of the monetarist, free-market-oriented Chicago school of economics and was known among other things for his writings on labor supply and the impact of unions.


Reviews/Film; Spying and Strudel As Part of War Effort
In the elaborate wartime drama "Shining Through," Melanie Griffith plays Linda Voss, a secretary-turned-spy who cooks her way into the heart of the Third Reich.
This undoubtedly marks the first time in film history that a spy's career has been advanced by the fact that she makes great strudel.
Actually, Linda is not yet a spy at the time of the strudel incident.
But she is well on her way.
Hired by the formidable lawyer Ed Leland (Michael Douglas), of whom it is said that "he runs through secretaries like a bowling ball through tenpins," Linda quickly makes the right impression by raising questions about the letters Ed dictates.
When he makes reference to "sea birds," Linda has a funny feeling that he means submarines.
"Naturally, it set a girl's mind to wondering," she remarks in voice-over.
So Linda speaks up, expressing her suspicions in the kind of kittenish, bitsy-voiced manner that guarantees she will wind up in bed with Ed.
And, thanks to this film's earnest silliness and its high-gloss Hollywood romanticism, it's also guaranteed that the bedroom scene will feature torrential rain at the window and a blazing fire in the hearth.
Less predictable, perhaps, is the fact that Ed's involvement in American intelligence operations in Germany will induce Linda to try out a secret mission of her own.
The strudel, delivered fervently to Ed's door in the middle of the night, is Linda's way of assuring him that she can pass for a Nazi chef and is ready to be sent to Germany.
"Shining Through," written and directed by David Seltzer, is based on Susan Isaacs's better and much longer novel.
In Ms.
Isaacs's version, a zesty, wisecracking Linda marries her wealthy employer, John, after a torrid affair, while also attracting the eye of Ed Leland, John's partner and former father-in-law.
Only after the marriage fails does Linda gravitate toward Ed and decide to take up spying, partly out of disappointment and partly as a show of real courage.
Unlike the movie's cream-puff heroine, she bothers to get some O.S.S. training before taking on the job.
The film, which eliminates all this background and thus loses much of Linda's motivation, also lacks the snap and wryness of Ms.
Isaacs's story.
Most of its comic moments -- like the point at which Linda, dismissed by one Nazi for her lousy cooking, is immediately hired by another as a nanny -- appear unintentional.
Even when Mr.
Seltzer deliberately invokes Hollywood cliches, as he does with a "Casablanca"-style airport-runway parting between the lovers, his dialogue is a shade too sincere for ironic distance.
"But Ed," wails Linda, "what's a war for if not to hold onto what we love?"
What indeed.
This
war, at least in the film's terms, is for introducing Linda to a number of glamorous Germans and making her so impress them that one declares "Mein Gott, you've got guts!" It's also for embroiling her in intrigue that eventually leaves her making a middle-of-the- night escape in cloak and evening dress, Cinderella style.
The ultimate purpose of her exploits, and the device that frames the film's extended flashback, is becoming so important that she can appear, sporting a dignified hairdo and liver spots, as an honored guest on a television talk show.
Heroism need no longer be its own reward.
"Shining Through" could easily have been more spirited.
But it's still fun, in an extravagant, hopelessly retrograde fashion.
Ms.
Griffith's wispy working girl and Mr.
Douglas's sexy, sourpuss executive both seem derived from other, better films, but they play reasonably well in this setting.
However, Mr.
Seltzer's insistence on recalling other films both through Linda, who is a big movie fan, and through visual allusions almost never works to his advantage.
Brightening up the proceedings in "Shining Through" are John Gielgud as Linda's gruff, supercilious German contact; Joely Richardson as the young German society woman with whom Linda achieves a feeling of instant sisterhood, and Liam Neeson, as the unmarried Nazi officer with the bad judgment to give Linda her second job.
There are also such memorable touches as Linda's effort to leave a secret message inside a fish, her uncanny good luck at negotiating padlocks and locating secret documents, and her startling discovery of Nazi regalia in an acquaintance's closet.
When "Shining Through" has a bombshell to deliver, its touch is seldom light.
"Shining Through" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian).
It includes brief nudity as well as some profanity and violence.
Shining Through
Written and directed by David Seltzer; based on the novel by Susan Isaacs; director of photography, Jan de Bont; edited by Craig McKay; music by Michael Kamen; production designer, Anthony Pratt; produced by Howard Rosenman and Carol Baum; released by 20th Century Fox in association with Peter V. Miller Investment Corp.
Running time: 127 minutes.
This film is rated R.  Ed Leland . . .
Michael Douglas Linda Voss . . .
Melanie Griffith Franze-Otto Dietrich . . .
Liam Neeson Margrete Von Eberstein . . .
Joely Richardson Sunflower . . .
John Gielgud Andrew Berringer . . .
Francis Guinan


U.S. Allowed Some High-Tech Sales to Iran in '90
The Commerce Department approved the sale of $59 million worth of high-technology equipment to Iran during a 13-month period in 1990-91 despite other agencies' concerns about Iran's record of supporting terrorists and developing nuclear weapons.
An internal Commerce Department list of the approvals shows 90 contracts that received export licenses, even though the department has a policy of denying export licenses for the shipment of many of the products to Iran.
The products on the list include scientific measuring gear for electrical and telecommunications equipment, several types of computers, gyroscopes and oscilloscopes for measuring electrical currents.


Gannett's Net Down by 17%
The Gannett Company the nation's biggest newspaper chain and publisher of USA Today, said today that fourth-quarter and full-year earnings for 1991 tumbled, mainly because of slumping advertising revenues.
Fourth-quarter earnings of $97 million, or 68 cents a share, were down 17 percent from the $117.3 million, or 74 cents a share, earned a year earlier.
Fourth-quarter revenue was $901.2 million, down from $904.6 million in the year-earlier period.


Review/Art; Paley's Gift, a Paean To French Masters
"THE WILLIAM S. PALEY COLLECTION," which opens Sunday at the Museum of Modern Art, places before the public for the first time an extraordinary private collection.
Its nearly 80 paintings, drawings and sculpture, the best of them by French modern masters, also constitute the most significant gift the museum has received in recent years.
On the short list of the high points of the Paley gift, which a museum spokeswoman termed "priceless," are Picasso's "Boy Leading a Horse" of 1905-06, a landmark on the artist's path to maturity, as well as paintings by Gauguin and Andre Derain that strengthen the museum's Post-Impressionist and Fauvist holdings.
In addition, a 1927 Matisse portrait becomes the museum's first real masterpiece from the artist's Nice period.


Defiance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. SHIFTS POLICY ON HAITIAN EXILES
In a shift in policy on Haitian exiles, the Bush Administration said today that beginning immediately Haitians will be able to apply for refugee status at the United States Embassy in Port-au-Prince for direct resettlement in the United States.
The procedure, being used for the first time in peacetime for a non-Communist country, makes Haitians who believe they are in danger of persecution eligible for a new category of legal immigration.
The United States has similar programs only in Vietnam, Cuba and the former Soviet Union.


At the Bar; New York's Outstanding Young Lawyer Has Been Young and Outstanding For a Long Time
This week, when the New York State Bar Association announced its outstanding young lawyer for 1992, one might have thought some typographical gremlin was at work.
The winner is 63 years old.
The proofreader was not asleep.
Under the association's rules, lawyers are deemed "young" if they are either under the age of 37 or have practiced for fewer than 10 years.
In this sense Ree Adler, a legal aid lawyer in Buffalo who began her legal career in 1983, won with two years to spare.


Review/Photography; The City of Light At Night in the 30's
Ilse Bing's photographs from the 1920's and 30's, now on view in a delightful exhibition at the Houk Friedman Gallery on the Upper East Side, reveal an artist acutely tuned in to the rich European photographic milieu of the period.
Now 92 years old, Ms.
Bing has lived a remarkably full life.
Born and raised in Frankfurt, she studied art history before turning to photography.
In 1929, she bought an early model of the Leica, the miniature camera that revolutionized photojournalism in the next decade, and she was soon photographing for Frankfurter Illustrierte and other magazines.
In 1930, Ms.
Bing moved to Paris and embarked on an extraordinarily prolific career, working for such legendary magazines as Vu and Arts et Metiers Graphiques, while joining in the heady photographic experiments of the Surrealists and others.
She developed the process of solarization independently of Man Ray, the best-known practitioner of the technique, and applied it with striking results to photographs taken at night.
In addition, she regularly undertook fashion assignments for Harper's Bazaar and Schiaparelli.


Aspen Imaging International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shuttle Lands in Desert After Smooth Mission
After eight days spent conducting zero-gravity experiments, the crew of the space shuttle Discovery touched down safely today, completing a mission that officials called one of the smoothest in the history of the shuttle program.
Under clear, windless skies, Col.
Ronald J. Grabe of the Air Force, the mission commander, landed the spacecraft at 8:07 A.M., Pacific standard time, to cheers from a crowd estimated by officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration at 18,500.
The flight was the 45th for the shuttle program and the first of eight missions planned for this year.


Economic Scene; The Basic Conflict In Budget Policy
IN his State of the Union Message, President Bush highlighted the key problem facing budget and fiscal policy: that the American economy's short-term needs and long-term requirements are in conflict.
"We must have a short-term plan to address our immediate needs and heat up the economy," he said.
"And then we need a long-term plan to keep the combustion going and to guarantee our place in the world economy."


New Michelob Spots Seek Wider Appeal
The night used to belong to Michelob. Now, it is claiming the days.
An advertising campaign created for the struggling Anheuser-Busch brand by its new agency, D'Arcy, Masius, Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis, carries the theme "Some days are better than others."


Hidden Costs in a Military Cutback
President Bush's plans to cut military spending by deferring production of newly designed weapons may result in serious delays and higher costs when they are actually built, manufacturing specialists say.
The "design now, build later" approach that is being proposed by the Defense Department aims to save 35 to 45 percent of the cost of new weapons by designing them and building test models, but delaying production until they are actually needed.
The idea is to keep American weapons technology at the cutting edge without spending billions for unnecessary hardware, Defense Department officials have said.


China Sets Condition For Atom-Arms Cuts
China said today that it would be willing to discuss reducing its nuclear arsenal only after the United States and Russia had scaled down their stockpiles of nuclear weapons to China's level.
The statement, by a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Duan Jin, seemed to dismiss a call by the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, for France, Britain and China to reduce their stockpiles of weapons in response to disarmament steps by the United States and Russia.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.00
11.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.84
3.81
6.20
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.93
3.90
6.20
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.91
6.86
7.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.78
7.74
8.19
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.95
8.90
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.72
6.70
7.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


THE FEDERAL BUDGET: Incentives; Businesses Want Broader Measures for Research
President Bush's proposed budget contains several notable incentives to spur research and development and improve the nation's competitiveness, many executives said today.
But it stops short of the full-fledged effort that many business leaders say the nation needs.
The budget would increase Federal research and development expenditures, particularly for nonmilitary research in such areas as computers and biotechnology.
There are also some tax incentives for industrial spending on research and new equipment, but experts say these measures would have only a modest impact.


Time to Sing Plan B Blues: Looked Over and Left Out
Two years ago, Brad Edwards felt the way most National Football League players do when they learn that they have not been protected by their teams under Plan B, the system that attempts to allow more player movement.
"I was shocked," said Edwards, a Minnesota Viking then, a Washington Redskin now.
"I was such a young player and a relatively high draft pick. I knew I had been injured and missed a lot of playing time in Minnesota. I was thinking, 'They don't believe I'm any good. They don't want me.'


Mere Plug at the Wire's End: In England, That's Progress
As Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher set herself the goal of transforming Britain into a consumer society where the customer was king from a producer society where people had to tolerate poor products and service.
Britain may have greatly changed under Mrs.
Thatcher and her successor, John Major.
But as grumbling Britons love to attest, there is still a way to go.
Take electrical products: go into a store to buy an iron, lamp or toy train, and if you're lucky, the sales clerk will ask if you want a plug.
Many electrical products in Britain are still sold without plugs.


THE FEDERAL BUDGET: The Overview; Mood of Compromise Prevails on Election-Year Budget
President Bush's budget director, Richard G. Darman, went to Capitol Hill today to begin the yearly ritual of negotiating with Congress over the President's tax and spending proposals, amid indications that both sides might be willing to strike some compromises in this election year.
Several Democrats welcomed Mr.
Bush's proposal to impose some type of overall limit on the growth of Federal benefit programs, including Medicare and Medicaid.
Mr.
Darman indicated that the Administration would consider some changes in the budget agreement of 1990, which severely restricts the ability of Congress to shift money from one category of spending to another.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
ABC Television Network, New York, promoted Lawrence S. Fried to executive vice president and general sales manager from vice president for news sales; Robert J. Cagliero to executive vice president and national sales manager from vice president for special program sales, and James F. Wasilko to senior vice president for prime-time sales from vice president for sports sales.
All are new positions. *
American Health Properties Inc., Los Angeles, said Robert L. B. Diener, president and chief operating officer, had assumed the additional title of chief executive.
He succeeds Walter J. McNerney, who remains chairman.


Diner's Journal
Lebanese Traditions
Bright, boldly seasoned and salubrious fare -- at bargain prices -- is the appeal of the year-old Al Bustan, a cheerful little Lebanese restaurant on Third Avenue at 50th Street in Manhattan.
The owner, Elias Ghafary, used to manage the Al-Amir on Second Avenue, which closed recently.
When you are seated, the table is set in Lebanese tradition with a head of Romaine lettuce, olives, pickled turnips and other condiments.
Mr.
Ghafary is a most cordial and exuberant host.


Coca-Cola's Earnings and Stock Climb
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that its fourth-quarter profit had risen 22 percent, driven by strong sales overseas and a pickup of sales in the United States, and its stock jumped nearly 8 percent.
The company also said it planned to recommend a 2-for-1 stock split to its board at its February meeting.
The split, if approved, is expected to be effective in April or May.


Haughey Resigns as Irish Prime Minister
Besieged by allegations of scandal, Prime Minister Charles J. Haughey announced his retirement today, ending an era of Irish politics he dominated for more than a decade.
One of the most imposing figures in the 70 years of Ireland's independence, Mr.
Haughey was finally felled by recurrent attacks on him for corruption among his friends and acquaintances and the revival of a 1982 scandal involving government tapping of journalists' telephones.


Devon Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fiscal Balancing Act; Dinkins Is Seeking to Keep City Livable And Still Hold Line on Budget Costs
As Mayor David N. Dinkins explained it, his preliminary budget is as remarkable for what it would not do as for what it would do.
It would not cut hospitals, or police officers, or libraries.
It would not raise real estate tax rates, or city workers' wages -- unless there are improvements in productivity.
Gone are the Mayor's dire threats of last year to close the Central Park Zoo, darken street lamps and drain pools.
Gearing up for re-election at the midpoint of his term, Mr.
Dinkins tried a new approach: a sobersided smorgasbord of cost-saving proposals, stretched out over four years, coupled with a pledge that he would only be pushed so far.
Job and Program Cuts
"That's the challenge we face," the Mayor said.
"To make sure our government is not bigger than its checkbook, but maintains and in some cases even expands the core services that make this city a livable, humane place for the eight million people who have the privilege to call it home."


Topics of The Times; A Socially Significant Centennial
One hundred years ago tomorrow, Mrs.
Astor held a ball that lives in legend as the genesis of "the 400" -- the certified upper crust of New York society.
While there were several Mrs.
Astors in that era, married to heirs of John Jacob Astor, Mrs.
William Backhouse Astor Jr.'s calling card said only "MRS . ASTOR ." She was it.
The confection of a specific 400 was the work of one Ward McAllister, a social lion who attached himself to Mrs.
Astor as arranger and chief promoter.
For the ball on Feb. 1, 1892, she asked him to cut her guest list to 400 because, she said, only 400 people would fit comfortably into the ballroom of her Fifth Avenue mansion.


Accord and Discord On the Bush Budget
As the White House began the annual ritual of negotiating with Congress over the President's budget proposals, there were indications that the two sides might be willing to strike some compromises.
But on his tax proposals specifically, Democrats and Republicans were busy firing salvos at each other.
Democrats said their analysis showed that the plan would provide a windfall for the rich, and Republicans offered their counter-analysis.
Articles, page A14.


Daniel Parker, 66; Ex-Parker Pen Chief Led Helicopter Firm
Daniel Parker, a leader in business and government and the former head of his family's Parker Pen Company, died Tuesday at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston.
He was 66 years old and lived in Wadmalaw Island, S.C.
Mr.
Parker died of complications during bone surgery, said Gaylan Crowell, a vice president and director of marketing for Omniflight Helicopters, a company founded by Mr.
Parker.
Omniflight, one of the largest helicopter maintenance companies in the country, is based in Charleston.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Dow Chemical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Joseph Valiunas, 68; Favored Free Baltics
Joseph Kestutis Valiunas, a longtime leader in the independence movement for the Baltic states, died on Saturday at Southampton Hospital in Southampton, L.I.
He was 68 years old and was a resident of Southampton.
He died of heart failure after a long illness, his family said.


Craftmade International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Time to Rethink National Policies on Race
To the Editor:
In "Race and Crime: Let's Talk Sense" (Op-Ed, Jan. 13), Representative Barney Frank cleverly attempts to deflect criticism of the liberal Democratic record of silence and rationalization on black street crime.
But his argument for candor -- insisting that liberals, like sensible Americans of all races, condemn violent crime by black Americans -- would make of liberal blindness a mere exaggerated politeness.
Mr.
Frank fears that the liberal social agenda of welfare, public housing, job quotas and other set-asides intended to help poor blacks "comes to look like a form of sophisticated bribery," a pay-off against violence.
This disingenuous response reveals the extent of the liberal distortion of race in politics generally.


Creating a New Outlook Through Neediest Cases
In Annette J.'s gloomy apartment, sheets hang from the windows in place of curtains, roaches scurry up and down the wall and the open oven provides much of the heat.
But the Brooklyn woman said: "I am much better off today than I was a couple of years ago. I am also a lot happier."
Life may be hard now, but Annette J. can remember greater deprivations and years of cruelty.
The 21-year-old woman is looking ahead to a better future, in large part because of the help she has begun to receive in recent years from a Brooklyn charity: counseling, emergency food when times are tough and day-care services for her 4-year-old son when she has appointments.


Yeltsin, in Britain, Warns Of Peril of Russian Unrest
At a stopover on his way to the United Nations, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia warned today that his country could collapse into "general unrest" and authoritarian rule if its economic reforms failed, and appealed for continued help from Western countries.
He left with broad promises, but not with much that he could take to the bank, just like the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, last July, after his meeting with leaders of the world's seven most powerful industrial democracies.


Yeltsin's Ambiguity Persists: Democrat Who Rules by Fiat
Seven months since he became President of Russia and seven weeks since he led the dismantling of the Soviet Union, Boris N. Yeltsin remains an ambiguous and complex figure: a democrat who rules by decree, a populist who risks draconian reform, a public politician who defies easy classification.
Making his first visit to America as head of an independent Russia and heir to the atomic weapons of the Kremlin, he still carries traces of the clumsiness and inexperience that marked his first forays abroad.


DuPont Awards Given For Gulf War Coverage
Four separate broadcast news organizations won awards for coverage of the Persian Gulf war in the annual Alfred I. duPont-Columbia University awards in broadcast journalism, which were announced yesterday.
Silver Batons were awarded to Peter Jennings and ABC News for their "Line in the Sand" specials before the gulf war and for a children's special about the war; to Peter Arnett of CNN for his individual reporting during the war; to National Public Radio for its war coverage, and to a Dallas television station, WFAA, for its special war coverage.


Dow Rebounds by 19.90 And Closes at 3,244.86
Stock prices displayed some resilience yesterday, rebounding from the sharp selloff the previous day, but some analysts said the market was showing signs of weakness.
After a 47-point drop on Wednesday, the Dow Jones industrial average gained 19.90 to finish at 3,244.86.
Analysts said the bounce was typical after a big selloff, and some said they expected a pullback, adding that when the Dow set a record on Tuesday other indexes lagged behind.


California Prosecutor Investigates Breast-Implant Maker's Managers
The Los Angeles County District Attorney today opened a criminal investigation of managers at the nation's leading manufacturer of silicone breast implants, the Dow Corning Wright Corporation.
Acting under a year-old California law, investigators will seek to learn if company managers knowingly concealed information about dangers of silicone implants, said District Attorney Ira Reiner.
If found guilty, individual managers could be jailed for up to three years and the company could be fined $1 million, Mr.
Reiner said.


Studies Find a Family Link to Criminality
More than half of all juvenile delinquents imprisoned in state institutions and more than a third of adult criminals in local jails and state prisons have immediate family members who have also been incarcerated, according to figures compiled by the Justice Department.
Leading criminologists say these statistics are the first to be assembled that show how common it is for criminals to be closely related to convicted criminals.


Color Systems Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cairo Journal; A Play Pillories Arabs, Yet the Arabs Applaud
A savage satire of the Middle East, portraying Arabs as hypocritical and unwilling to accept the notion that their governments and mores are bankrupt, has shattered the norms of Arab theater and broken several social taboos.
The production, "In Plain Arabic" by Lenin al-Ramly, ridicules Middle East culture and politics, showing Arabs chanting slogans rather than discussing differences and blaming "Zionist, Western imperialism" for all their problems.


Lakers' Plans Still On
General Manager JERRY WEST of the Los Angeles Lakers said yesterday that the team still planned to retire MAGIC JOHNSON's jersey even though Johnson has alluded to a possible comeback.
"Earvin has not talked to me about playing again for us, so we are proceeding with plans for his jersey retirement on Feb. 16," West said in a statement issued by the Lakers.


BRIEFS
Debt *
GE Capital Corp. sold an 80 million European Currency Unit note issue due February 1994, valued at a little more than $100 million; it was priced to yield 8.55 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The company is the financing unit of General Electric Co.
Preferred Stock


Irish Premier Quits


Cleveland Cliffs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mayor's Proposal Would Raise Many Fees
Besides cutting services and raising new taxes on gasoline, cars and commuters' incomes, Mayor David N. Dinkins's budget proposal would also depend on new or higher fees for everything from picking up some doctors' trash to testing blood and urine specimens in city laboratories.
For the first time, the city would charge professionals with offices in residential buildings for picking up refuse that is now collected free as part of household trash.
The rates would range from $328 a year for someone dumping one to five bags a week to $1,172 a year for those throwing out 16 to 20 bags a week.
The offices could choose to hire a private trash collector instead of paying the city fees.


Higher-Denomination Coins Match Real Prices in Russia
Russia plans to introduce coins and bills in higher denominations because of the leap in consumer prices, a central bank official was quoted today as saying.
Arnold Voilukov, vice president of Gosbank, the central bank of the former Soviet Union, told the newspaper Trud that Russia planned to introduce 20-ruble coins in April.
The highest-denomination coin now in circulation is one ruble, worth about one cent at the Russian central bank's market rate.


Federal Agents Seize Etchings as Fakes
In one of the largest seizures of counterfeit art, Federal law enforcement agents have taken custody of 75,000 prints that were supposedly produced by Chagall, Dali, Miro and Picasso, it was announced yesterday at a news conference at the General Post Office at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, Manhattan.
Federal officials also filed a complaint in Federal District Court in Brooklyn charging the owners of the prints, Original Artworks Ltd. of Island Park, L.I., with having sold several million dollars worth of fake limited-edition lithographs, etchings and aquatints to galleries throughout the United States and Europe.


MAYO CLINIC IS SITE OF MURDER-SUICIDE
A psychiatrist visiting from Iowa walked into a friend's hospital room at the Mayo Medical Center complex in Rochester, Minn., early today and apparently shot the man to death as he lay on his bed, the authorities said.
The doctor then put the gun in his mouth and killed himself.
The two men had lived together on the grounds of a public mental hospital in Cherokee, Iowa, where the psychiatrist, Dr.
Ralph D. Laskey, taught, attended to patients and oversaw a 208-bed chemical dependency unit.


Pop/Jazz; A Drummer Rummages In Be-Bop Repertory
Paul Motian's drumming steams ahead only to slow down.
At times it seems as if his musical ideas break apart, falling into non-linear fragments; there's a sense of abstraction there that most drummers working in jazz simply don't have.
His style has aligned Mr.
Motian, who is bringing in a new band at the Knitting Factory tonight, with various avant-gardists over the years, from Bill Evans's legendary and empathetic trio of the late 1950's to groups with the pianist Geri Allen and the bassist Charlie Haden to his own bands with the guitarist Bill Frisell and the saxophonist Joe Lovano.


Mets Put Johnson in Center and Hope It's Right
What was once creative speculation has become certain strategy: Howard Johnson will play center field for the Mets this season.
And yesterday, in what amounted to his debut as a center fielder, Johnson was diplomatic, enthusiastic and almost convincing.


In Alabama, Blacks Battle For the Authority to Govern
Thanks largely to the Voting Rights Act of 1965, Alabama has 706 black elected officials, more than any other state in the nation.
But when two of them, Russell County Commissioners Ed Mack and Nathaniel Gosha, lost an appeal citing that law to the United States Supreme Court this week, it raised a vexing question: Can the law guarantee the right to govern in the same way it protects the right to vote?


Medical Aid for Palestinian Stirs a Brouhaha in France
The Socialist Government of President Francois Mitterrand found itself in the midst of a political storm today after agreeing to the hospitalization here of the Palestinian leader George Habash, whose Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine has been linked to several terrorist actions.
Mr.
Habash, who is 64 years old and suffered a stroke in Tunis on Monday, was admitted to a Paris hospital late Wednesday night.


Last Chance
Here is a listing of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon.
Closing This Weekend
"CRAZY HE CALLS ME," a play by Abraham Tetenbaum, starring Polly Draper and Barry Miller, at the Walter Kerr Theater, 219 West 48th Street, Manhattan.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: today at 8 P.M. and tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $35.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"CELEBRATING CALDER," a collection of 70 works, at the Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.
"COLOR ADJUSTMENT," a film by Marlon Riggs that examines the depiction of blacks on television from 1948 to the present, at Anthology Film Archives, Second Avenue at Second Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Today and Sunday at 6 P.M. and tomorrow at 4 and 6 P.M.
Tickets: $6.
Information: (212) 505-5181.
"MAD FOREST," a drama about two families before and after the recent Romanian revolution, by Caryl Churchill and directed by Mark Wing-Davey.
New York Theater Workshop at the Perry Street Theater, 31 Perry Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
All performances are sold out; returned tickets may be available.
Information: (212) 302-6989.
Closing Next Weekend
"DER FLIEGENDE HOLLANDER," by Wagner, Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance Feb. 7 at 8 P.M.
Tickets range from $20 to $110.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
"FIDELIO," by Beethoven, Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance Feb. 8 at 1:30 P.M.
The performance is sold out.
Information on returns and standing room: (212) 362-6000.
"TWO SHAKESPEAREAN ACTORS," a comedy-drama by Richard Nelson, directed by Jack O'Brien, at the Cort Theater, 138 West 48th Street, Manhattan.
Through Feb. 9.
Performances: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, 8 P.M.; Saturdays, 2 and 8 P.M. and Sundays, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $37.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


Sounds Around Town
A Side Order of Jazz
Bob Kindred and Gene Bertoncini with Sean Smith, Andiamo, 1991 Broadway, near 68th Street, (212) 362-3315.
Andiamo, an Italian restaurant near Lincoln Center, added jazz to its menu at the end of December and the music has proved to be distinctive.
This weekend and all next week, Monday through Saturday, the music will be served up by the saxophonist Bob Kindred and the guitarist Gene Bertoncini, a provocative teaming.
Mr.
Kindred is an exciting summation and extension of the great Swing Era saxophonists, and Mr.
Bertoncini's guitar is a subtle blend of jazz and classical sources.
They are supported on bass by Sean Smith tonight and tomorrow.
Sets tonight and tomorrow are at 9:15 and 10:30, with an added set at midnight tomorrow.
There is neither a music charge nor minimum at the tables, although the restaurant's full menu is served throughout the evening.
At the bar, there is a two-drink minimum.
Bill Doggett Is Back
Doggett Combo, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
Michael's Pub is becoming the home of early rhythm-and-blues.
After a November tribute to Louis Jordan, one of the originators of rhythm-and-blues, the pub is now presenting one of the early rhythm-and-blues stars, the pianist and organist Bill Doggett, with his combo.
Mr.
Doggett, who played both piano and organ in Louis Jordan's Tympany Five in the late 1940's and early 50's, later formed his own group with which he had several top hits, including "Honky Tonk," which sold six million copies.
He is making his first appearance in New York since 1986 with David (Bubba) Brooks on tenor saxophone, Bill Wurtzel on guitar, and Bernard Scott on drums; the singer Toni Williams also joins in.
They play tonight and tomorrow at 9:15 and 11:15.
There is a $20 cover charge and a two-drink minimum on both nights.


What Cable TV Is Trying to Do and Why You Should Care
To the Editor:
As Joshua Siderowitz notes in "Cable Company Adds Hidden Cost to the Bill" (letter, Dec. 27), installing individual descrambling cable channel selectors is only the first step in increasing the cost of cable television to the consumer.
This device will eventually permit a cable company to scramble every signal delivered to a consumer.
This will facilitate multiple-tier pricing, with "basic" service consisting only of local broadcasters and extra charges for satellite services ("expanded basic"), traditionally included in "basic" (CNN, ESPN, TBS, Nickelodeon).
Charges for "expanded basic" may then be increased with less scrutiny and resistance than increases in the new "basic" service.


No Headline


Art in Review
Kenro Izu Howard Greenberg Gallery 120 Wooster Street SoHo Through Feb. 29


Comshare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Report to Dinkins Urges Overhaul In Shelter System for the Homeless
A mayoral commission is recommending a sweeping overhaul of New York City's troubled shelter system, including rent subsidies to help the homeless pay for housing.
The rent vouchers, which would allow the city to take advantage of the surplus of rental apartments on the market, would be a significant shift in how government houses the homeless and would be part of a new approach advanced by the commission.


Review/Music; Picking Performances Apart for the Public
It might have seemed to a casual observer just an accumulation of detail.
At a master class conducted by Hermann Prey on Wednesday night as part of this week's Schubertiade at the 92d Street Y, the baritone's corrections to three young singers performing some of Schubert's Goethe songs were often specialized and precise.
"More accent," he would say in his own accented English, or "more bright." In the German word sehe (see), he would suggest "take more time for the S," or "in 'Wasser' make it a long W." "In rhythm!" he would urge, clapping.
Or he would patiently define the precise sound of the German O with an umlaut.
But while searching for the right expressive words, while singing in illustration, while gesturing in air or while approaching the accompanist and coaxing him into a phrase, Mr.
Prey was also revealing something else.
Watching him graciously dissect a performance was as remarkable an experience as listening to him put one together.


Russian Vice President Wants to Redraw Borders
In a nationalist broadside published today in the newspaper Pravda, Vice President Aleksandr V. Rutskoi of Russia said he would take up the cause of Russia's "historical conscience" and seek a redrawing of borders that would reflect a "glorious page" in the nation's past.
Although Mr.
Rutskoi did not mention the Crimean Peninsula directly, his latest statement -- another in a series that have put distance between him and his old running mate, President Boris N. Yeltsin -- threatens to sharpen an emotional issue that lies at the heart of a dispute between Russia and Ukraine.


Big Loss at UAL; $2 Billion in Cuts Planned
The UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, reported a loss for the fourth quarter yesterday that doubled that of the quarter a year earlier, and said it would cut capital spending by $2 billion over three years to strengthen its balance sheet.
United's loss was $252.6 million, compared with a loss of $123.5 million in the fourth quarter of 1990.
But UAL's shares rose $5.125, to $144.50, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, as Wall Street was generally pleased with the planned cuts.


Review/City Ballet; A Premiere Having Fun With Mozart
"DELIGHT OF THE MUSES," the New York City Ballet's long-awaited premiere choreographed by Peter Martins to a commissioned score by Charles Wuorinen, is a joke.
No, not a mistake, although some might disagree.
What Mr.
Wuorinen -- one of the most decorated figures in contemporary American music -- had in mind is a deliberate musical joke, incorporating a presumably serious tribute to Mozart.


Leonard Raver, 65, an Organist For the New York Philharmonic
Leonard Raver, the organist of the New York Philharmonic as well as a frequent recitalist and a champion of contemporary music, died on Wednesday at his home in Bayside, Queens.
He was 65 years old.
He died of AIDS, said George Cree, his companion.


Colonial Data Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yankees Stand By Howe, Inviting Him to Promotion
Steve Howe, the Yankee relief pitcher who faces a possible permanent suspension from baseball after being arrested last month in Montana on cocaine-possession charges, will join his teammates today at a promotional function in Manhattan that is expected to underline the team's support for the pitcher.
The 33-year-old Howe has been suspended from major league baseball six times for drug and alcohol abuse.
He would be likely to be suspended a seventh and final time if he is found guilty of the two Federal misdemeanor charges brought against him by Montana authorities after the arrest on Dec. 19 in Kalispell, Mont., near Howe's off-season home.
Daily Contact With Official
Howe, who is not permitted to leave Flathead County without permission from Jerrold Cooley of pretrial services, has been allowed to attend the Yankee fan festival at the Javits Center.
But he has been in almost daily contact with Cooley, who serves in the same capacity as a probation officer would for a convicted criminal.


A Better City Spending Plan
Mayor David Dinkins's new financial plan for New York City is a welcome step in the right direction -- toward the kind of lasting reforms that might finally bring the budget into long-term balance.
Even so, it has flaws that need to be addressed if the city is to have a credible fiscal policy to help it through this recession.
What's very right about the plan is its heart.
Despite painful cuts, it doesn't sacrifice day care, infant mortality programs, full-day kindergarten or other efforts aimed at helping those most vulnerable.


Nathan Skolnick; U.S.O. Executive, 71
Nathan Skolnick, a former executive of the United Service Organizations, died on Sunday at his home in Miami Beach.
He was 71 years old.
He died of cardiac arrest, said his wife, Theodora Fire Skolnick.


Collagen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A review in Weekend on Jan. 17 about the film "Juice" credited the screenwriters incompletely.
Ernest R. Dickerson's co-writer was Gerard Brown.


Influx From Ex-Soviet Lands Falling, Israel Says
As Israel presses the United States for loan guarantees to cope with a projected huge influx of immigrants from the former Soviet Union, officials here said today that the immigrant flow this month had sunk to its lowest in almost two years and could dwindle even further.
Jewish Agency officials attributed the reduced flow of immigrants to the acute difficulties facing those who have already arrived, cannot find jobs or decent homes and write back to friends and relatives in the former Soviet Union chronicling their tribulations.


American Biodynamics reports earnings for Year to Nov 30


Accused Police Officer Testifies in Teaneck Shooting Trial


TVWeekend; Jessica Lange as Willa Cather Heroine
Taking a cue from Glenn Close's triumph in "Sara, Plain and Tall," Jessica Lange has decided to do her own "Hallmark Hall of Fame" movie, and with the same director, Glenn Jordan.
Her vehicle is Robert W. Lenski's adaptation of Willa Cather's "O Pioneers!" It's on CBS at 9 P.M. on Sunday.
Although under 200 pages, "O Pioneers!" encompasses a sprawling story of immigrants settling in Nebraska in the final decades of the last century.
Cather's own father, of Scottish-Irish stock, moved his family from Virginia to Nebraska in 1883 when she was 9 years old.


Clinton's Private Life Serves as Distraction
To the Editor:
The surge in interest in the personal life of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who is campaigning for the Democratic Party's Presidential nomination, shows a disturbing trend in American politics.
All too often, the American public seems to identify a politician's competence or suitability for elected office with his or her personal life.
This unfortunate penchant for sensationalism, which much of the news media feed on, denigrates the political process and eclipses the pressing issues.
There is little evidence in history to support the view that with moral piety comes political effectiveness.
Winston Churchill, one of the great statesmen of the 20th century, was certainly no icon of piety.
His taste for liquor was well known.
John F. Kennedy's personal exploits did not prevent his rise to the highest elected office and place in history.


The Word's Turn: Urban Poets Re-emerge
A CREWCUT young woman, wearing only black, intones with a sultry, hypnotizing voice: "You moan with/the insanity of such/raw miraculous movements." The poem she is reading this night -- her own -- proceeds to describe an overwhelming sexual encounter.
The crowd at the nightclub cheers when she finishes, and then 5 audience judges rate her effort: she averages an 8, on a scale of 0 to 10.
A gangly young man prone to arm flails, her competitor in a surreal contest called a Poetry Slam, counters with a string of non sequiturs loosely tied to American malaise: "Zombies do well in an addictive society/. . . The Pope will let you kiss his ring but he won't let you wear his hat." His scores run from a 7.9 to a 10.
As the winner, he receives the $10 grand prize; but not before the contest host makes sure to remind the listeners that "the best poet always loses."


At the Movies
Recalling Dr. Lecter
On the one hand, Ted Tally was listening to a famous Hollywood producer.
On the other, he was thinking of Dr. Hannibal Lecter.
"I thought he was crazy," Mr. Tally said. "Not Lecter. The producer."
Mr.
Tally is a screenwriter.
Dr.
Lecter is a homicidal psychopath created by the novelist Thomas Harris.
The topic of the discussion between Mr.
Tally and the producer was Mr.
Harris's novel "The Silence of the Lambs," in which Lecter figures prominently.
The producer had just finished telling Mr.
Tally that the book would never be made into a movie.
Why?
"Because so much of the impact of Lecter in the book is in his mental processes and his thoughts and reflections, which, of course, you can't really dramatize in the movie," Mr.
Tally recalled.
By now everyone knows that "The Silence of the Lambs," directed by Jonathan Demme and starring Anthony Hopkins as Lecter and Jodie Foster as a young F.B.I. trainee named Clarice Starling, not only became a movie, but also one of the major hits of 1991.
Mr.
Tally wrote the screenplay.
Discussing his adaptation of the tense, eerie relationship between Lecter and Starling, who is hunting for a serial killer named Gumb, Mr.
Tally said: "A sort of streamlining always goes on in an adaptation -- eliminating minor characters, creating new transition scenes, changing the scene order, inventing new dialogue. But probably the most important single choice in this adaptation was trying to eliminate the multiple points of view."
"The book goes inside the minds not just of Clarice Starling, but of Lecter, of Gumb, the killer she is pursuing, and of Jack Crawford, her mentor at the F.B.I.," Mr.
Tally said.
"I thought really that the entire story had to concentrate on Clarice, that every scene had to concentrate as much as possible on what she is seeing and what she is feeling and what she is thinking. The heart of the story was between Clarice and Lecter, that strange sexual power struggle, that chess game between this young woman and this man -- this monster."
"The Silence of the Lambs" attracted popular and critical acclaim when it opened early last year.
It also attracted a number of accolades at the year's end, including the New York Film Critics Circle awards for best picture, best director, best actor and best actress.
And the film has left its mark on the career of Mr.
Tally, also a television and stage writer whose film credits also include "White Palace."
"It's been a complete sea change, I guess," he said, reminiscing about "The Silence of the Lambs." "I got more than 100 offers for other projects in the months before it opened and after it opened."
He has completed a script for Orion called "Nice Work," based on a novel by David Lodge that Mr.
Tally describes as "a kind of Tracy-and-Hepburn story for the 90's -- an unlikely sort of love story between a feminist professor and a sort of middle-management industrialist."
And he is starting work on the screenplay of "Before and After," a forthcoming Rosellen Brown novel .
"It's a very intense, powerful family drama," Mr.
Tally said, adding that Barbet Schroeder is to direct.
And there's one other thing.
"In the back of my mind," Mr.
Tally said, "I know that Tom Harris is finishing a sequel to 'The Silence of the Lambs.' "
Is Mr. Tally ready for another session with Dr. Lecter?
"I know everyone connected with this movie," he said of "Silence," "would sign up again tomorrow to do another if given a chance." A Busy Barkin
Ellen Barkin is heading off to Vancouver and romance with Robert De Niro.
We're talking movies here, not real life.
The busy Ms.
Barkin's latest project is the role of Caroline, the mother, in "This Boy's Life."
"It's great material, which I think is all too rare, and also a wonderful woman's role, which is even rarer," Ms.
Barkin said.
" 'This Boy's Life' is taken from the Tobias Wolff book, a memoir of a period of his childhood when he and his mother took a trip cross-country searching for uranium, and she wound up meeting a man from the Seattle area and ultimately married him. Basically, this movie is about this four-year period in his life, and the husband turns out not to be what he seemed."
In the film, to be directed for Warner Brothers by Michael Caton-Jones ("Doc Hollywood") and produced by Art Linson ("The Untouchables"), the husband is played by Mr.
De Niro, and the boy, in his early teens, by Leonardo DiCaprio.
Ms.
Barkin said that when the book was published in 1989, her husband, Gabriel Byrne, who starred in "Miller's Crossing," was reading it when he said, "Someone should make this into a movie, and you'd be great for the mother." Others agreed.
When Mr.
Linson and Mr.
Caton-Jones cast "This Boy's Life," they offered Ms.
Barkin the job.
She'll be in Vancouver three months.
Ms.
Barkin, whose film roles last year included the forthcoming "Into the West" with Mr.
Byrne, "Mac" with John Turturro, and "Man Trouble" with Jack Nicholson, says she knows what's next for her: "A rest." 'The Black New Wave'
Black film making will be the focus of attention at the American Museum of the Moving Image beginning Feb. 8, when a retrospective titled "The Black New Wave" will open with screenings of William Greaves's "Symbiopsychotaxiplasm: Take One" and Charles Burnett's "To Sleep With Anger."
Also in the series, to run through Feb. 23 at the Museum in Astoria, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Queens, are as "Jungle Fever," "Straight Out of Brooklyn," "A Rage in Harlem," "Boyz N the Hood" and "A Dry White Season." Among the film makers scheduled to introduce their films are Mr.
Greaves, Reginald Hudlin, who will introduce "House Party" on Feb. 15, and James Bond 3d, who will introduce "Def by Temptation" on Feb. 23.
Information: (718) 784-0077.


THE FEDERAL BUDGET: Real Estate; Developers Are Cheered by Talk of New Tax Rules That Would Offset Income With Losses
Throughout the real estate industry hopes rose this week that Congress would adopt a tax change proposed by President Bush that would aid real estate investment companies and improve market conditions generally.
The Administration's proposal would allow taxpayers active in the real estate business to offset taxable income with losses sustained in operating rental property they developed.
The losses include depreciation as well as cash operating losses.
One Executive's View
"This would help people who are in trouble, who are on the verge of foreclosure," said Stephen Driesler, senior vice president of the National Association of Realtors in Washington.
"If someone is hanging on, this may be all the equity the owner has in the property."


Review/Dance; Lubovitch Vignettes Set to Ives
Lar Lubovitch has assembled a scrapbook of American images in "American Gesture," the new work that Pacific Northwest Ballet offered on Wednesday night at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.
Not all of his choreographic snapshots are equally vivid.
Nevertheless, several are witty, a few are poignant and all are pleasant to watch.
Mr.
Lubovitch's choice of music by Charles Ives was shrewd.
Ives blended iconoclasm with nostalgia, and his scores quote popular songs, marches and hymns.
Mr.
Lubovitch is equally eclectic as a choreographer.
His ability to blend genres was evident at the Kennedy Center when Dirk Platzek and Edi Akio Taketa, from his own modern-dance company, filled in for injured members of Pacific Northwest Ballet.
No stylistic discrepancies resulted.


THE FEDERAL BUDGET: The Tax Battle  Divining the Winners; Again, Parties Squabble Over Who Would Benefit From President's Plan
President Bush took pains this week to present his budget as one that would benefit Americans across the income spectrum, but it has set off a war of interpretation over which income classes would gain and by how much.
The budget ink had yet to dry before Democrats, pouncing on an issue that has helped them in the past, were criticizing the plan as another in a long line of Republican proposals that offered unfair windfalls to the rich.


Art in Review
'Dysfunction in the Family Album' Diane Brown Gallery 23 Watts Street SoHo Through Feb. 15


North Korea Signs Accord On Atom-Plant Inspections
After years of promises and false starts, North Korea today signed a nuclear safeguards accord calling for international inspection of its nuclear plants but left it doubtful whether inspectors would gain access to the appropriate installations any time soon.
The long-awaited signing, which took place in the offices in Vienna of the International Atomic Energy Agency, was welcomed in South Korea and elsewhere.
But diplomats and nuclear experts cautioned that there were many problems standing in the way of inspections.


New Chairman Named For British Regulator
Andrew Large, chairman of the London Futures and Options Exchange, has been named chairman of the Securities and Investments Board, the agency that regulates Britain's investment industry.
He will succeed Sir David Walker, 52, whose five-year term ends on May 31.
Mr.
Large, 49, has been chairman of the exchange since October.
He also heads Large, Smith &amp; Walter, a London corporate consulting firm.


The Art Market
Barnes in Court
The controversial administration of the Barnes Foundation is now being legally challenged.
The assault comes in the form of a suit alleging that the trustees of the foundation, a world-renowned institution in Merion, Pa., that has a priceless collection of Impressionist and post-Impressionist art, have taken advantage of the foundation's assets.
The suit was filed by the De Mazia Trust, which was established by Violette de Mazia, a protegee and close companion of the founder, Dr.
Albert C. Barnes.
Miss de Mazia, who died four years ago, was a driving force in the institution, which she served as a vice president and the education director.
The Barnes Foundation, established in 1922 by Barnes, a patent-medicine manufacturer, to perpetuate his art collection and his ideas about art education, has always been considered an eccentric, exclusive institution.
Barnes, for example, was well known for refusing to allow important collectors like Walter P. Chrysler Jr. and distinguished scholars like Meyer Schapiro and Kenneth Clark to see any of his estimated 800 paintings and 200 sculptures.
Before his death in 1951, the founder made another unusual decision: he gave Lincoln University -- a small, predominantly black college 45 miles west of Merion with no track record in art education -- the power to nominate the trustees of the Barnes Foundation.
Both the foundation and its trustees made news last May when a lucrative contract was signed with Alfred A. Knopf to publish for the first time color photographs of the foundation's collection.
The holdings include 170 Renoirs, 55 Cezannes and 20 Picassos.
The deal was signed a month after the Newhouse Foundation made a $2 million donation to Lincoln University.
The head of the Newhouse Foundation, and the son of its founder, is S. I. Newhouse Jr., the chairman of the corporation that owns Knopf.
In its petition filed on Jan. 21 in Montgomery County, Pa., the De Mazia Trust charges that the Barnes trustees used the catalogue contract as a lure for the donation to Lincoln University. (Three out of the five trustees of the Barnes Foundation are also on the board of Lincoln University, and the fourth, Richard H. Glanton, the president, is the university's general counsel.) The donation, they say, should have gone directly to the Barnes Foundation, which owns the artwork to be catalogued.
The De Mazia Trust contends that because of the contribution to Lincoln, the Barnes trustees dismissed bids made by other publishers.
They say other publishers would have given the foundation a contribution of several million dollars but that their efforts were ignored.
Mr.
Glanton's response was: "That's not true. We had four serious proposals. We asked each publisher for a minimum of a $500,000 advance and only one publisher met our request." He added that Harry N. Abrams, the New York-based publisher, submitted the "second best" proposal.
But Paul Gottlieb, the president and publisher of Abrams, denies this.
"The Barnes Foundation had no idea what they would have gotten out of us," said Mr.
Gottlieb.
Mr.
Glanton said on Wednesday that Knopf had awarded the Barnes Foundation a $750,000 advance for publishing the collection, a sum Mr.
Gottlieb called "staggering" for an art book.
He added, "I don't really believe that's what the advance is."
According to Susan D. Ralston, the editor of the catalogue at Knopf, "$750,000 is an erroneous figure."
"The real amount is a private matter between the Barnes Foundation and Knopf," Mrs.
Ralston said, adding that the contract was for two books.
The first book, a selection of the Barnes Foundation's great works, is to be in bookstores by the fall of 1993.
While Mrs.
Ralston said that no writer had been decided on, a name that keeps surfacing is that of J. Carter Brown, the director of the National Gallery of Art in Washington.
Mr.
Brown announced his resignation last week but is to remain in the post through this year.
The second part of the contract is a catalogue raisonne that may be published in more than one volume.
Consulting with the Barnes Foundation on the selection of art are several institutions, including the National Gallery, the French National Museums and the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
After the suit concerning the book contract was filed in Montgomery County Orphans' Court by the De Mazia Trust, the Barnes Foundation asked the court to withdraw a petition it made in March to ease visiting-hour restrictions, change investment policies, raise admission fees and allow the building to be used for social functions.
But last week Louis D. Stefan, a Montgomery County judge, refused to let the foundation withdraw its suit.
Instead, the judge asked the trustees to produce the foundation's financial documents as well as minutes of its board meetings.
"The Attorney General also opposed the request to withdraw the petition," said Judge Stefan in a telephone interview.
"He wants to enable the court to look into the allegations raised by the De Mazia Trust and to resolve the serious issues currently being raised." Judge Stefan said that a hearing was tentatively scheduled for March.
Mr.
Glanton called the allegations in the suit "very regrettable," and said the foundation's books and records would be open to the court.
The de Mazia suit is the most explosive challenge to the Glanton-led board of the Barnes Foundation.
It clearly draws the line between the trustees, who want change, and Barnes loyalists, who would like to preserve the status quo.
The De Mazia Trust, along with a group of past and present students, is committed to preserving the 70-year-old foundation's emphasis on art education.
The trustees say they are trying to modernize the foundation and make its outstanding but little-known art collection available to a wider audience.
Meanwhile, the board is considering other options that would go against the very strict indenture set up by the foundation's creator.
Among the prohibitions laid down by the irascible Dr.
Barnes was a stipulation that the collection may never be moved from the present 1926 building that houses the artworks.
But the trustees would like to close the museum for renovations and send the collection on tour to other museums like the National Gallery of Art.
"It is one of the options under consideration," Mr.
Glanton said.
"But I cannot really comment any further."  A Shrinking Whitney
The Whitney Museum of American Art is losing two of its three Manhattan branches.
It has been asked to vacate by August its first-floor gallery in the Equitable Center, at Seventh Avenue and 52d Street, where the museum has been holding exhibitions for the last six years.
By the end of September, the space at 33 Maiden Lane, which has housed the Whitney's downtown gallery since 1988, will be transformed into an I.B.M. marketing and education center.
"It's another sign of the times," said David A. Ross, the director of the Whitney.
"These branches were a way of keeping more of our collection on view." Mr.
Ross also pointed out that the timing for the closings was particularly bad since the museum's expansion plans have been postponed until the economy picks up.
Since their inception, the branches have always been well attended.
During fiscal year 1991, for example, 40,000 people visited the Whitney's downtown branch; about 100,000 passed through the Equitable Center branch.
"The branches fulfilled an important purpose," said Mr.
Ross.
"The Whitney has about 10,000 works of art in its collection and even when the entire third and fourth floors are used, there may only be about 200 artworks in an installation. Without these branches, fewer people will have a chance to see the depth of of our collection."
In financial terms, Mr.
Ross said, these branches were neither a drain nor an income producer.
Admission to all of the Whitney's branches are free and corporations like Equitable Life Assurance, International Business Machines and Park Tower Realty financed their operating costs.
Equitable, as well as I.B.M. and Park Tower Realty, which jointly own the building on Maiden Lane, said each company would continue to give the museum financial support, as they have in the past.
But each corporation had different reasons for closing its branch of the Whitney: at Equitable, Mary Mannarino, the manager of public relations, said the company had decided to "support a wider number of institutions who would benefit from the good location." Ms.
Mannarino also explained that Equitable would not be making any public announcement about future exhibitions until the spring.
At the Whitney's Maiden Lane location, an award-winning space designed by the New York architects Tod Williams and Billie Tsien, Paul Neuman, a media spokesman for I.B.M., said the decision to close the gallery wasn't an easy one since they were losing a mini-landmark.
"We are downsizing and shrinking our real-estate holdings," he said.
"We simply needed the space." Meanwhile, Park Tower Realty, in an effort to continue its association with the museum, is planning to help the Whitney find a new location.
"We haven't actually begun the search," said Kate Coburn, Park Tower's director of marketing.
"But we will be finding the Whitney a new downtown home."


Police Investigate Death in Custody
Law enforcement officials are investigating why a 27-year-old Queens man died in police custody after he fought with officers making a narcotics arrest in midtown Manhattan.
Shortly after the incident, which occurred about 10 P.M.
Wednesday, several people filed complaints with the police of excessive force being used against the man.
But several other witnesses made statements supporting the officers' conduct, a police official who spoke on the condition of anonymity said.


Brush Wellman reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Counteroffensive In Camel Campaign
The R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is beginning a counteroffensive against the widely publicized attacks on Joe Camel, the cartoon beast featured in advertising for its Camel cigarette brand.
James W. Johnston, chairman and chief executive of Reynolds, has written to Janet D. Steiger, chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, seeking a meeting with commission members to discuss the most recent charges against the character.
Last month, antismoking and health organizations urged the commission to regulate cigarette ads, citing articles in the Journal of the American Medical Association that linked the Joe Camel campaign to smoking by young people.


Xerox Profit Down by 61%
The Xerox Corporation said today that its earnings fell 61 percent in the fourth quarter after a special charge for cutting 2,500 workers from its document processing unit.
For all of 1991, Xerox reported an 87 percent increase in earnings.


New Jersey Budget Math: Add, Subtract and Guess
The school year began here last fall with science students at Westside High School returning to labs that local education officials say have changed little since Westside opened 66 years ago in what is now one of the poorest districts in the state.
A few miles to the north in Bergen County, one of New Jersey's most affluent areas, the school year began in Hackensack with classrooms that were only slightly more crowded than the year before, though officials brooded over anticipated cuts next year that would eliminate many music classes, scale back summer school and cause the high school to disband 3 of its 25 athletic teams.


Aortech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Miscellany
*
A paid television commercial urging the Presidential candidates to speak out about AIDS, sponsored by Act Up, the AIDS advocacy and protest group, has been run by a station in Portland, Me.
The same spot, which presented a series of pictures of gay, lesbian and interracial couples kissing, had been rejected by a station in Manchester, N.H., as inappropriate.


Art in Review
Bill Traylor Hirschl &amp; Adler Modern 851 Madison Avenue (at 70th Street) Through Feb. 8


Alex. Brown Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Conversion Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  WORLD LEADERS GATHER
Thirty years after Khrushschev banged his shoe on a desk at the United Nations, President Yeltsin of Russia joined world leaders in New York for a United Nations summit meeting signaling a new era of cooperation.
Mr.
Yeltsin is probably looking beyond the meeting to talks with President Bush on nuclear arms cuts and financial aid.
A1  On a stop in Britain, Mr.
Yeltsin appealed for help with reforms.
A8  RUSSIA'S ENIGMATIC LEADER
Seven months after becoming President of Russia, Boris Yeltsin remains an ambiguous figure: a democrat who rules by decree, a populist who risks draconian reform.
On his first visit to America as heir to the Kremlin's atomic arsenal, he still carries traces of inexperience.
A1  VEILED THREAT ON CRIMEA
Russia's Vice President said the country would seek to redraw its borders to reflect a "glorious page" in its past.
He did not mention the Crimean peninsula, but his remarks appear likely to sharpen tensions with Ukraine.
A9  A human rights organization inducts 10 former Soviet republics.
A9  ENVISIONING A VIGOROUS U.N.
When the United Nations opens its first Security Council summit meeting on Friday, world leaders will ask the new Secretary General to propose ways of improving the U.N.'s peacemaking role.
One suggestion is to create what would amount to a standing United Nations army.
A8  Japan told Mr.
Bush it "will deliver" on promises to import more.
A8  CHINA SELLING MISSILE PARTS
Intelligence reports indicate that China continues to sell missile technology to Syria and Pakistan despite statements by Beijing that it is willing to curb missile exports, Bush Administration officials say.
A1  CROATIA BALKS ON PEACE PLAN
A United Nations proposal to send peacekeeping forces to war-ravaged Croatia edged toward collapse after Croatian leaders demanded fundamental changes in the plan, Western diplomats said.
A1  PYONGYANG SIGNS NUCLEAR PACT
After years of promises, North Korea signed an accord calling for international inspection of its nuclear plants.
But the Government left it vague whether inspectors would gain access to the installations any time soon.
A2  FRANCE'S UNWELCOME GUEST
The French Government found itself in the midst of a political storm after agreeing to let George Habash, whose Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine has been linked to terrorist actions, fly to France for medical treatment.
Three French officials involved in the decision resigned under pressure.
A11  Cairo Journal: A satire of Middle East culture shatters taboos.
A4  National A12-16  CRIME AS AN INHERITANCE
More than half of all juvenile delinquents imprisoned in state institutions and more than a third of adult criminals in local jails and state prisons have immediate family members who have also been incarcerated, Justice Department figures show.
Some criminologists see the findings as striking new evidence that crime runs in families.
A1  DEMOCRATIC JITTERS
These are nervous times for the Democratic Party, which is assessing how much damage has been done to Governor Clinton's campaign and is watching the horizon for signs of a new candidate.A1  Again, a "character issue" seizes political-page headlines.
A12  In personal finances, too, Jerry  Brown finds his own path.
A12  President Bush addressed business executives in Philadelphia.
A13  DARMAN MAKES HIS PITCH
Amid indications that both sides might be willing to strike some compromises, the President's budget director went to Capitol Hill to begin the yearly ritual of negotiatingwith Congress over the White House's tax and spending proposals.
A14  News analysis: Just whom would the tax proposals help most?
A14  The proposed flexible I.R.A. is actually misnamed.
A15  Executives said the budget lacked a full effort on competitiveness.
A15  Home builders were enthusiastic about the budget.
A14  A LAW AND ITS LIMITS
Largely because of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, Alabama has 706 black elected officials, more than any other state in the nation.
But when two of them lost a Supreme Court appeal citing that law, a vexing question was raised: Can the law guarantee the right to govern in the same way it protects the right to vote?
A16  NEW INQUIRY ON IMPLANTS
The Los Angeles County District Attorney opened a criminal investigation of managers for the nation's leading manufacturer of silicone-gel breast implants to determine whether they knowingly concealed data suggesting that the products might be dangerous.
A15  THE SHUTTLE RETURNS SAFELY
The crew of Discovery completed an eight-day scientific mission that officials called one of the smoothest in the shuttle's history.
A15  HOSPITAL SLAYING AND SUICIDE
A psychiatrist visiting from Iowa walked into a friend's hospital room at the Mayo Medical Center complex in Rochester, Minn., and shot the man to death as he lay on his bed.
The doctor then killed himself.
A16  A jury recommended death for a woman who killed seven men.
A16  A man hijacked a bus, was chased for 320 miles, then killed.
A15  Law Page B7  Courts are offering post-traumatic counseling to jurors in tough cases.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 AUSTERE SPENDING PLAN
Mayor Dinkins proposed a $29.4 billion spending plan that he said "does not contain much good news for New Yorkers in the short run." It calls for heavy cuts for all city agencies except the Police Department but holds the line on property taxes.
A1  NEW PROPOSAL FOR HOMELESS
A sweeping overhaul of New York City's homeless shelter system, including rent subsidies to help the homeless pay for housing, is being recommended by a mayoral commission.
The plan represents a significant shift in how governmental bodies care for the homeless.
A1  Neediest Cases B3  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-28  Poetry returns to the clubs.
C1  Dance: City Ballet with premiere of "Delight of the Muses." C1  Art: The Paley collection at the Modern.
C1  Obituaries A17  Wanda M. Jablonski, oil expert and newsletter owner.
Sports B8-13  Baseball: Howard Johnson will be in center field for the Mets.
B9  Boxing: Tyson accuser testifies.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials A26  Beat back defense bloat.
U.N. needs cash for peace.
A better city spending plan.
Topics: Post yuppies.
Letters A26  A. M. Rosenthal: The best in him.
A27  Leslie H. Gelb: Tomorrowland glimpsed.
A27  Stephen S. Roach: It's a recession, not doomsday.
A27  Jack Kemp: Boris, lend me a hand.
A27


10 Former Soviet Republics Join Human Rights Group
Europe's leading human rights organization today inducted 10 former Soviet republics as members, signaling their formal acceptance as independent states in the European family of nations.
Only the strife-torn republic of Georgia was frozen out.
Foreign Ministers of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, including Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, gathered today to formally welcome the new members.


Advanced Micro Sets Intel Clone
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. said it would produce a family of clones of the Intel Corporation's 486 computer chip, which is used in most powerful personal computers.
It said it would begin shipping samples of the chips this summer, with volume shipments in the fourth quarter.
The company said it would offer models of the 486 in three different speeds, as well as two low-voltage versions.
It also announced two higher-performance versions of the earlier 386 microprocessor.
The company's stock lost $1.75 a share, closing at $19.25 on the New York Stock Exchange.


No Arts Cuts in Dinkins Fiscal Plan
Tucked away inside the four-year preliminary financial plan for the city released yesterday by Mayor David N. Dinkins is the assertion that despite drastic cuts for most city agencies the culture budget will remain unchanged.
The bulky document, which proposes allocating more than $100 billion over the next four years for everything from police and firefighters to libraries and schools, includes one brief paragraph headlined "Department of Cultural Affairs":


Quotation of the Day
"I won't be glib. This plan does not contain much good news for New Yorkers in the short run. Someday I hope to be a good-news Mayor, presiding over good economic times." -- DAVID N. DINKINS.  [ A1:1. ]


Duracell International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Thomas Paine Statue Coming to Capital
To the Editor:
Readers of your Jan. 14 report from New Rochelle, N.Y., on Thomas Paine, a local hero of that Westchester County community, and on the Thomas Paine National Historical Association, should know that the "someday" when Congress may authorize a Paine statue in Washington could be sooner than they think.
One hundred eighty-eight members of the House of Representatives are co-sponsors of H.R. 1628, my bill to authorize placing a Paine statue on Federal property at no cost to the taxpayer.
The bipartisan sponsorship of the bill covers the political spectrum and constitutes a remarkable tribute to the contributions of Thomas Paine.


Davis Cup Upset Seems Unlikely
Framed by palms and Pacific surf and serenaded by a ukulele, the first Davis Cup draw ceremony at which almost everyone wore a lavender lei of local orchids was held today to determine the matchups for the three-day weekend event between the United States and Argentina.
In the interest of this pristine ecology, one Davis Cup tradition was discarded: No commemorative balloons were released.
But there was plenty of color without them.


Donnelley (R.R.) &amp; Sons (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sounds Around Town
Latin-American Benefit
Latin-Jazz Spectacular, Club Broadway, 96th Street and Broadway, (212) 864-7600.
Virtually every Latin-jazz luminary will be on hand for a benefit concert and dance to pay medical expenses for Frankie Malabe, a conga virtuoso, and to honor Mr.
Malabe and Antonino (El Cojito) Escollies, the drummer for the pioneering Latin-jazz group Machito and the Afro-Cubans.
The performers are to include Mario Bauza's Afro-Cuban Jazz Orchestra with the singer Graciela; Jerry Gonzalez's Fort Apache Band; Larry Harlow's Orchestra; Manny Oquendo's Libre, and Bobby Sanabria y Ascension, all of whom merge jazz and Latin rhythms.
Among the guest soloists are the percussionists Ray Barretto, Tito Puente, Carlos (Patato) Valdez and Milton Cardona; the pianists Tania Maria and Hilton Ruiz; the saxophonists Mario Rivera and Paquito d'Rivera, and the flutist Dave Valentin.
Sunday from 7 P.M. to 2 A.M.; tickets are $15 in advance, $20 at the door.


Digital Sound Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Abbott, Angels Settle
Pitcher JIM ABBOTT and outfielder CHRIS GWYNN split the difference and averted arbitration with their teams yesterday, reducing the field of players who have filed for arbitration to 97.
Abbott, an 18-game winner with California last season, his third in the major leagues, received a raise of nearly $1.5 million in signing for $1.85 million with the Angels.
He was seeking $2.1 million in arbitration.


Gynecologist Is Arrested On Charges of Bribery
A gynecologist was arrested in Manhattan yesterday on charges of offering $1,500 in cash and a watch to a state Health Department investigator who was looking into complaints about the care women had received at the doctor's East Side office.
The doctor, Ben Thamrong, 49 years old, was to be arraigned on bribery charges last night.


Review/Fashion; Givenchy Walks Traditional Path
The traditionalists had their say as the spring and summer couture shows ended today with the pretty, predictable clothes of Hubert de Givenchy.
No untrod paths here.
No dubious experiments.
After 40 years as the head of his own couture house, this designer knows where he's going.
Shapes that flatter a woman's body and colors that are light and bright; those are the effects he is after.
He is sure that is what women want, especially today, when the idea is not to look ostentatious and when a reasonably complex style at an established couture house costs $10,000 and more.


Wild Shots Hit 2 Children In a Brooklyn Playground
Two children were wounded outside their Brooklyn school yesterday morning when another youth involved in a dispute pulled out a gun and fired two wild shots across a crowded playground, the police said.
The shooting was the latest in a series of recent violent incidents in and around New York City schools.
Last week in Brooklyn, a student shot a police officer outside Junior High School 324 in Bedford-Stuyvesant, and three students were stabbed by a youth as they left Thomas Jefferson High School in East New York.


Vandeweghe Playing Himself Off the Bench
Kiki Vandeweghe has reached the point in his career where he takes nothing for granted.
He is 33 years old and in his 12th professional season.
His career has been threatened by a chronic back condition on several occasions.
And this season, after he struggled during the first two months, Vandeweghe was buried on the Knicks' bench by Coach Pat Riley for several weeks, which did not exactly boost Vandeweghe's confidence.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the sentencing of El Sayyid A. Nosair on charges arising from the assasination of Rabbi Meir Kahane misidentified two people who the police say encountered Mr.
Nosair in the moments after the killing.
One, who was shot in the leg, was Irving Franklin.
The other, who drove the taxi that the police said Mr.
Nosair commandeered, was Franklin Garcia.


Cirrus Logic reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BRIEFS
*
Century Cellular Corp., New Canaan, Conn., notified shareholders that the company would change its name to Centennial Cellular Corp., effective Feb. 7. *
Dow Chemical Co., Midland, Mich., through its subsidiary Marion Merrell Dow Inc. is seeking to dispose of its 17 percent stake, or 6.6 million shares, in U.S.
Bioscience Inc., Blue Bell, Pa., a drug company.


Judge Lets Gay Partner Adopt Child
A Surrogate Court judge in Manhattan yesterday approved the adoption of a 6-year-old boy by the lesbian partner of the child's natural mother.
The decision is believed to be the first such adoption ever approved in New York State.
It comes at a time of legal attempts to provide nontraditional families greater standing in areas like housing, health insurance and child visitation.


California Closes a Bank
The California Banking Department today closed the Independence Bank of Encino, which had been secretly owned by the failed Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Independence said the decision came as a surprise, particularly since it had received a capital infusion of $5 million under a Dec. 19 plea agreement signed between the liquidators of B.C.C.I. and Federal regulatory agencies.
A spokesman for the state banking department said the bank was closed because it was insolvent.
As of today, the bank had deposits of $530 million and assets of $555 million, the spokesman said.
For the year ended Dec. 31, 1991, Independence lost $44 million, he added.


Wilkins Has Surgery
DOMINIQUE WILKINS, the star forward of the Atlanta Hawks, should be back in action next season, his surgeon said yesterday, after Wilkins underwent surgery for a torn right Achilles' tendon he suffered in a game Tuesday.
"It went fine, looks good and looks like it ought to heal well," said Dr.
JACK HUGHSTON, who performed the one-and-a-half-hour surgery at his Hughston Sports Medicine Hospital in Columbus, Ga.


French Steelmaker Gets A-1 Rating
Usinor Sacilor, the French steelmaker, has won an A-1 rating for 10 billion French francs, about $1.8 billion, in commercial paper from Standard &amp; Poor's.
The company is owned by the French Government.
The rating service cited the steel company's cost-reduction program and above-average operating position in Europe, even though the European steel industry is highly competitive and has excess capacity.
Cash flow have been satisfactory, according to Standard &amp; Poor's.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Executive Moving On . . . and On
ANYONE still unconvinced that top executives at the nation's large advertising agencies are changing jobs at a rate rivaling professional football coaches need only consider yesterday's news about John Hayes.
One month after he was promoted to chief executive of Geer, DuBois Inc., Mr.
Hayes disclosed he would leave that New York shop, where he has been for a total of 19 months, to become president of Lowe &amp; Partners, the American operation of the London-based Lowe Group.


Producer of Costly Wines Ousts Co-Chief in Burgundy
The Domaine de la Romanee-Conti, probably the most famous wine producer in the Burgundy region of France, has ousted one of its co-directors, Lalou Bize-Leroy, in a dispute over apparently unauthorized sales of the Domaine's extraordinarily expensive wines in the "gray market" in the United States and Japan.
Aubert de Villaine, the Domaine's other co-director, said that a separate wine exporting company headed by Mrs.
Bize-Leroy was shipping the Domaine's wines to the United States through a Swiss affiliate even though it was expressly banned from selling them anywhere but in Continental Europe.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Journal; Now, Journalists Renege On Election Promises
It is still early in the Presidential campaign, as political analysts have repeatedly determined, but the press coverage is beginning to take a familiar shape.
In fact, this week there were two events on national television that could ultimately qualify as official defining moments.
The first, of course, was when Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas went on "60 Minutes" to make what was probably the most public confession in the history of marriage problems.
The next came Tuesday night when Mr.
Clinton's confession was analyzed -- along with questions on the economy and President Bush's understanding of the middle class -- by what was probably the largest biased sample in the history of instant polling.


Centex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Officer Says He Thought Youth Was Going to Shoot
Speaking in a steady and deliberate voice, Officer Gary Spath testified today that he shot and killed 16-year-old Phillip Pannell because he feared the youth would fire at him.
"I shot because this guy was going to shoot me," Officer Spath said.
"I believe he was reaching in -- he
was
reaching -- he went into his pocket and he was going to shoot me."


CXR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Way to Get the Trade Deficit in Balance
To the Editor:
Now that President Bush's trade visit to the Orient has ended in disappointment, it may be time to take stronger measures to eliminate our trade deficit.
Here is a simple mechanism that could balance trade:
Each time we exported something, the buyer would receive a chit that allows the bearer to export goods of the same value to us.
These chits could be freely traded.
All imports to us would have to be accompanied by a chit for equivalent value.
The requirement of equal value would balance exports and imports.


Francesca Primus; Writer and Critic, 45
Francesca Primus, a writer and theater critic, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 45 years old.
She died of lung cancer, said her brother, the actor Barry Primus.


American Filtrona reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Credit Depot Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Art in Review
Lili Dujourie  Louver Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Feb. 8


Elizabeth Chase, 77, An Adviser to Javits 1
Elizabeth Coykendall Chase, a former campaign adviser to United States Senator Jacob K. Javits, died on Sunday at Stamford Hospital in Connecticut.
She was 77 years old and lived in Stamford.
Mrs.
Chase, a writer and public relations specialist, counseled Mr.
Javits in his first successful race for the House of Representatives in 1946.
She also was public relations adviser to the New York Citizens Budget Commission, a private organization, in the 1950's.


U.N. Peace Plan for Yugoslavia Eroded by New Croatian Demand
A United Nations proposal to send peacekeeping forces to war-ravaged Croatia edged to the brink of collapse tonight after Croatian leaders demanded fundamental changes in the plan, Western diplomats said.
A complete breakdown would certainly jeopardize the flimsy four-week cease-fire that was brokered by United Nations negotiators.


THE FEDERAL BUDGET: Home Buyers; Builders Like President's Plan for Tax Credit to Bolster Housing Sales
Home builders reacted with enthusiasm to President Bush's proposal in the State of the Union address to stimulate housing sales, with the proposed $5,000 tax credit for first-time buyers getting the most applause.
"It's by far the biggest idea for residential construction," said David K. Hill Jr., president of Kimball Hill Inc., a home builder in Rolling Meadows, Ill., north of Chicago.


The U.N.'s Need: Cash for Peace
Ending 20 years of civil war in Cambodia was an extraordinary achievement.
But three months after an agreement was signed with great fanfare in Paris, the cease-fire is fraying and peacekeeping forces are not expected to be deployed before April.
The main reason for delay has been the U.N.'s worsening financial crisis.
That crisis is the most compelling issue facing the leaders gathered for today's Security Council summit meeting.
But they seem more interested in expanding the U.N.'s peacekeeping role than in paying for it.


The Spoken Word
SYMPOSIUM, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
"Schubert the Man: Myth Versus Reality," a symposium exploring the composer's character, with lectures and discussions by professors and writers including Leon Botstein, Ernst Hilmar, Joseph Horowitz and Susan McClary.
Sunday, 1 to 9 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 415-5450.
READ-IN, Abyssinian Baptist Church, 132 West 138th Street, Manhattan.
A period of silent reading of works by black writers, followed by a public reading; sponsored by the Literacy Society.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 862-4646 or (212) 862-7474.
ARTISTS' TALK, Studio Museum in Harlem, 144 West 125th Street, Manhattan.
"From the Studio: Artists in Residence, 1990-1991," an informal discussion with the artists Ada Pilar Cruz, Leonardo Drew and Eve Sandler.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $3 ($1.50 for the elderly, $1 under age 12).
Information: (212) 864-4500.
LECTURE, Long Island University, Humanities Hall, DeKalb and Flatbush Avenues, downtown Brooklyn.
The film director and producer Spike Lee will speak about film making.
Tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 2 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Reservations: (718) 624-3703.
LECTURES AND PLAYS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Family Matters: An Immigrant Memoir," a dramatization of the lives of an immigrant family, Sunday at noon, followed at 1 P.M. by "House of Heritage," a slide show and lecture on the history of the museum's building, and at 2 P.M. by "The Washingtons: Free Africans in 19th-Century New York," a two-character drama about a couple who help a runaway slave.
Separate admission is required for each event.
Lecture tickets are $4; dramatization tickets, $10 ($8 for the elderly; $5 for students).
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, Crown Heights.
"Islamic Ceramics," by Jean Tisne, today at 2 P.M.; "Italian Renaissance Panel Painting," by Maribeth Flynn, tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "Decoration and Ornamentation in American Indian Art," by Martha Usdin, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "American Landscape Painting," by Nancy Uberman, Sunday at 2 P.M.
All talks are free with museum admission of $4 ($2 for students, $1.50 for the elderly).
Information: (718) 638-5000.
LECTURES AND GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art.
"Stuart Davis," by Lewis Kachur, today at 11 A.M.; "France in the 1920's," by Barbara Larson, today at 3 P.M.; "Stuart Davis: Murals, Modernism and Music," by Greta Berman, today at 6 P.M.
"Rubens and Van Dyck," by Frederick Ilchman, today at 6 P.M.; "Recognizing a Masterpiece: The Christofori Piano," by Laurence Libin, today at 7 P.M.; "Winslow Homer," by Diana Linden, tomorrow at 11 A.M.; "Understanding Academic Art: Antiquity and the Renaissance," by Ellen Handy, tomorrow at 7 P.M.; "Space in Northern Renaissance Painting," by Katie Luber, Sunday at 11 A.M.; "African History in Brass and Ivory: Royal Art of Benin in the Perls Collection," by Kate Ezra, Sunday at 3 P.M.
Unless otherwise noted, lectures are free with museum admission of $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3764.
GALLERY TALKS, Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
"Art in the Age of TV," by Amelia Arenas, today at noon; "Looking at Modern Art: Drawings," by Wendy Beiser, today at 1 P.M.; "Mexican Modernism," by Ms.
Arenas, today at 3 P.M.; "Gay Block: Rescuers of the Holocaust," by Julie Reiss, tomorrow at 1 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.; "Gemini G.E.L.," by Ms.
Reiss, tomorrow at 3 P.M.; "1960's: Art and Rebellion," by Ms.
Reiss, Sunday at 1 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free under age 16).
Information: (212) 708-9480.


Saints Get Pinkett
The New Orleans Saints acquired a veteran running back, ALLEN PINKETT, from the Houston Oilers yesterday in return for a fifth-round choice in the 1992 N.F.L. draft.
Pinkett, a third-round Houston draft choice out of Notre Dame in 1986, is expected to fill a need created by the retirement of REUBEN MAYES and injuries which sidelined the starting tandem of DALTON HILLIARD and CRAIG HEYWARD for much of last season.
In six seasons at Houston, Pinkett, 28, carried 567 times for 2,324 yards and rushed for 21 touchdowns.
He also caught 119 passes for 921 yards and 4 touchdowns, and last season returned 26 kickoffs for a 19.5-yard average. (AP)


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 587 money market mutual funds increased by $2.92 billion, to $509.75 billion, in the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 217 institutional funds increased $2.59 billion, to $180.37 billion.
The assets of the 281 general-purpose funds were down $107.2 million, to $180.27 billion.
The 89 broker-dealer funds decreased $437.0 million, to $149.11 billion.


Beat Back the Bloat in Defense
President Bush has adopted three splendid principles for squeezing down $300-billion-a-year defense budgets.
If only he would now follow them.
The first principle is that forces can be substantially reduced now that global threats are vastly diminished.
Second, new weapons can be designed and built -- but need not be put into full production.
Third, cooperative cuts provide a lot more security than arms competition does.
But having professed these principles, the President ignores them in practice.
He wants to retain the force structure that was drawn up before the Soviet threat disappeared.
He lets the Pentagon keep on building needless new weapons.
And he does not extend the principle of reciprocal cuts from nuclear to conventional forces.


Treasuries Lower in Light Trading
Prices of Treasury securities moved lower as interest rates rose further in light, nervous trading yesterday.
Credit market participants said the selling was a continuation of Wednesday's steep price decline, a slide apparently touched off by the suggestion by the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, that the central bank was not likely to ease policy again soon.


Susan Kaplan Has Wedding
Susan Jo Kaplan, a mortgage broker in Carteret, N.J., and Roy J. Konray, a lawyer in Westfield, N.J., were married yesterday at their home in Westfield.
Judge Herbert Charles Kaplan of Municipal Court in East Brunswick, N.J., a brother of the bride, officiated.
Mrs.
Konray, 51 years old is the president of Investors Cooperative Mortgage Company.
She is a graduate of Kean College.
She won a gold medal in the 1976 Maccabean Games in Israel as a member of the United States Judo Team; she now teaches at the Judo Center in Cranford, N.J.
She is the daughter of Samuel and Irene Kaplan of Carteret.
Her father is the senior partner in the Carteret law firm of Kaplan, Feingold &amp; Kaplan.
Her mother is a retired kindergarten teacher.


Carnesecca Has One Wish: One in a Row
Maybe the optimistic, feel-good approach that St.
John's showed after its defeat at Georgetown on Wednesday night will translate into a successful stretch drive and the type of season the Redmen expected.
Perhaps, as Coach Lou Carnesecca has said, his team can create the kind of roll produced by the 1979 Redmen, who very nearly turned a frustrating 9-8 record into a trip to the Final Four.


Tropicana's President Gets Job Permanently
William G. Pietersen, the acting president of the Seagram Company's Tropicana unit, was formally named president of the juice company yesterday.
Mr.
Pietersen, a Seagram executive since 1988, took over at Tropicana Products Inc. in September when Tropicana's president and executive vice president were dismissed after Seagram became aware of cost overruns on several construction projects.
Mr.
Pietersen refused to discusss the incident or say whether he had introduced new financial controls at Tropicana.


Bush Budget Would Hurt Area, Officials Say
By continuing the decadelong trend of shifting the cost of social programs to the cities and states, President Bush's budget proposal would aggravate the increasingly desperate fiscal plight of the New York region, officials from the region said today.
In a rising chorus, the officials complained that the budget would give short shrift to a variety of programs they consider vital to urban areas, from mass transit to health-care costs.


E-Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For Children
'Sprint, Jump and Run'
Draddy Gym  Manhattan College  Manhattan College Parkway  Riverdale, the Bronx  (212) 227-0071  Recommended ages: 6 to 18  Sunday


Wiebe and Sluman Enjoy Perfect Day on Pebble Beach Course
Mark Wiebe and Jeff Sluman shot eight-under-par 64's today, the lowest scores in the first round of the A.T.&amp; T. Pebble Beach National Pro-Am.
On a clear, warm day in which almost no wind blew off the Pacific Ocean, both played at Pebble Beach, one of three courses being used for this tournament.


